[Illustration: GEORGE L. HERR AND WIFE]




                                  THE

                        NATION BEHIND PRISON BARS


                                  BY

               GEORGE L. HERR, Prison Evangelist



              "_I was in prison, and ye came unto me_"



                             PUBLISHED BY

                     THE CARTER PRINTING COMPANY

                       LOUISVILLE, KENTUCKY



                            COPYRIGHT 1913

                                 BY

                    GEORGE L. HERR, LOUISVILLE, KY.



                              To My Wife

                        WHOSE CONSTANT HELP AND

                             ENCOURAGEMENT

                MAKE IT POSSIBLE FOR ME TO DO THE WORK

                               TO WHICH

                                  God

                    HAS CALLED ME, THIS VOLUME IS

                         INSCRIBED WITH THE

                              PRAYER THAT

                                  God

                    WILL USE IT TO SAVE MANY SOULS




The Nation Behind Prison Bars

BY

GEORGE L. HERR, Prison Evangelist

    Author of "Light in Dark Places," "You Are My Prisoner," "The
    Life Line," "Man's Worst Enemy," "Nothing Better," "The
    Missionary," "The Bethel," "Lost and Is Found," and "A Glorious
    Rescue."

    THE WORLD OF PRISONERS UNKNOWN TO MANY BROUGHT FORWARD IN
    DESCRIPTIVE SPEECH AND VIVID PICTURES


There are enough people in prison in these United States to furnish a
citizenship to a considerable territory, or to populate a good-sized
city. For the psychological student, they form the most interesting of
all objects of study. For the philanthropist, and for the Christian
missionary, they constitute a wonderful field of activity. How to lift
them out of the criminal strata is the question to which Mr. Herr is
devoting his life, in an effort to answer. In a good measure he is
answering it. Many prisoners to whom the grace of God has appeared,
bringing salvation, will rise to call him blessed.--Rev. Jno. Paul,
Mississippi.

[Illustration: MY DEVOTED FATHER

THE LATE HON. RICHARD S. HERR

"And their works do follow them."]

[Illustration: MY PRECIOUS MOTHER

The Late Mrs. RICHARD S. HERR

"Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her own works praise her in
the gates."]




Foreword


Gathered within these pages are recitals of scenes and incidents in a
field of existence fortunately unfamiliar to the majority of our
readers. The subject has been handled without any attempt to embellish
the hard facts or gloss over the cruel details--the paramount desire
upon the part of the author being an endeavor to show the crying
necessity for a constant, earnest labor among the unfortunates who are
shut away from God's sunshine; whom God still loves, despite their sins
of omission and commission. If the perusal of this volume brings to the
reader a belief that the cause is worthy, that labor in this field
brings a reward which amply compensates for the time and effort
expended, the author will rest in the knowledge of a duty well
performed. There has been no effort at exaggeration in presenting these
sketches of daily experiences among the outcasts of society, no
straining for effect, no striving to paint word pictures that may touch
the heart. It is simply the story of everyday life in the field of the
prison missionary's labor, and is given to the public with a fervent
prayer that God, in His infinite wisdom, will instill in the hearts of
our readers a feeling of charity toward those whose burden is almost
greater than they can bear.

                                                Faithfully,
                                                       G. L. H.




Contents


  Title                                                               i

  Copyright                                                          ii

  Dedication                                                        iii

  Advertisement                                                      iv

  Foreword                                                            v

  Contents                                                          vii

  Illustrations                                                      ix

  Commendations from Louisville Ministers                             x

  Story of the Life of Geo. L. Herr                                xiii

  Subscription Card                                                 xvi

  Chapter First--Life of Geo. L. Herr                                 1

  Chapter Second--"Lost, and Is Found"                               10

  Chapter Third--"Political Peril," Sermon by Dr. E. L. Powell       23

  Chapter Fourth--"Christ the Interpreter," Sermon by Dr. Hawes      34

  Chapter Fifth--Throwing Out the Life Line                          41

  Chapter Sixth--Reformation of Criminals                            46
          Visit to Nashville Prison                                  52

  Chapter Seven--Does Prison Work Pay?                               54
          The Work of a Prison Evangelist                            57
          Youtsey, Kentucky's Famous Prisoner                        66
          Practical Religious Work in County Jail                    67
          Praise for Prison Evangelist                               69
          Sermon in State Prison                                     70
          Revival Stirs Up Inmates                                   72

  Chapter Eight--A Man of Honor                                      74

  Chapter Nine--Jim O'Brien, the Modern Miracle                      76
          Jim O'Brien Passes Away                                    83

  Chapter Ten--Columbus Ohio Prison                                  85
               The Big Ohio "Pen" Week by Week                       88
               Chapel Services                                       89
  Chapter Eleven--Incontestable Proof                                92

  Prison Evangelist's Good Work                                      97
  A Grand Work Highly Commended--John R. Pflanz                      98
  "Worked Wonders"                                                  100
  Strong Endorsement                                                101
  Speaks to Prisoners                                               102
  Sad and Pitiful Story                                             103
  Resolution Never Broken                                           104
  What is a Friend?                                                 106
  "Another Chance I Crave"                                          108
  Letter from Col. Will S. Hays                                     110
  Letter from Capt. Scheider                                        111
  Profanity Shows Mental Deficiency                                 112
  Cincinnati Work House                                             115
  Extermination of Habitual Criminals                               116
  Criminal Becomes Minister                                         120
  Poem to Brother Herr                                              122
  Success of Reform Criminals--Wm. A. Pinkerton                     124
  Letter from Editor Star of Hope                                   137
  Lost and is Found                                                 138
  Christmas at the Frankfort Prison                                 139
  Hundreds of Letters                                               144
  A Tribute from Jos. M. O'Hara                                     145
  Fishing for Men                                                   147
  Branch Library in the Jail                                        149
  Change comes in Curt Jett                                         151
  Christian Endeavor at Frankfort Prison                            158
  Capital Punishment                                                165
  Indiana Reformatory                                               168
  Indiana Reformatory Chapel Services                               169
  Clinging to the Bible                                             172
  Tree of Life and Knowledge                                        173
  The World Dying for Love                                          174
  George L. Herr's New Book                                         176




Illustrations


  Geo. L. Herr and Wife--Frontispiece                                 i
  The Late Mr. and Mrs. Richard S. Herr                              iv
  Rev. Chas. R. Hemphill, D.D.                                       xv
  Rev. Steve P. Holcombe                                              6
  The Late Mr. George Gaulbert                                        8
  Rev. Carter Helm Jones                                              9
  The Late Rev. E. A. Ferguson                                       10
  Rev. E. L. Powell                                                  22
  First Christian Church and Presbyterian Theological
  Seminary                                                           28
  Rev. T. M. Hawes, D.D.                                             34
  Rev. Henry Clay Morrison, D.D.                                     40
  Rev. John Paul                                                     46
  Dwight L. Moody                                                    48
  Valentine Burke                                                    50
  The Late Col. Mat. Ragland                                         54
  Jefferson County Jail                                              58
  The Late Hon. J. C. Bohart                                         60
  Hon. John R. Pflanz                                                64
  Rev. C. S. Hanley                                                  92
  Hon. Chas. F. Grainger                                            106
  Judge Aaron Kohn                                                  108
  Rt. Rev. Chas. E. Woodcock, D.D.                                  112
  The Hon. and Mrs. John L. Whitman                                 116
  Gospel Service at the County Jail, Chicago, Ill                   118
  Wm. A. Pinkerton                                                  124
  Louisville Free Public Library                                    149
  Curtis Jett                                                       151
  Henry E. Youtsey                                                  158




Commendation from Louisville Ministers


                                   Louisville, Ky., Jan. 27, 1910.

 To His Honor Judge Muir Weissinger,
      Judge of the County Court,
            Jefferson County, Ky.

Dear Sir:

The undersigned Ministers of the Gospel in the city of Louisville, being
members of the Ministerial Association, do hereby recommend to your
Honor the appointment of the Rev. George L. Herr, a regular ordained
minister of the gospel, as Chaplain of the Jefferson County Jail, in
accordance with Part 9, Sections 627-632 Russell Statutes, 1909,
inclusive.

The Rev. Mr. Herr is thoroughly well qualified to fill the position of
Chaplain at the County Jail, he having for seven years previous to the
enactment of the present law given up his time and money in this noble
work, without compensation from any source whatever, either state,
county or city, as the present Jailer of Jefferson County and many other
will testify.

  R. D. SMART,
      Pastor Broadway Methodist Church.

  CHARLES R. HEMPHILL,
      Professor Presbyterian Theological Seminary.

  W. N. BRINEY,
      Pastor Broadway Christian Church.

  W. J. CLARKE,
      Minister Clifton Church.

  A. R. KASEY,
      Pastor Clifton Crescent Hill Methodist Church.

  S. G. SHELLEY,
      Pastor Jefferson St. Methodist Church.

  THAD. S. TINSLEY,
      Pastor Third Christian Church.

  W. F. IRWIN,
      4th Ave. Presbyterian Church.

  E. B. PATTERSON,
      Pastor Trinity Church.

  W. R. HENDRIX,
      Pastor Methodist Temple.

  J. T. RUSHING,
      Pastor Virginia Ave. M. E. Church, South.

  D. B. GREGORY,
      Pastor Woodland Pres. Church U. S.

  G. W. NUTTER,
      Pastor Parkland Christian Church.

  B. F. ATKINSON,
      Pastor Rivers Memorial M. E. Church, South.

  C. F. WIMBERTY,
      Marcus Lindsay Memorial.

  CHAS. A. HUMPHREY,
      Pastor Portland M. E. Church, South.

  J. D. SIGLER

  E. L. POWELL,
      Pastor First Christian Church.

  S. H. LOVELACE,
      Pastor Oakdale Methodist Church.

  C. R. CROWE,
      Pastor Highland Park and Hill Street.

  T. R. KENDALL,
      Lander Memorial Church.

  T. L. CRANDELL,
      Dumesnil M. E. Church.

  C. E. CARTER,
      Asbury M. E. Church.

  ARTHUR W. BROOK,
      M. E. Church, South.

  W. B. BEAUCHAMP,
      Pastor Fourth Ave. M. E. Church, South.

  J. R. McAFEE,
      West Broadway M. E. Church, South.




Story of the Life of Geo. L. Herr


The Rev. George L. Herr, prison evangelist, has received from Chicago
his book entitled "The Story of His Life," by Edward De Alma. Mr. Herr
distributed 100 copies yesterday in the Jefferson County jail, and the
men received them with great eagerness. Mr. Herr will place the story in
all penal institutions. A letter from the Rev. James M. Taylor,
complimenting the book, says: "I have read with soul-stirring interest
the sad, heart-rending experience of Brother Herr, and the miraculous
deliverance by the grace of God; how, by a life of sin, he squandered a
fortune; how God found him and gave him deliverance; the romantic way in
which his God-given companion entered his life and how they are being
used, perhaps, as no other persons to-day in helping those behind the
bars. This story will warn the reckless, encourage the 'outcast,' and
put a desire in the hearts of thousands to lead better lives."
  --_Louisville Courier-Journal_

The Rev. Paul, of Meridian, Miss., says: "The story of Brother Herr's
life, 'Redeemed from the depths of sin to the mountain top of
salvation,' is a thrilling narrative, published as a warning to the
fallen."

The Rev. J. B. Foote, chaplain of the Onondaga county penitentiary, in
New York, acknowledging receipt of the life story of Mr. Herr and
thanking him for it, states in his letter that he will use the book in
his preaching in prison.

When asked if prison work paid, Mr. Herr said: "Who will ever know the
vast number that will attribute their first impulse to a better life,
formed while in the seclusion of a prison cell, while reading this book.
The world will never know how many, when sitting in judgment upon
themselves, have learned the great secret, that it takes an omnipotent
power to change the current of their lives and give them deliverance
from the power of sin, and enabling them to go forth, not to live a new
purpose, but a new life."

In 1909 Mr. Herr published 150,000 sermons, books and tracts.

The Rev. George L. Herr, whose address delivered in our chapel last
Sunday morning was charmingly refreshing, is a man whose vicissitudes of
life lead through a labyrinth that would require a half century of years
to make its journey at an ordinary pace.--Rev. D. J. Starr, D.D., Ohio
Penitentiary.

Bro. Herr knows the prison work as few men do. He is a man of large
sympathy, and having had an experience of fifteen years as an
evangelist, knows how to reach the hearts of the men. He has the entire
confidence of both prisoners and officials and is always given a most
hearty welcome by all.--Jos. Severance, Chaplain.

"The large number who have been helped by hearing your message will be
still further benefited by reading your book."--Rev. Albert J. Steelman,
Ph.D., Chaplain, Illinois State Penitentiary.

Get Rev. Herr's book for your good, but chiefly for the good of others.

Rev. C. R. Hemphill, D.D., Louisville, Ky.: "I believe Rev. George L.
Herr especially equipped for the difficult work of an evangelist to
those in prison and to the neglected."

Rev. Wm. Edmond Foster: "His love for lost souls and his zeal knows no
bounds. I bespeak for him a life of great usefulness to his fellowmen
without hope and without God."

[Illustration: REV. CHAS. R. HEMPHILL, D.D.

President Presbyterian Theological Seminary, Louisville, Ky. One of the
South's greatest scholars and teachers; whose heart is full of sympathy
for and helpfulness of the unfortunate.]

Rev. Horace G. Ogden, D.D., New York: "I have been placed where I have
known intimately his work as prison evangelist. I can say he has made a
superb record. He has taken an enlarged field of work, and I have every
confidence in his increased usefulness. His book merits a large
circulation."

Rev. Ed. Ferguson: "For years he, with his most estimable wife, have
given their time and talent to the uplifting of the down-trodden of this
great metropolis and they have the respect and hearty co-operation of
the best people in Louisville."

Rev. James M. Taylor: "The story will warn the reckless, encourage the
'outcast,' and put desire in the hearts of thousands to lead better
lives."

Rev. T. T. Taliaferro, Chaplain Kentucky State Prison: "Your sermons are
blessed of God to the furtherance of the works of grace in our midst.
May God bless you in your noble work."

Rev. W. O. Vreeland, Chaplain Kentucky State Prison: "You are worthy of
the highest commendation."

Men's Bible Class, James Lee Memorial Presbyterian Church: "Rev. George
L. Herr's talk at last Sunday's session was a treat."

Rev. George L. Herr, 195 Coral Avenue, Louisville, Ky.: "Who will ever
know the vast number that will attribute their first impulse to a better
life, formed while in seclusion of a prison cell while reading this
book."

The Rev. George L. Herr is bringing out a book on prison life which is
abundantly capable of two effects, namely: Enlisting the attention of
readers, like a romance, and benefitting the class of whom he writes. It
is a two-hundred page book, illustrated with pictures of prisons, and
scenes behind the bars.




DEAR FRIEND:

We know you will rejoice with us in the work being accomplished behind
prison bars. Many thousands we are preaching the gospel to every year.
There are converts all over the United States that we hear from. The
outlook of the work was never more encouraging. May we submit to you our
plan to secure auxiliary memberships at $10.00 each?

Will you be one?

                                            GEO. L. HERR AND WIFE,
                                                   Prison Evangelists.


DEPARTMENTS OF WORK.

Distribution of thousands of papers, tracts, and other religious
reading.

Visiting the sick and poor.

Street work in the slums.

Evangelistic work in the different penitentiaries a specialty.




CHAPTER FIRST

LIFE OF GEORGE L. HERR

BY EDWARD DE ALMA

A BRAND PLUCKED FROM THE BURNING.

"As we sow so shall we reap."


Born in the city of Louisville, of an old Kentucky family, whose
escutcheon had never been shadowed by smirch or breath of shame or
ignominy, it might truthfully be said of George L. Herr that he had been
ushered into this world with the proverbial "gold spoon in his mouth,"
his father, the late Richard S. Herr, being a prominent and highly
esteemed and wealthy citizen of the grand old state of Kentucky. Though
surrounded by the luxuries of life, by environments unusually favorable
for the development of a strong, healthy, vigorous and clean life, yet
Brother Herr's life from his youth up to the period of this writing,
presents an aspect checkered with the lights and shadows of temptation,
sin, remorse, repentance, redemption and restful peace of heart in
salvation through Jesus.


    Give us help from trouble; for vain is the help of man.--Ps.
    108:12.

    God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in
    trouble.--Ps. 46:1.


At the age of three months, the death of his precious mother caused him
to be given into the keeping of his aunt, a noble Christian woman, and
it was due to her teachings that the seeds of reverence for God, belief
in his dearly beloved Son and faith in the promise of a life of
everlasting happiness were planted deep in the recesses of George Herr's
heart, while his father, a Christian gentleman, spared no efforts in his
endeavor to bring up his son in the way he should go.

At the age of eighteen years, through the death of his father, he came
into the possession of a large estate, but lacking the experience which
usually comes with maturity, he developed a spirit of independence which
soon brought in its train of attendant evils.


    Have mercy upon me, O Lord; for I am weak; O Lord, heal me.--Ps.
    6:2.

    My grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect
    in weakness.--2 Cor. 12:9.


The story of George Herr's experience is the recital of a man's gradual
surrender to the power of drink, until the enormity of his fall can but
be depicted by contrasting his condition with that as it was a few years
before. Then he was a well known young man of Louisville's elite
society, wealthy, respected, esteemed and sought after. Friends without
number, well wishers innumerable, the door of any refined home in the
city would have swung wide open in welcome at his knock. Now the other
picture: A drunken outcast, a prey to the buffetings of every chance
wind of fate, deprived of friends, stripped of wealth, position and
reputation; exposed to every form of evil, subject to the cruelty of
every character of temptation that assails human nature. Ostracized from
society, barred from contact with any self-respecting acquaintance of
former days, can you imagine a more potent example of the victory of
Satan through the agency of his chief field marshal, Drink? God grant
that this may come as a warning to some one of the thousands of young
men who, with prospects as bright or even more flattering than were
those of George Herr at the age of eighteen, are at this moment entering
upon the path which will lead them, as it has countless thousands, into
the abyss of eternal destruction! God grant that the moral to be drawn
from this picture will burn itself in indelible letters of fire upon the
very soul of each young man who reads this.


    I am poor and needy; make haste unto me, O God.--Ps. 70:5.

    My God shall supply all your need, according to his riches in
    glory by Christ Jesus.--Phil. 4:19.


These were indeed dark days, the past a record of sin, the present a
nightmare of misery and shame, the future black with the darkness of
despair, with not the faintest gleam of hope to pierce the gloom. "Poor
fellow," you say, "only one of a multitude." Yes, only the prototype of
one of the thousands who are traveling the same broad thoroughfare at
this moment.

It was at this critical juncture, when reputation was blasted, hope
departed and the future barren of promises, that a remnant of respect
for his home and the associates of better days awakened the residuum of
pride remaining and brought the determination to remove his unwelcome
presence from the scenes of former pleasures. He went West, but his
hopes were blasted, and penniless, homeless, wretched, obliged to accept
any kind of menial work in order to eke out a bare living, he wandered
about until an overwhelming homesickness brought him back to Kentucky.
There was, perhaps, a flickering intention to do better, to cut loose
from the bands that bound him, but good resolutions were made only to be
broken, and the cords of sin drawn tighter than ever.


    Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?--Acts 9:6.

    Follow thou me.--John 21:22.


None but God can realize the extreme bitterness of that bondage, the
depths of that dark and unrelieved despair. Without light, without hope,
without rest, and worst of all, without Christ? With not one friendly
hand held out to greet him, with not one word of encouragement, but
rather the cold glance of scorn, the bitter sneer of contempt, it is not
strange that there stretched out before him apparently nothing but a
drunkard's life, a drunkard's death and an endless eternity in a
drunkard's hell.

Then the fearful temptation of suicide met him; but God, in his infinite
mercy, destined him to pass through even this fearful ordeal unharmed
and spared him that he might carry the gospel of a Savior's love to a
lost and ruined world. Then a helping hand was extended. A lifelong
friend, meeting him one day, and overcome with pity, gave him one more
chance to make a man of himself, fitted him out with clothes, gave him a
railroad ticket and money, advising him to leave Louisville and start
life afresh elsewhere. But the fetters of sin were riveted so strongly
that the well-meant advice of his boyhood friend was unheeded, and a few
hours found him in as fearful a plight as ever. Then there came into
this, the darkest hour in all his life, the experience of the prodigal
son. A determination came into his life to sever forever all ties
binding him to the life of degradation he was then living and to take
the first step back into the narrow path of righteousness.


    Show me thy ways, O Lord.--Ps. 25:4.


It was then that the Rev. Steve P. Holcombe of Louisville, Ky., took him
to the Union Gospel Mission.

At this critical period there came within the radius of his sphere of
existence a noble, devout woman, who proved to be the one thing needful
to round out the life now worth living. In spite of all remonstrances on
the part of her friends, she was greatly interested in the welfare of
this man and prayed earnestly that God would make him a strong Christian
man.

Her tireless energies, endless prayers and earnest teachings were ever
present to hold him up and help him onward in the new life. God placed
her in the sphere of George Herr's experience at a critical stage, using
her as a medium for cementing his faith and determining his purpose to
devote his remaining years to the work of redeeming unfortunates sunk in
the darkness of sin. Their destinies were welded together by mutual
interest in the work of saving lost men and the affinity of feeling
between them developed into a bond of love, each seeing within the other
those qualities necessary to happiness in wedded life, and on the 14th
of April, 1898, George L. Herr and Miss Lillie M. Joyce, the woman
who was such an essential portion of his existence, were joined in the
holy bonds of matrimony by the Rev. Carter Helm Jones, D.D., pastor of
the Broadway Baptist Church, Louisville, Ky.


    The meek will he teach his way.--Ps. 25:9.

    Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy Holy Spirit
    from me.--Ps. 51:11.


[Illustration: REV. STEVE P. HOLCOMBE

The founder of the Holcombe Mission of Louisville, Ky.]

George Herr says that the old life, with its bondage in sin and its
darkness of evil, is a thing of the eliminated past. Finding happiness
in his new life, he has consecrated his time, energy, ability and
talents to continuous devotion to the task of spreading the gospel among
the fallen. Into the gloomiest recesses of penitentiaries, workhouses
and jails, beyond portals where visitors are excluded, he has carried
the message of Christ's saving grace into the darkness of despairing
men's and women's lives.

God has blessed George L. Herr in many ways, giving him daily recompense
for the days of misery, shame and degradation, giving him a happy home,
glorified by the presence of a loving, devoted wife and the precious
daughter, and this story is sent forth with the earnest prayer that God
may use it, with its message of hope and cheer, for the salvation of
many despairing, discouraged ones who are bound by the awful fetters of
sin as he once was.


    All that the Father giveth me shall come to me; and him that
    cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.--John 6:37.


One of the greatest privileges accorded man is to be a messenger for
Christ. George Herr has tasted the sweets of liberty in Christ and he
loves to tell those in the terrible bondage of sin that there is an
avenue of escape. In his rescue work he has been able to take a great
number of homeless, friendless and hopeless men and women by the hand.

Does it pay? The results of George Herr's labors among the unfortunates
are a satisfactory answer to this question. It pays a hundredfold in the
feeling of duty well done, in the knowledge of many useful lives saved.
It pays in words of gratitude feelingly uttered by noble men and women,
who, formerly sunk in the quicksands of despair, are now restored to a
world of happiness and peace.


    Jesus own words are: "They that be whole need not a physician,
    but they that are sick, for I am not come to call the righteous,
    but sinners to repentance."--Matt. 9:12, 13.


It is our earnest prayer to the Father of all good, that this story of
George Herr's redemption from the clutches of sin may, through his
unfailing love for all suffering ones, carry its message of hope, its
promise of salvation from eternal despair, into the hearts of many who
are despondent, discouraged, despairing. May it instill into the hearts
of the unfortunate a desire to come back into the fold of the Father's
unending love, bringing with it the sweet conviction that no matter how
far we have wandered from within the radius of his love, we are still
his children, the erring ones for whose redemption he gave his Son to be
offered upon the altar of human sacrifice that we, through the atonement
of his innocent blood, should inherit the kingdom of heaven.


    Hold up my goings in thy path, that my footsteps slip not.--Ps.
    17:6.


[Illustration: THE LATE MR. GEORGE GAULBERT

One of my best friends. Many heart-to-heart talks I have had with this
grand and wealthy merchant]




CHAPTER TWO

"LOST AND IS FOUND"


Jesus said, "A man had two sons; and the younger one of them said to his
father, 'Father, give me my share of the inheritance!' so the father
divided the property between them. A few days later the younger son got
together all that he had and went away into a distant land; and there he
squandered his inheritance by leading a dissolute life. After he had
spent all that he had, there was a severe famine through all that
country, and he began to be in actual want. So he went and engaged
himself to one of the people of that country, who sent him into his
field to tend pigs. He even longed to satisfy his hunger with the bean
pods on which the pigs were feeding; and no one gave him anything. But
when he came to himself he said, 'How many of my father's hired servants
have more bread than they can eat, while here am I starving to death; I
will get up and go to my father and say to him, 'Father, I have sinned
against Heaven and against you; I am no longer fit to be called your
son; make me as one of your hired servants.' And he got up and went
to his father. But while he was still a long way off, his father saw him
and was deeply moved; he ran and threw his arms around his neck and
kissed him. 'Father,' the son said, 'I sinned against Heaven and against
you; I am no longer fit to be called your son; make me one of your hired
servants.' But the father turned to his servants and said, 'Be quick and
bring a robe, the very best, and put it on him; give him a ring for his
finger and sandals for his feet; and bring the fatted calf and kill it,
and let us eat and make merry; for here is my son who was dead, and is
alive again, was lost and is found."


    For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the
    government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be
    called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting
    Father, The Prince of Peace.--Isa. 9:6.


[Illustration: REV. CARTER HELM JONES, D.D.

The late Pastor Broadway Baptist Church Louisville, Ky.]

This younger son thought he was wiser than his father and wanted to
manage his own affairs. So it is with men who think they can manage
their own affairs without God.


    He shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all
    thy ways.--Ps. 91:11.


A case in hand: An acquaintance of mine in Louisville, a young man of
handsome face and fine physique, with all the advantages wealth,
education and social position could give him, started out at the age of
twenty-one with unfaltering prospects of a prosperous, useful and happy
life, but, like the young man in our lesson, thought he could manage his
own affairs without God; in other words, he refused to give his heart
and life to Jesus Christ, and not having Christ to protect, shield,
restrain, and assist him, in a time of temptation he was led along
little by little, almost without knowing it, until he was ready to
commit any crime. One day in a house of ill repute he shot and killed a
young man; for this crime he was arrested, tried and convicted, but the
wealth and influence of his family secured him a pardon. Even this
bitter experience failed to teach him that he had made a mistake in
thinking he could manage his own affairs, for, after regaining his
liberty, he plunged deeper and deeper into sin, ending in himself being
murdered.

As the prodigal in the parable wanted to get as far from his father's
presence as possible, "into a far country," so the man when he
determines to give himself up to others. He does not want to hear about
God or even think about him. Reader, was not this so with you? The
father did not compel the son to stay at home; he allowed him to choose
what he preferred. So it is with God; he does not compel us to
obedience. For my part I wish he did. "He wasted his substance in
riotous living;" and so it is with the sinner, in the service of sin;
he wastes and destroys his property, his health, his reputation, his
intellect, his conscience.


    Fear not; for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy
    name; thou art mine.--Is. 43:1.


[Illustration: THE LATE REV. E. A. FERGUSON One of the Author's best
friends]

There is nothing in this world valuable enough to recompense such a
loss, or balance the misery of a tormenting conscience. If you violate
it for the sake of a gratification of the body it will remember the
injury many years after. Gen. 42:21; Job 13:26. It will not only retain
the memory of what you did, but it will accuse you for it. Matt. 27:4.
It will not fear to tell you that plainly, which others dare not
whisper. It will not only accuse, but it will also condemn you for what
you have done. This condemning voice of conscience is a terrible voice.
You may see the horror of it in Cain, the vigor of it in Judas, the
doleful effects of it in Saphira. It will produce shame, fear, and
despair, if God give not repentance to life. The shame it works will so
confound you, that you will not be able to look up. Job. 31:14; Psa.
1:5. The fear it works will make you wish for a hole in the rock to hide
you. Isa. 2:9, 10, 15, 19. And its despair is a death pang.


    "Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord; though
    your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though
    they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool."--Is. 1:18.


Young man, consider the nature of your present actions; they are seeds
sown for eternity, and will spring up again in suitable effects, rewards
and punishments, when you that did them are turned to dust. What a man
sows, that shall he reap. Gal. 6:7. And as sure as the harvest follows
the seedtime, so shall shame, fear, and horror follow sin. Dan. 12:2.
What Zeuxis, the famous painter, said of his work, may much more truly
be said of ours: "I paint for eternity." Ah! how bitter will these
things be in the day of reckoning, which were pleasant in the acting! It
is true our actions, physically considered, are transient. How soon is a
word or action spoken or done, and there is an end of it! But morally
considered, they are permanent, being entered upon God's book of action.


    I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and,
    as a cloud, thy sins: return unto me; for I have redeemed
    thee.--Isa. 44:22.


Let me illustrate: Some time ago a young man, son of a nobleman of
Germany, came to our home poorly clad, without money, without friends,
realizing to some extent the depth to which he had fallen, filled with
remorse on account of disgrace he had brought upon himself and his
family, and like the prodigal in the parable he said, "I will arise and
go to my father." He left our home for his home in New Orleans, La.
After his arrival there we received the following letter:

My Dear Brother Herr: My letter to you from San Antonio told of the
happiness which had come to me as a result of the reunion of my wife and
little ones. Can you realize how full those days were spent in the sweet
companionship of those who are so dear to me? I would have wished to
have remained with them until Christmas, but my obligations to business
intervened, and I was compelled to leave in order to attend to matters
here.

My thoughts are with you so much that I often feel as though I could
reach out and grasp your hand; and so often during the day there goes up
a whispered prayer from my heart that our Father will bless you in just
proportion as you have been a sweet, helpful blessing to others.

My route includes Louisville, and while I may not be in there on this
trip, it will not be many days before I will have an opportunity to
greet you in person. May God bless Sister Herr and yourself if only in
recompense for your kindness to me.

                                                           EDWARD.


    Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy
    God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will
    uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness.--Isa.
    44:10.


Does not the life of this man preach a more eloquent sermon, and tell a
more powerful tale, and teach a more eloquent lesson than I or any other
preacher could do? Reader, you cannot ignore, disregard, or shut your
eyes to the lesson which this man's life teaches, impresses and enforces
of the awful danger and the deadly and destructive effects of sin.


    Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from
    before mine eyes; cease to do evil.--Isa. 1:16.


Here is a lesson in life that appeals to us and bids us stop in our mad
way. This parable of the prodigal son shows that we can have our own way
if we determine to do it; father and mother can't keep us from it, and
God by force will not keep us from it; but we will certainly pay for it,
and pay the price of tears and sorrow, remorse and ruin. This nobleman's
son, by refusing to heed God's warning, was brought to want. No matter
whose son it is, if he determines to have his own way and give himself
up to self-indulgence and riotous living, he will come to want, shame,
bitterness, and many are the men who tried to master themselves but
failed. Some evil habit had fastened itself upon him, and realizing
himself a slave, tries to shake it off, but, alas! the will has been
paralyzed, and it does not respond in warding off the fearful habit.
Defeat after defeat occurs until the poor fellow, discouraged,
broken-hearted, gives up and goes down to utter ruin. Man is no match
for the devil. How hopeless would be the outlook for the great army of
men whom we labor with were it not for a Deliverer. "The cross held his
body; the sun hid his face for shame, and the bowels of the earth were
moved in compassion, when Jesus expired on Calvary's rugged tree, thus
purchasing redemption for every man from the curse of sin. It is
possible through Christ for every man to be a Christian."


    "Him that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out."--John 6:37.
    What a wonderful invitation--these words of the Savior!


And now here are some of the ways God has taken to tell you of his love:
Psalm 103:13: "Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord
pitieth them that fear him." Isaiah 49:15: "Can a woman forget her
suckling child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her
womb? yea, they may forget, yet I will not forget thee." Luke 11:13: "If
ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how
much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that
ask him?" Luke 18:13-14: "And the publican, standing afar off, would not
lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast,
saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you this man went down
to his house justified rather than the other: for every one that
exalteth himself shall be abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be
exalted." Luke 15:7: "I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in
heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine
just persons, which need no repentance." Luke 15:10: "Likewise I say
unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one
sinner that repenteth." Luke 7:36-50: "And one of the Pharisees desired
him that he would eat with him. And he went into the Pharisee's house,
and sat down to meat. And behold a woman in the city, which was a
sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee's house,
brought an alabaster box of ointment, and stood at his feet behind him
weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with
the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the
ointment.


    Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her own works praise
    her in the gates.--Prov. 31:31.


"Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him saw it, he spake within
himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet, would have known who
and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him; for she is a sinner.
And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say unto
thee. And he saith, Master, say on. There was a certain creditor which
had two debtors: the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty.
And when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me,
therefore, which of them will love him most? Simon answered and said, I
suppose that he to whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou hast
rightly judged. And he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Seest
thou this woman? I entered into thine house, thou gavest me no water for
my feet: but she hath washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the
hairs of her head. Thou gavest me no kiss: but this woman, since the
time I came in, hath not ceased to kiss my feet. My head with oil thou
didst not anoint: but this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment.
Wherefore I say unto thee, her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for
she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little.
And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven.


    And, behold, there came a leper and worshipped him, saying,
    Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.--Matt. 8:2.


"And they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves, Who
is this that forgiveth sins also? And he said to the woman, Thy faith
hath saved thee; go in peace."

A father whose son had gone away to California, and was a gambler in San
Francisco, sent him word by a friend: "Your father loves you still." And
it made him ashamed; it broke his heart; he repented, returned home and
was saved. "God, your heavenly Father, loves you still." Will you not
believe it and come to him for safety? He will not abuse you for your
sins. He will save you from your sins, and make you happy.

"And he began to be in want."

That is what sin brings a man to--want.

And it was this which brought him to his senses--"he came to himself"
(verse 17).

And when he does come to himself he can think of only one place where he
can hope to find relief, and he bravely determines to go straight to the
very father he had so shamefully abandoned, and to make a full
confession and throw himself on that father's mercy with the hope of
being taken back as a hired servant. He is willing to take the humblest
and meanest place if he can only get back to that home he was, a short
time before, so eager to leave. Nor does he offer any excuse; he calls
his sin by the right name and confesses it without trying to excuse it
or justify it.


    And Jesus put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will;
    be thou clean. And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.--Matt.
    8:3.


And how did his father receive him? Why, he did not wait till his poor,
ragged, worn and wasted boy got in and made his confession; but he saw
him a great way off (verse 20) and he knew what had passed in the boy's
heart and life, and moved with compassion toward him, he ran and fell on
his neck and kissed him a glad welcome back to his heart and home. But
the son goes on to make his confession and his offer to be a hired
servant anyhow, and yet the father says, "No! no! bring forth the best
robe and put it on him."


    "And their works do follow them."--Rev. 14:13.


A man married a young widow with a small son. Her former husband had
left her $10,000 in his will. The man said: "I will take care of you and
we will lay away that $10,000 for your boy." Two other sons were born to
them. The stepson was educated and taught habits of business. At
twenty-one years of age he asked for the money his father had left. He
was told that instead of being $10,000, it had been invested for him and
was now $50,000. He was asked to let the money stay in the business and
to become a partner with his stepfather. The young man refused, took his
$50,000, fell into bad habits and lost it all and came home in rags, a
tramp. His stepfather met him at the train, took him to the barbershop
and clothier and presented him to his mother at the house as a
gentleman. The nicest room in the house was assigned him and he was told
that it was his permanent home. He was also told by his stepfather that
he was to be taken into the business firm composed of the father and the
two half-brothers. This was more than he could stand. He began to weep
at his ingratitude and at the love which had been lavished upon him. He
devoted himself to business, was devoted to his stepfather, and was as
loyal to his interests as his own sons. This picture, though it seems
overdrawn, is one of real life. The stepfather had a good disposition
naturally, but his magnanimous treatment of the prodigal was out of his
sincere affection for his wife. There were few ties of love that bound
him to the bad boy, only the love of his faithful wife. He loved the boy
for the sake of his mother. Our Father loves his children and receives
the prodigals returning to him for their own sake and the sake of his
Son who died for them, and treats them, in his affection, as though they
had never sinned against him.


    The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and
    the good.--Prov, 15:3.


[Illustration: DR. E. L. POWELL

Pastor First Christian Church, Louisville. One of the ablest ministers
of the Christian Church who has done a wonderful work among the
masses.]




CHAPTER THREE

POLITICAL PERIL

    Sermon by Dr. E. L. Powell, on "The Need of Prophets in a Time
    of Political Peril," delivered at the First Christian Church,
    Louisville, Ky.

    "And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear,
    (for they are a rebellious house,) shall know that there hath
    been a prophet among them."--Ezekiel 2:5.


He thought it would not be questioned by thinking persons that we are
living in a time of political peril. He did not mean that revolution was
at our door; he did not mean that we are threatened with a reign of
terror; he did not mean that there was any prospect of immediate
bloodshed.


    I have preached righteousness in the great congregation: lo, I
    have not refrained my lips, O Lord, thou knowest.

    I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart; I have
    declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation; I have not
    concealed thy loving kindness and thy truth from the great
    congregation.--Psalm 40:9, 10.


Our perils spring from our state--the state of our own souls. They are
lacking in moral sensibility--we are in danger. We are told on every
hand our country was never more prosperous--that is unquestionably so.
The same might be said of Rome when that colossal empire was tottering
to its fall. There were persons then who paid from $200,000 to $400,000
for a single feast. It is recorded of one man that, after spending
several millions of dollars in luxurious living, he committed suicide
because he had only $400,000 between him and starvation. National
bankruptcy does not stare us in the face. Fortunes grow up in a
generation--the dollar smiles upon us as a beneficent sun. Yet our moral
condition is such as to call forth from thinking men serious and earnest
fear. We are as a man living in a luxuriously appointed house, and yet,
on account of invalidism, unable to appreciate his splendid home and
environments.


    Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
    brethren, ye have done it unto me.


He had called the attention of the congregation last Sunday night to
what was the fundamental source of our political corruption--the
unnatural separation of religion and politics. He did not mean
separation of Church and State; that was right and proper; but he did
mean that we need the reign of truth, purity and righteousness, because
of the ills to which attention was called last Sunday night. His lecture
tonight would be on "The Need of Prophets in a Time of Political Peril."
He did not wish to call attention to the peculiarly inspired Bible
prophet. So far as he was concerned he was a man apart, who could not be
our example--he constituted an order of his own; but we mortals can to
some extent, recognizing our limitations, reproduce the power of the
prophets, and it is not limited by arbitrary metes and bounds, as God
sends his teachers to every age and every clime. If there ever was a
time when we stood in need of moral leadership it is now. We want men
who come like the prophets of old, who shall come before us as genuine
leaders to take us out of this wilderness in which we find ourselves. A
fine moral leadership is the exception rather than the rule. Unless the
standard be lifted up the hosts will not rally. Truth will not win its
way on its own merits. Let the call come from the lips that speak not
lies, but the truth, and there is that in the humblest of men that will
give back an amen. And when our leaders come we shall recognize them. We
are not likely to mistake the rumble of cart-wheels for thunder. The
leader carries his credentials. When a community is visited by a prophet
it is known by that community that a prophet has been among them. You do
not mistake genuine fire. You are never deceived by a genuine voice. It
has been true in all ages of the world that wisdom is recognized by its
people. Deep down in the hearts of the people are the instincts of
truth. When we find men willing to pay the price of leadership we shall
have leaders. It is as true today as it was in the days of prophecy that
such leaders as we have have taught us to err. We need men with
political consciences--men who recognize that there are such things as
truth, purity and righteousness in the world.


    What must I do to be saved?--Acts 16:30.

    Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.--Acts
    16:31.


In speaking of moral leadership the all-inclusive qualification is
inspiration. He did not mean the exceptional inspiration that applies to
the Bible prophets. He meant that inspiration which kindles the powers
we already have into life. When he spoke of inspiration he meant the
enlivening, the stirring up of the powers we already have as opposed to
the shallow indifference of one who draws about him the robes of his
silken selfishness and says, "Let well enough alone"--a man whose
inspiration glows and glows intensely. The inspired man feels the
degradation of his country as a personal infliction. Those who dishonor
her are his own foes, and insults flung in the face of political liberty
are felt by him as an affront to himself. Our prophets must be men who
feel the woes that they oppose, men who feel the humiliation before they
can strike with the right arm clothed with power. Indifference to the
public weal on the part of the average political leader is one of the
most distressing features of our political situation. These people do
not seem capable of feeling righteous indignation in the presence of the
moral infamy by which they are confronted, and hence their words do not
come forth as thunderbolts, but as spent balls. Beware of the man whose
heart has not been pierced by the woes of his country. The sting is the
needed spur to effort. The sleeping lion is not dangerous; but let him
be wounded and his roar shall ring as the trumpet of doom in the ears of
his enemies. We must seek our leaders among those who can feel the woes
of humanity--men of profound feeling--as those are the best prophets.


    Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he hath redeemed from
    the hand of the enemy;

    And gathered them out of the lands, from the east, and from the
    west, from the north and from the south.--Psalm 107:2, 3.


He believed that we must strike at the evil of social indifferentism.
Who does not feel profound shame that the law against carrying concealed
and deadly weapons is not strictly enforced, which made possible
tragedies such as that at Frankfort, which has disgraced the fair name
and fame of our State. The leaders' voices should ring throughout our
land until we are bowed to the earth in shame in view of the infamies
which disgrace us.


    Lord, save us; we perish.--Matt. 8:25.

    There shall not a hair of your head perish.--Lu. 21:18.


Another element required for leadership was the power of vision. There
must be a clear recognition of evils. The idealist is not a mere
dreamer, but acquainted with the actual wants of the people. In fact our
leaders must see something better. The man who is working in the slums
must keep his eyes fixed on the stars. There can be no change for the
better until the better is made to shine with the brightness of a
beckoning angel.


    I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my
    heart.

    I am a companion of them that keep thy precepts.--Psalm 119:63.


Here is the opportunity and duty of newspapers. James Russell Lowell
says: "What a pulpit the editor mounts daily, sometimes with a
congregation of fifty thousand within reach of his voice, and never so
much as a nodder, even, among them! and from what a Bible can he choose
his text--a Bible that needs no translation, and which no priestcraft
can shut and clasp from the laity--the open volume of the world, upon
which with a pen of sunshine or destroying fire the inspired Present is
even now writing the annals of God!"

[Illustration: PROMINENT IN THE RELIGIOUS LIFE OF LOUISVILLE]

[Illustration: PRESBYTERIAN THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY]

But has the editor no mission other than to tell us of partisan
political measures? To be a simple annalist who shall bring before us
the events of the day, but who creates no perspective along which we may
tread to better customs, better men and better times? He never leaves us
in doubt--"Let us do the best we can, and leave the rest alone." In
God's name, is there not something better? "Let us go up and possess the
land." Standing on the mountain height up there we shall all see fairer
lands below. The inspired editor not only sees the battle from afar, but
also the coming of the imperial guard of righteousness with victory.
There is that in the heart of every man that responds to the ideal. No
leader has ever succeeded in having an evil reformed who wanted an
ideal. Napoleon, when he said, "Beyond the Alps lies Italy," was
appealing to that sentiment--to something beyond--to something in the
future. When Cortez drew an imaginary line before his men, who had
become mutinous, and said "On this side lies danger, death, duty and
glory; on that, safety, shame and infamy. Choose ye whether you will
step this side of the line or remain where you are," he was appealing to
something in their hearts--put there by the Almighty himself. Editors
should not think it their only mission to mirror forth things as they
occur, but say to their 50,000 readers, "Let us go up and possess the
land" of truth, purity and righteousness. This is not weakness on their
part but evidence of the profoundest philosophy. Fifty years ago we had
senatorial utterances that would reach across the continent. The secret
power of those utterances was that they were ideal. In the days when
boys spoke pieces in school we declaimed them, and we feel their
influence today.


    Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.

    When wilt thou comfort me?--Ps. 119:82.

    Love worketh no ill to his neighbor; therefore love is the
    fulfilling of the law.--Rom. 13:10.


Another element of leadership is moral enthusiasm. The idealist in art
is so for the love of art. He enters into the discussion of art subjects
with enthusiasm. So with the moral enthusiast. Sin is hateful to him,
and he seeks to crush it as he would a viper, and instinctively and
spontaneously his denunciations come forth. Truth is his pole-star, and
he will tell his best friend, "I will do anything but lie for you." Try
to bribe him, and you will think that the central fires of the earth
have been concentrated into his blistering rebuke. Suggest a compromise
involving dishonor, and if you escape a blow you will be fortunate. Like
Luther he says: "Here I stand. I can do no other. God help me." He would
not go with the crowd to moral destruction. Moral enthusiasm has been
the virtue of all epoch-making men. Men do not die for fancies; they do
not die for offices. They die for what they believe is right. Give them
something that appeals to their moral nature and they will die for it.
The grand martyrs were men who laid down their lives for what they
believed to be right. There came to them those lines of James Russell
Lowell:

    "Once to every man and Nation
      Comes the moment to decide,
    In the strife of truth and falsehood
      For the good or evil side;
    Love's great cause, God's new Messiah,
      Offering each the bloom or blight,
    Parts the goats upon the left hand
      And the sheep upon the right,
    And the choice goes by forever
      'Twixt the darkness and the light."


    As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you.--Is.
    66:13.

    He who loveth God loveth his brother also.--1 John 4:21.


We must have leaders who possess the elements of leadership for the
great task of making the world better--who possess the elementary
virtues of honesty and truth. He had indicated some of the elements of
moral leadership that these times demand. He did not mean to say that
the political stage had not such leaders. Certainly there were a few;
but we can make it possible to have a thousand. When we can see one we
are surprised. In the past, thank God, we have had such leaders, and in
the future we shall have such leaders again.

It is slumbering in the hearts of men and women all around us. It needs
only some one to sweep the harp strings. The trouble is with ourselves.
How can we be leaders with sensual and selfish appetites and desires?
Does God no longer speak to man? Burns there no fire upon the altar? He
did not believe God had exhausted himself. God had not exhausted himself
by casting out a few bright stars from his own luminous presence. There
is power for him to bring to the front the men we are longing and
praying for.


    He shall deliver thee in six troubles; yea in seven there shall
    no evil touch thee.--Job 5:19.


In conclusion, he wished to say only these few words--that every leader
is a man that must bring to us the message of hope. The prophets through
all those weary years carried the torch of hope and handed it to their
successors. Abraham believed with all his soul that he should have a
posterity as numerous as the stars. He died leaving only one heir.
Moses, the great law-giver, had a vision that a community of slaves
should be made into a great nation. He went up into Pisgah and died,
leaving them still slaves. Long ago a prophet looked over the sea at a
vision of a new heaven and a new earth. Two thousand years have passed
away and no new heaven or new earth has come--but as sure as truth is
stronger than falsehood it will come--just so sure we shall one day see
a new heaven and a new earth, where dwelleth no political corruption,
but righteousness. Not in our time, perhaps, not in our children's time,
shall the thing be; but it will come. Let us pray, then, that we may
answer in the language of the great poet.

    "Oh, well I know that to him who works, and knows he works,
    This same glad year is ever at the door."

  The Lord bless thee, and keep thee:

  The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee:

  The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.




CHAPTER FOUR

CHRIST THE INTERPRETER OF THE PICTURE

A Sermon preached by Rev. T. M. Hawes in the Slums


    "I have somewhat to say unto thee."--Luke 7:40.

The scene presented in this narration is worthy of the painter's brush.
We have a beautiful and striking presentation of the gospel--not set
forth in theological terms as abstract truth--but presented in the form
of a concrete example--a picture with Christ himself as the interpreter.

And now as we look at this picture with Christ to explain and interpret
it to us, let us see what he will teach us concerning the gospel.

First, we can learn here for whom the gospel is not intended.


    Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one
    another.--1 John 4:11.


Evidently it is not intended for those who find fault with it. Christ is
among a people who seem determined not to be pleased. He has just
wondered to whom he could liken them, and observing a number of children
at play he likens them to children playing in the market place. "We
have piped unto you and ye have not danced; we have mourned to you and
ye have not wept." They found fault with John the Baptist because he was
too severe--they found fault with Jesus because he was too liberal. And
here Simon is finding fault with him because he is allowing this sinful
woman to wash his feet. Am I saying too much when I say that there is
that same trait in human nature today, and that it keeps people out of
the kingdom? Yea, more than that, it often keeps those who are in the
kingdom from receiving the blessings which otherwise might be theirs.
There are those on the outside who remain out because they are
constantly finding fault. There are those on the inside who are always
unhappy for the same reason. If the preacher hews to the line they say
he is a scold--if he doesn't they say he is afraid to stand up for what
he believes, and so it goes.

[Illustration: REV. T. M. HAWES, D.D.

The beloved pastor of the Highland Presbyterian Church. The "Beloved
John" of the Louisville ministry.]

Let us learn from this picture that the gospel is not for faultfinders.
Our late Mr. Moody says a true thing when he says that a faultfinder is
usually a lightweight.


    He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me
    was love.--S. of S. 2:4.


Again we can learn from this picture that the gospel is not intended for
those who do not think they need it; not intended for self-righteous
people. No one is ever going to appreciate the gospel until he feels the
need of it. The spirit of the Pharisee will shut us out from the
blessings of the gospel whether we are church members or not. Simon
looked down on the sinful woman and felt that he was far superior to
her. Evidently he felt no need of a Saviour. The Scribes and Pharisees
rejected Christ on the very grounds that he was the friend of publicans
and sinners. Oh, yes, in the very nature of the case the gospel cannot
reach those who do not feel their need of some power beyond themselves.

Furthermore, the gospel is not meant for those who are ashamed of it.
There is something very touching and beautiful in this picture of the
woman who was a sinner coming into this public court to do honor to
Christ. She had true humility. Simon was far from doing anything of this
kind, he was willing to show a certain sort of respect for Christ, but
he would have been too proud to have ever done such a thing as this.

    "Ashamed of Jesus, sooner far
    Let evening blush to own a star."

Is it not true that a sense of being ashamed of the gospel shuts out
from its blessings those who entertain such unworthy feelings?


    Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart.--Mk. 12:30.


Finally, let us learn from this picture that the gospel is not meant for
those who are not glad to make a free-will offering of sacrifice as a
token of this grateful love. This woman brought an alabaster box of
ointment.

"My head with oil thou didst not anoint; but this woman hath anointed my
feet with ointment." Christ did not exact this of her--it was a
free-will offering. If the gospel does not draw out our gratitude and
liberality, then it has never touched us. It is not because of our gifts
that we are forgiven, but it is because of our forgiveness that we give.
"To whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little."

    "That man may last but never lives,
    Who much receives but nothing gives;
    Whom none can love, whom none can thank,
    Creation's blot, creation's blank.

    "But he who walks from day to day
    In generous acts his radiant way,
    Treads the same path his Saviour trod--
    The path to glory and to God."

Now, having learned from this picture for whom the gospel is not
intended, let us learn for whom it is intended. Ah! how with a few bold
and simple strokes the whole matter is made plain.


    Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.--Mark 11:31.


First, I notice that it is meant for sinners. "Behold a woman in the
city which was a sinner." Jesus "a friend of publicans and sinners."
That tells the story. "I came to call not the righteous, but sinners."
Some people find fault with the church because there are so many sinners
in the church. Just as well find fault with a hospital for having sick
people in it. Just as well find fault with the doctor for visiting
invalids. "Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee; you are finding
fault with me for allowing this sinful woman to touch me. Let me tell
you, Simon, that it is just for this very purpose that I am come into
this world." "This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation,
that Christ came into the world to save sinners." He was the great
Physician and great physicians are those who have a specialty. This was
Christ's specialty--to save sinners. Who is this that forgiveth sins,
also?


    The end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart.--1 Tim.
    1:5.


Secondly, I learn from our Saviour's interpretation of this picture that
the gospel is for the very greatest of sinners. "Simon, I have somewhat
to say unto thee. There was a certain creditor who had two debtors,"
etc. Our Saviour proceeds with an illustration which shows that this
woman was one of the greatest of sinners. She was ten times worse than
the average sinner, and yet she was more welcome to the Saviour than
this proud, self-righteous Pharisee. Oh, men and women! if you are in
this hall, feeling that you are unworthy to be here, your very unfitness
makes you fit. Draw nigh to this Saviour from sin and hear him say, "Thy
sins are forgiven; go in peace." Let no pharisaical Simon frighten you
away--the Saviour will give him the rebuke which he deserves and will
whisper into your ear words of pardon and of peace.


    Many waters cannot quench love neither can the floods drown
    it.--S. of S. 8:7.


I learn from this picture which Christ interprets that the gospel is for
penitent sinners. "Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee; seest thou
this woman? She hath washed my feet with her tears." Oh, those were
precious tears in the sight of our Saviour. Every tear-drop was a jewel.
The breaking of the alabaster box of ointment was a sweet incense to
Jesus, but this ten-fold sinner bathing his very feet with her
penitential tears was a sight which made the angels in heaven rejoice,
"for there is more joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth than
over ninety-nine just persons who need no repentance." Simon despised
this woman's tears and sat unmoved at the pathetic scene--but not so
with Jesus. He could refrain himself no longer, but speaking out before
all the company he said, "Thy sins are forgiven." Oh, gracious words!
How sweet and soft must have been this music to the ears of this sinful
outcast.

    "They fall as soft as snow on the sea
    And melt in the heart as instantly."

Finally, I learn from this picture which Christ is interpreting for us
that the gospel is for sinners who commit themselves in implicit faith
to Christ. "Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee." "Behold this
woman; you have done a great deal of talking--this poor woman has not
spoken a word--but behold how she has thrown herself upon my mercy with
unquestioning confidence! Do you think I will disappoint such trust as
that? She has heard me say, 'Him that cometh unto me I will in no wise
cast out' and has taken me at my word, and I consider it an honor to
turn from thy company to the company of this sinful woman."

And he said to the woman, "Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace."


    Without faith it is impossible to please God.--Hebrews 11:6.


[Illustration: REV. HENRY CLAY MORRISON, D.D.

A Giant Against Unrighteousness]




CHAPTER FIVE

THROWING OUT THE LIFE-LINE

By Rev. H. C. Morrison, D.D.


"Ye are the salt of the earth," "Ye are the light of the world," "Let
your light so shine before men that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which art in heaven."--Matt. 5:13, 14, 15.

These sayings of Jesus from the sermon on the mount are quite
remarkable. No other teacher ever used such words to his disciples, "Ye
are the light of the world." Had the Jewish doctor of the law heard
these words of our Lord to his humble sun-tanned, bare-footed,
shaggy-browed fishermen, he would have been quite disgusted with what to
him would have seemed the consummate egotism of the Nazarene.

The meaning of the words of Christ is very plain. The disciples, their
lives, character, spirit, the power of the Christ in them must, and
would, permeate society like salt, and purify and save from sin. They
must illuminate the world, so dark with vice, and show it the way back
to God.


    Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with
    God.--Rom. 5:1.


These words of Jesus to the disciples who sat before him that day, are
addressed by him to all of his followers for all time, to all of those
who trust him and gladly obey him (and only such are disciples). He
says, "Ye are the salt of the earth," "Ye are the light of the world."
"Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father which is in heaven."


    I have somewhat to say unto thee.--Luke 7:40.


We must not forget that God's plan is to save the lost, through the
instrumentality of those who were themselves once lost, but are now
saved from sin. If we would have a great testimony meeting in the city
of the skies, and all of the countless hosts there should one by one
stand up to tell how they were brought from sin to Jesus, each one of
them would point out some person who had been the chief instrument in
his or her salvation. There is this one characteristic of all who are
truly saved--they desire the salvation of all souls. In fact, this is a
very good thermometer with which to get the correct temperature of one's
spiritual life. Does he long for the salvation of the lost? If so, in
the nature of things he must be in a state of salvation. Is he
indifferent to the condition of the lost? Then he is himself in a lost
state. Let us here impress the important truth that Jesus did not say to
his disciples, "Ye must try and salt the earth," but said, "Ye are the
salt of the earth." He did not say, "Ye shall kindle a flame that shall
illuminate the world." He said, "Ye are the light of the world." We are
not, as the disciples of Christ, to be makers of light and salt, but we,
by the power of Christ, must be made into salt and light. It will be
interesting to notice the processes through which one must pass in order
to become salt and light. Let us go back to the beginning of this sermon
of our Lord and we will hear him saying, "Blessed are the poor in
spirit." First of all to become salt and light one must be poor in
spirit; he must awake to the fact that he owes a million and has not one
cent with which to pay. From his heart he must say,


    "Nothing in my hands I bring,
    Simply to thy cross I cling."

    Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit
    within me.--Psalms 51:10


He must realize in his inmost soul his perilous condition, and pray from
the fullness of a deep conviction in his heart, "Lord save, or I
perish." Not only must he be poor in spirit, but our Lord says, "Blessed
are they that mourn." God loves to see the falling tears of sorrow for
sin against himself. Those that truly mourn because of their sins will
forsake them. How blessed for the returning prodigal to come with a
heart all full of deep contrition. They that mourn because of their sins
shall be comforted. After deep poverty of spirit and true mourning for
sin and the comforting of the soul by the pardoning mercy of God. Then
meekness will most certainly follow.

Now, the soul comforted, born of God, sitting in meekness at the feet of
Jesus, will "hunger and thirst after righteousness." A dead man has no
appetite or desire for food, but a living one must eat. The soul that is
born of God will at once begin to hunger for Godlikeness. The cry of
such a soul is not so much for his blessings as it is for him. The
Psalmist says, "As the hart panteth for the water-brooks, so panteth
my soul for Thee, O God." Jesus says of such, "They shall be
filled"--filled with purity, love and peace; filled with the Holy Ghost;
filled with all the fulness of God. All such will be merciful, pure in
heart, peace-makers, and be sure that persecution will follow. This
world that hated and killed our Lord will not let his followers pass
through without persecutions. Of this we may be sure.


    Be ye of good courage, and bring of the fruit of the land.--Num.
    13:20.


But with all these graces and past experiences herein named the
persecuted can rejoice and be exceedingly glad. And of such Jesus says,
"Ye are salt and light." Would the reader be salt and light? Then pass
through the program laid down in the sermon on the mount. One must be so
poor in spirit that he will be such a mourner, that he will receive such
comfort, that he will become so meek, that in him there will be such
hungering and thirsting after righteousness, that he will be so filled
with righteousness, that he will become so merciful and pure in heart,
that he will be such a peacemaker, that he will be so persecuted, that
he will so rejoice, that he will be salt and light, so shining that men
will see it and glorify our Father in heaven. It is folly to be striving
to do something before. By the grace of God and his divine power we are
ourselves made something. Make the tree good and the fruit will be good.
If by the power of the Holy Ghost we are made right it will be easy for
us to do right. Salt salts, and light shines without effort. So with
true disciples of our Christ. They cannot exist without proving a
blessing to those with whom they come in contact.


    Pray for them which despitefully use you.--Luke 6:28.





CHAPTER SIX

REFORMATION OF CRIMINALS

[Louisville Times]


In a sermon delivered in the Nashville penitentiary, the Rev. George L.
Herr, formerly chaplain of the jail here, spoke encouragingly to the
inmates, citing cases of reformation where reform seemed impossible. The
Rev. Mr. Herr took occasion to pay a high tribute to Jailer John R.
Pflanz, of Louisville. He said in part:


    Repent ye therefore and be converted.--Acts 3:19.


When I address you upon this subject I speak from the standpoint of one
who knows by bitter experience. I know that sin can rob man of fortune,
and all the luxuries of life. I know that it can rob him of the love of
all who ever loved him; I know that it can drag him down from a position
of prominence, and make him a habitue of the dives; I know that it will
cause him to place a rope around his neck and hang himself to a rafter
in his own barn; I know that sin will lead him to pause at the railing
of a bridge, his mind set upon the awful deed of self-destruction; I
know that it will tempt him to take a razor in hand and draw it across
his throat. I know that sin will reduce him from a position of
influence, a welcome visitor to the homes of the elite, to a degraded
drunkard, homeless upon the streets of his native city, robed in a short
linen duster and a straw hat in the dead of a bitter winter's night.

[Illustration: REV. JOHN PAUL

He gave the title to this book after reading the manuscript]


River Thief's Reformation.

Jerry McAuley was a river thief, and, while serving a term in the
penitentiary, caught a glimpse of what the life beyond with Christ would
be, and the verse, "God so loved the world," etc, (John iii., 16), won
his heart and life, and this poor, weak vessel in the few years he
labored for Christ has planted the gospel light through some convert at
every port where a ship now lands throughout the world.


Case of Sam Hadley.

Sam Hadley, who was saved through this man of God, was a poor friendless
drunkard, and at the time God spoke peace to his soul had committed
almost every crime in the calendar; over one hundred forgeries looked
him in the face when he confessed, but he had faith in God, and he led
him through all the dark valleys. Sam Hadley, was delivered.


    If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be
    established.--Isa, 7:9.


I met in the office of the prison every day the jailer, and I can
safely state, without any fear of contradiction, that I have never met a
warden or jailer who has such mercy and charity.


A Jail "Miracle."

I shall speak now of a miracle of the prison cell. Several years ago the
great D. L. Moody was holding meetings in St. Louis, Mo. The Globe
Democrat announced that it was going to publish Mr. Moody's sermons. He
made up his mind that he would weave in plenty of Scripture for the
newspaper to carry into places that he could never enter. One night he
preached on the Philippian jailer, and next morning the paper came out
with a sensational headline, "How the Jailer of Philippi Was Caught." A
copy of the paper was carried into the city jail, and fell into the
hands of a notorious prisoner. This man was one of the worst characters
known to the St. Louis police. He was about forty years old at that
time, and had spent about twenty years in prison, and was then awaiting
trial on a serious charge. As he glanced over the morning paper, the
headline caught his eyes. Thinking that it was some jail news he began
to read it.


    This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our
    faith,--1 John 5:4.


God used it to convict him, and a sense of his responsibility before
God rushed upon him. There in his cell at midnight he prayed for the
first time in his life. On the following Sunday he talked with Christian
friends who held service in the jail, and was led into the light of the
gospel. From that night he was a changed man. The sheriff thought he was
playing the "pious dodge," and had no confidence in his professed
conversion. But when he came to trial the case against him was not
pressed, and he escaped through some technicality.

[Illustration: DWIGHT L. MOODY

Who sent the Gospel through the daily press that fell into the hands of
Valentine Burke. He was always interested in the lost man.]


Unexpected Good Fortune.

For some months after his release Burke tried to find work, but no one
would take him, knowing his past history. He thought perhaps it was
because of his ugly face. He went to New York and was taken in by a
member of the police force, who knew him, and who told him he would
shoot him dead if he abused his confidence.

Being unsuccessful in New York, he returned to St. Louis. One day this
man who had realized what the "enemy" had done for his life received a
message from the sheriff that he was wanted at the courthouse. He obeyed
with a heavy heart.


    Thy God whom thou servest continually, he will deliver
    thee.--Dan. 16:6.


"Some old case they've got against me," he said, "but if I'm guilty I'll
tell them so; I've quit lying." The sheriff greeted him kindly.

"Where have you been Burke?"

"In New York."

"What have you been doing there?"

"Trying to find an honest job."

"Have you kept a good grip on the religion you told me about?" inquired
the sheriff.

"Yes," answered Burke; "I've had a hard time, sheriff, but I haven't
lost my religion."

"Burke," said the sheriff, "I have had you shadowed ever since you left
jail. I suspected your religion was a fraud, but I am convinced that you
are sincere, as you have lived an honest life, and I have sent for you
to offer you a deputyship under me. You can begin at once."


    Yea, he shall be holden up; for God is able to make him
    stand.--Rom. 14:4.



Tribute to Burke's Honesty.

This was in 1880. When Mr. Moody was preaching in Chicago in 1890,
Burke, who had not been off duty for the ten years, came to see him.
During all that time there had been many changes in the administration
of the sheriff's office, and they had changed every deputy but him.
Finally they appointed the ex-convict treasurer of the sheriff's
office. Mr. Moody preached in St. Louis again in 1895. A short time
before his visit an evangelist was called away in the middle of the
revival meetings. The committee wanted Burke to come and preach in his
absence, but the sheriff said he had just levied on a jeweler's store
and had not had time to take an inventory, and Burke was the man he
could trust to put in charge of it.

[Illustration: VALENTINE BURKE

Fac-simile of photograph taken for the Rogues' Gallery.]

[Illustration: VALENTINE BURKE

From a photograph taken in 1887, seven years after his conversion]

He was held in such confidence by the police that they did a most
unusual thing; they gave him a photograph they had of him in the Rogue's
Gallery. He had his photograph taken again in 1887, and in sending a
copy of this along with the original Rogue's Gallery photograph, to Mr.
T. S. McPheeters of St. Louis, to show the change in his features, Burke
wrote a note:

"Notice the difference in the inclosed pictures. See what our holy
religion can do for the chief of sinners." On the back of the Rogue's
Gallery photograph he wrote:

"He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth the needy out of
the dunghill, that he may set him with the princes, even with the
princes of his people." (Ps. cxiii, 7, 8.)


    Buy the truth and sell it not, also wisdom and
    instruction.--Prov. 23:23.


This incident shows what the grace of God can do for a hardened sinner.
Not only can it save him, but it can keep him. Valentine Burke lived an
active, consistent Christian life in the position until God called him
home in 1895.


Visit to Nashville, Tenn., Prison

Mrs. Wilburn, of Nashville, writes of Mr. Herr's visit to the Nashville
prison as follows: It was my great pleasure as we reached the door to
find Brother Herr, of Louisville, Ky., awaiting admission. It was
raining, cold and dreary without, but he carried sunshine on the inside
of the prison to the sad prisoners. The large chapel was filled with
eager listeners and he received a most hearty welcome and all were
delighted to see their true friend Brother Herr. It was indeed a sight
to make angels rejoice to see how eagerly they drank in every word. I
believe many darkened lives from whom all hope had fled were encouraged
once more to look up. Hundreds of faces grew brighter as he told with
burning words how God had saved convicts steeped in many crimes, causing
judges in different states to set them free; when they were told that
Jesus had blotted out their past and made new men of them. At the close
of his sermon Brother Herr asked all who would pray when alone in their
cells that Christ would save them too from the power of sin, and
transform their lives as He had others, to hold up their hands; as quick
as a flash hundreds of hands white and colored were raised above their
heads and, oh, how our hearts rejoiced as we saw the hope in so many
lives. We are looking to God who giveth the increase to bless the seed
sown in those sad hearts, and earnestly pray that when the great harvest
day comes many of these men may testify that the sunshine of God's great
love entered their hearts on that dark dreary day in December.


    Be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord.--Isa. 52:11.





CHAPTER SEVEN

DOES PRISON WORK PAY?


Who will ever know the vast number that attribute the first impulse to a
better life, formed while in the seclusion of a prison cell--alone with
God.

The world will never know how many, when sitting in judgment upon
themselves, have learned the great secret that it takes an _Omnipotent
Power_ to change the current of their lives, and give them deliverance
from the power of sin, and enabling them to go forth not to live a new
purpose, but a new life.

Many of these unfortunate ones, not remaining criminals from choice, but
because they have never known there was an antidote provided for the
deepest-dyed criminals, "a scarlet atonement for a scarlet sin," whereby
the power of evil possessing them could be eradicated from their lives,
and they no longer victims. While some do not seemingly heed the kindly
admonition given, yet we believe the promise of God will be fulfilled,
that "His word will not return void," and some time--somewhere--the
fruition of their hopes will be realized.


    Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
    against the wiles of the devil.--Eph. 6:11.


[Illustration: THE LATE COL. MAT. RAGLAND

Who aided the Author in securing a pardon from Gov. Beckham for a young
man who is now at the head of a great firm]

If Mr. A. could speak for himself when 14 years ago he bowed in his cell
as a poor forlorn sinner, and surrendered himself to God, and has since
been testifying of his saving grace; Mr. B., after leading a criminal
life for years, but when touched by the mighty power of God, came forth
to become a preacher of the gospel, and has since been magnifying the
grace that brought his deliverance; Mr. C., a desponding infidel,
persuaded to believe there was efficacy in prayer, and in the atoning
blood of the Lord Jesus Christ; if the multitude of witnesses who have
been saved through the faithfulness of prison workers were known, the
verdict would be--_it pays_.

                                 Louisville, Ky., February 15, 1912.

Dear Brother Herr:

When you handed me your little book "Lost and is Found" I had no idea
what a treasure you were placing in my hands. Undisturbed in my cell
tonight I read it through and wished for more. I read it the second and
third time, and your sermon so impressed me I read it the fourth time,


    Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues
    of life.--Proverbs 4:23.


Before I wandered away from my mother's teaching and fell into my awful
sin and disgrace, I had heard many sermons on the "Prodigal Son," but
none that in such a convincing way drives home the awfulness of sin as
does your description of this, to me, the dearest of Christ's parables.

What I like about you most in all your talks with the prisoners is this,
you never show a man how bad he is or how low he has fallen without
showing him how good he can become or how high he may rise, and it's
always in a way that appeals to the heart of the man.

God grant that while under your influence and in the knowledge of "your
way back to Christ" I and many of the lost ones within the prison may be
able to throw off the shackles of sin and return to our Father's love.

Your noble work among fallen men will never be known in its entirety in
this world, but in that to come God will surely number you among those
who have brought unto him a great harvest of precious souls.

May God bless you and your dear Christian wife in uplifting the fallen
ones, is the earnest prayer of one who desires your influence over the
remainder of his life.

                                     Yours for a better life,
                                                        CURTIS.


    My foot standeth in an even place; in the congregation I will
    bless the Lord.--Psalm 26:12.


                                    Louisville, Ky., Dec. 26, 1911.

 Rev. Geo. L. Herr,
    Jefferson County Jail.

Dear Brother Herr:

I want to thank you for the Christmas service which you held in the
chapel yesterday afternoon.

I was greatly helped in my own spirit and I was profoundly impressed
with the very evident influence of the occasion and your address upon
the hearts and spirits of all the other prisoners.

May God richly reward you in your labors of love for these people.

                                           Faithfully yours,
                                                           HENRY.


The Work of a Prison Evangelist

By Geo. Wm. Wood

[From the Courier-Journal Nov. 17, 1912]

To the right-thinking man there can be but one answer to the question,
does the work of an evangelist pay? As well might we ask does the
beautiful life of a true Christian pay? As well might we ask the farmer,
as he carefully tills the soil and sows the seed and labors to
cultivate the grain, does it pay? What answer would you expect from the
shrewd business man of today should you ask him the question does it
pay, when he labors and advises to keep down expenses. He would promptly
answer in the affirmative. Let us bring the question closer home. Ask
the prisoner behind the bars, does it pay to respect the law? He will
answer yes. So for the question does the work of an evangelist pay
behind prison bars there can be but one answer--yes.


    Be of good courage, and let us behave ourselves valiantly.--1
    Ch. 19:13.


Sitting tonight in our lonesome cell, bounded on three sides by blank
and barren walls of steel, through our two-by-six door, constructed of
massive bars of iron, there comes to us the conversation of our fellow
prisoners, as with head pressed close against the bars to catch the
other fellow's words, we listen to the talk of the men "committed for
crime"--men strong and healthy, who should be engaged in some honest
labor, but, instead, are "doing time" for a broken law. We had no idea
of the meaning of the words "doing time" until being placed behind these
bars, we took up the daily life of a prisoner, and with nothing but
"time" to look to, began the task of trying to be contented. We believe
from our own past ideas of prison life that very few of the outside
world have any conception of what the prisoner's life really is, or
what it means to be sentenced to a term in prison.


    No good thing will he withhold from them that walk
    uprightly.--Psalm 84:11.


[Illustration: JEFFERSON COUNTY JAIL, LOUISVILLE, KY.

Members of the International Prison Congress pronounced this prison the
model jail of the world.]


Judge Does Not Understand.

The judge who pronounces sentence upon the evil and unfortunate knows as
little of the meaning of the terms he uses in meting out punishment as
the mail clerk knows of the contents of the letters he handles at his
daily task. "Danger" conveys but little meaning to the mind of the
engineer who has never had a wreck. By the standard of freedom, a day in
prison is a year, and it is only those who mingle daily in our midst can
talk to the "man behind the bars," who can have a fair idea of what the
prisoner suffers daily in "doing time." The world that lies beneath the
bars is a strange world to the average citizen, the citizen blessed with
average good fortune. Prison life is a queer and twisted one, and a law
to itself.


    Let your conversation be as it becometh the gospel of
    Christ--Ph. 1:27.


But to return to the prisoners' conversation, of which we spoke.
Vile--yes, dear reader, this word does not convey to you the full
measure within the writer's mind. At times it seems that some have sunk
so low that all conception of honor and truth have passed entirely away.
No reverence whatever for such words as "mother, home or heaven" left
within their minds, for they are rendered entirely void of good thoughts
or honest ideas, having been so long filled with the one thought--crime.


Prison Record for Life.

Men who started on their "career of crime" as mere boys, with years of
youth spent in reform schools only to be developed into men of crime,
have prison records to follow them through life. Many of these men feel
that they have lost all hope of any but the criminal's life. Many of
them have been forsaken by family and friends. So to the man or woman
who is at all interested in the uplift of his fellow man, can you think
of any field where the labor of an evangelist is more needed than it is
among the men we have attempted to describe to you?


    Stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong--1
    Corinthians 16:13.


Then there is the paramount reason why the evangelist is needed. Men who
would not on the outside of prison give one minute of their time to
listen to the evangelist as he tried to persuade them to take a new
lease on life let him engage their attention by the hour as he shows
them the error of their way and points them to a better life. There are
those that listen to his talk and turn away in scorn to ridicule his
teaching. But as the days follow on, and the newness of the prison life
begins to wear away, they listen with more respect to the "man of God."

[Illustration: THE LATE HON. J. C. BOHART

of Chicago, one of the Author's main supporters while living in Chicago,
Ill.]

We have seen men behind the bars who never before bent their knee in
prayer. After listening to the evangelist's story of God and his love,
they go to their cells, and upon bended knees, beg for mercy and help.

Brother George L. Herr has taken the word of the Master into many of the
prisons of the United States, but the jails and penitentiaries of his
native State of Kentucky have claimed much of his time and attention. We
must confess when first coming in contact with him, our feeling against
him was bitter, we did not want his friendship nor his help, only
because we were angered by his denouncing our pet sins. But as days
lengthened into weeks, and weeks into months, the truth of his kindly
spoken words came home to us. Life was stripped of all its so-called
pleasure, with nothing but its disgrace and shame left to mock us,
having sold out to the "demon of crime."


    Why art thou cast down? Hope thou in God.--Psalm 42:5.


Then we began to feel the need of his wise counsel and to realize the
good of having him among us. He was always ready and willing to help
each and every man, not only with advice and counsel, but in so many
substantial ways, trying to lighten the prisoner's burden and make his
life better and brighter.

He has also devoted part of his time to writing books. Those we call to
mind are "Light in Dark Places," "You Are My Prisoners," "The Life
Line," "Man's Worst Enemy," "Nothing Better," "The Missionary," "The
Bethel," "Lost and is Found," "A Glorious Rescue," and his new book,
"The Nation Behind Prison Bars," soon to be brought out. Hundreds of
thousands of these books have been sent broadcast over the world, and
through them great good has been accomplished. Well might he be called
the "Prisoner's Friend," for his desire to aid each and every man gives
to him this well-earned title.

Full of generosity, kind far beyond the ordinary meaning of the word,
always ready to forgive the aggressor and to forget the offense, he wins
his way into the hearts of wicked and violent men in a manner that makes
them his lasting friends, and turns their words of condemnation into
words of praise.


    He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that
    believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God
    abideth on him.--John 3:36.


We fancy, as we write tonight, while, for the moment, the stillness of
death has fallen upon the entire prison, we can hear his voice, as it
rings out in righteous indignation, through the prison corridors,
calling some man to account for his vile language or his taking in vain
the name of God.


Works Without Pay.

If you were to ask a prisoner to what church Brother Herr belongs he
would no doubt plead ignorance, as no faith nor creed is known in his
work among the men. He makes no distinction between chapel-goers and
non-attendants, and will do a favor for the worst man in prison as
readily as for the leader of the chapel quartet; but ask the same
prisoner, "Who is it that speaks to judge and the warden about the sick
mother who longs to see her imprisoned son before she dies? Ask him.

Who pleads with the Governor?

Who tries to soften the heart of the prosecutor?

Who provides shoes and clothing for the poor prisoners?

What unpaid messenger runs the errands of the prisoners?

Who reconciles the erring son in prison with his mother and father?

He will answer, "Brother Herr."


    I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way.--Psalm 101:2.


Now, the average prisoner may be deficient in the matter of mental
balance, but he is not an imbecile. He is a better judge of character
and a keener observer than the more honest and commonplace fellow man.
By the same keen powers of observation that belong to the criminal type,
he notes that Brother Herr differs from many other prison evangelists,
for he helps without asking questions. He has no theory or dogma to
exploit, and he labors for the uplift of humanity.


Tribute to Jailer.

Much that we have written of this great work was made possible by Jailer
John R. Pflanz, who for the past twelve years has been at the head of
the Jefferson County jail. He is constantly laboring to better the
conditions of the prisoners and give to the people an honest
administration and progressive system of prison management.

To him Louisville and Jefferson County owe a great deal for the good
work accomplished among the criminals. Brother Herr says:


    Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with the good.--2 Ch.
    19:11.


"If such men as John R. Pflanz, of Louisville; John L. Whittman, of
Chicago; Co. E. E. Mudd, of Frankfort, and Col. Dan Bartley, of
Cincinnati, were placed in office for life the criminal world would
greatly decrease every year, instead of being on the increase."

[Illustration: HON. JOHN R. PFLANZ

Jailer of Jefferson County. A friend of the unfortunate.]

We have never heard of any prisoner complain of unjust treatment by him,
but on the other hand, many are the unfortunate men who leave this
prison to take their places in business again, because of assistance
given them by Mr. Pflanz.

His regular rounds through the entire prison are always hailed with
delight by the prisoners, as he is ever ready to hear their complaints
and remedy any existing evil. He listens to all the appeals for help by
the prisoners and leaves no unfulfilled promises.

His personal inspection of the "cell-house" and inquiries about the
health and general welfare of all the prisoners, make him always a
welcome visitor among the men.

Mr. Pflanz's desire to change the criminal into a respected citizen and
the assistance he gives to bring about this result proves his thorough
understanding, brought about by years of study and personal contact, of
how to deal with this class of our citizenship.


    Be strong and of a good courage; for the Lord thy God is with
    thee whithersoever thou goest.--Joshua 1:9.



Youtsey, Kentucky's Famous Prisoner

[Louisville Herald]

Henry E. Youtsey, sentenced to life imprisonment in the penitentiary for
his complicity in the murder of Governor Goebel, and at the present time
the most distinguished prisoner confined behind the cold, gray walls of
the State prison at Frankfort, has at last "got religion."

The man who has succeeded in reaching the heart of this man whose name
emblazened the front pages of newspapers from coast to coast almost ten
years ago, is the Louisville prison evangelist, the Rev. George L. Herr.
The medium he employed was a little pamphlet containing the simple story
of the reformation of one Dad O'Brien, an erstwhile scalawag who was
finally converted to a new life.


    As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our
    transgressions from us.--Psalm 103:11.


Rev. Herr, who has carried the gospel into the cells of many a poor,
crime-stained wretch, not only here in Louisville, but in every
prison-house in the country and has accomplished a great amount of good
among the outcasts of society, recently received a letter dated October
16, 1909, which reads:

"I am delighted to learn that you visited all the cells today and left
in each one the tract, 'How Dad O'Brien Became Converted.' I have read
it, and it is simply an additional evidence of a truth that has long
been known to sincere evangelists like yourself to the effect that no
matter how hardened and steeped in sin a poor fellow may be, the love of
God can win him and Jesus can save him, and he can start life anew,
singing praises to his Redeemer, and winning the lives of his old
companions for the Master. I believe that the happiness of O'Brien's
latter years more than made up for all he suffered--for he enjoyed a
portion of the most glorious life that could be lived here below. When
you get into heaven, as you surely will, Dad O'Brien will be the
brightest star in your crown. Yours most sincerely,

                                                 HENRY E. YOUTSEY."


Practical Religious Work in County Jail

Dear Brother Herr:

Whenever I think of my confinement in the Louisville jail, a picture
arises before me in which I can clearly see in the main corridor in the
building, down the center of which extended a long table covered with a
snowy cloth, and then in charge of the Hon. John R. Pflanz, than whom
there never was a kinder-hearted jailer in all the world.


    Come out from among them and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and
    I will receive you.--2 Cor. 6:12.


But that table and its delicious burden: Turkey after turkey, four of
which weighed more than twenty-five pounds each, with all the trimmings,
including dressing, cranberry sauce, etc. There were oysters fried, and
oyster soup, with crackers and celery. And what an array of cakes! As I
remember, there were chocolate and caramel, layer and black ones, in
short, almost every kind of cakes and pies known to the culinary art.
Then there were bushels of oranges, apples and mixed nuts, and for a
time all of us forgot about stone walls and iron bars, for what a merry
time we did have discussing that repast!


    For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
    that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have
    everlasting life.--John 3:16.


Whence came all of those good things? Why, the little man who has so
often walked a square or two further in the rain to buy one banana more
for a nickel for some poor prisoner, and who has worn out more
shoe-leather in helping unfortunate men in durance vile than any other
man in Kentucky: the Rev. Geo. L. Herr, affectionately called "The
Little Missionary," made personal calls on the wealthy and charitable
merchants in the city of Louisville, soliciting this food and dinner in
the name of humanity, and may God richly bless all those who helped him
make it such a grand success.

                                                HENRY E. YOUTSEY.


Praise for Prison Evangelist

[Courier-Journal]

To the tributes that have been paid to the Rev. George Herr, after
filling the pulpit of the Clifton Baptist church, of Louisville, the
Rev. James A. Clark yesterday added a testimonial, in which he praised
the prison evangelist for work which he considers "little short of
wonderful."

"It gives me pleasure to add my testimonial to the many I have seen
concerning the work of the Rev. George Herr as prison evangelist," says
the Clifton Baptist church pastor. "Three times I have heard him tell
the simple gospel story of Jesus and his love. He has a message few
preachers have, and tells it with power and effect. He has a message the
world needs to hear, because it is an example of the power of God to
save to the uttermost.


    My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.--Prov. 1:10.


"Mr. Herr has had a wonderful, but costly experience, which fits him
peculiarly for the special work among prisoners. From a wealthy man,
living in a mansion, sin blindly led him to poverty, robbed him of his
money, property and friends; but God came into his life and now he
rejoices that he is a child of the King.

"George Herr is doing a work little short of wonderful. He deserves the
co-operation of the Christian brotherhood, and I take pleasure in
commending him."


Sermon in State Prison

Rev. Jos. Severance, Chaplain, says in the Courier-Journal:

One of the most remarkable meetings in the annals of the prison was held
in the chapel of the penitentiary at Frankfort, Ky., Sunday morning.
George L. Herr, of Louisville, a friend of Chaplain Severance, was
present and spoke from the fourth and twelfth verses of the 103rd Psalm.
The sermon was a strong appeal to the men for gratitude to God for the
rich provision for the redemption of the race and urging them to accept
the mercy of God and allow him to remove their sins from them "as far
as the East is from the West." The chapel was crowded to the doors, and
during the sermon that lasted for an hoar no one moved and none went
out.


    My feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped.--Psalm
    73:2.


At the close of the sermon the gospel invitation was given and a total
of forty-two men came forward, some to confess faith in Christ (of these
there were thirty-seven) and others to renew their vows. Hundreds asked
for prayer in their behalf. Among those who came were some of the
hardest men in the prison and more noted for insubordination and
disobedience than for piety and morality.

But the Chaplain believes that the per cent. of those who remain true is
as great among prisoners as among those outside.

Bro. Herr knows the prison work as few men do. He is a man of large
sympathy, and having had an experience of fifteen years as an evangelist
knows how to reach the hearts of the men. He has the entire confidence
of both prisoners and officials and is always given a most hearty
welcome by all.

The baptism of the thirty-seven men who made confession Sunday will be
attended to next Sunday morning. Mr. Herr will return to the baptism.


    Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these, my
    brethren, ye have done it unto me.--Matt. 25:40.



Revival Stirs Up Inmates

[Courier-Journal]

The Rev. George L. Herr preached yesterday at the Frankfort penitentiary
for the Rev. Joseph Severance, who was filling another engagement.
Several hundred men and women asked for prayer, and fourteen confessed
Christ and were baptized in the prison pool in the afternoon by the
chaplain, assisted by the Rev. C. R. Hudson and the Rev. Herr, prison
evangelist.



The prisoners in the Frankfort penitentiary were again blessed by a
visit from Bro. Geo. L. Herr, the Louisville prison evangelist, who came
unexpectedly to us. It was doubly fortunate, for the reason that Bro.
Jos. Severance, the chaplain, was absent from the city and therefore
could not fill his appointment.


    He that believeth on him is not condemned; but he that believeth
    not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the
    name of the only begotten Son of God.--John 3:18.


Bro. Herr read that most beautiful 37th Psalm, which is replete with
comfort for those who are in dire distress and in need of consolation,
placing special emphasis on those passages which teach patience and
faith in "The God who is mighty to save and strong to deliver."

Bro. Herr never fails to extend the invitation of the gospel; in fact,
that is his strong point, and is recognized by him to be the most
important part of his work as an evangelist. His labor was rewarded, as
he won eight souls for our Lord and Saviour.

The following representatives, members of the present General Assembly,
were present at the morning services: W. H. Jones, Princeton, Ky.; John
T. Shanklin, Johnson, Ky.; W. A. B. Davis, Mt. Vernon, Ky.; Albert
Butler. These gentlemen have been coming regularly, which proves that
they are interested in our welfare, and also devoted to the church
services. We are always proud of their presence, and invite all their
colleagues.

At the afternoon Christian Endeavor service, Bro. Herr made an
extemporaneous address in which he revealed the secret of his wonderful
success as a soul-winner, which the writer would call unlimited charity,
and inexhaustible brotherly love; the love that always instantly
forgives, and as quickly extends a hand to help a fallen brother rise.

The eulogy he paid his wife, whom he acknowledged to be the inspiration
to his life, was most beautiful. At this service he won five more souls
for his hire, making thirteen for the day. HENRY E. YOUTSEY.




CHAPTER EIGHT

A MAN OF HONOR


For several years I have been deeply interested in the men confined in
the prison, and in the betterment of their condition. Each time I held
service in the prison I came in contact with, and was very much
encouraged and assisted by the warden's great kindness. He did much to
improve the conditions of life within the prison walls. G. L. H.



[Evening Post.]

FRANKFORT, Ky., Jan. 23.--The body of Edward E. Mudd, late warden of the
Frankfort State Reformatory, who died yesterday morning, was taken this
morning to his former home at Glendale, in Hardin County, where it will
be buried this afternoon.

Yesterday afternoon the body lay in state in the prison chapel and was
viewed by 1,300 convicts.


    My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.--Prov. 1:10.


Five floral designs were sent from the penitentiary. The guards and the
deputy wardens and the clerks sent two, a few of the "trusties" sent
another, and the white prisoners and the colored prisoners each sent a
design. These latter were paid for in 5 and 10-cent contributions.

The Prison Commission, which is in session, ordered flowers sent from
Louisville, and adopted the following resolution:

"Resolved, That in the death of Edward E. Mudd, warden of the State
Reformatory at Frankfort, the State of Kentucky has lost a valuable
public official, and the prison has been deprived of an ideal executive.

"His long experience in prison work had supplemented his natural
ability, with the result that he brought to a difficult task a trained
mind and an admirable judgment. He was firm without being severe; gentle
without being weak; with a heart full of kindness for the unfortunates
under his control.

"The Board of Prison Commissioners recognized his worth; had the fullest
appreciation of his manliness, his integrity and his devotion to duty.
They sought his advice on all important matters, and in his demise they
realize that the State has sustained an irreparable loss. The sincere
sympathy of the board is hereby extended to his bereaved wife and
children."

Until a successor to Warden Mudd is appointed one of the commissioners
will be constantly in Frankfort.


    Neither do I condemn thee; go and sin no more.--Jno. 8:11.





CHAPTER NINE

JIM O'BRIEN: MODERN MIRACLE

By George L. Herr


Several years ago I met in the Jefferson County jail, Louisville, Ky.,
"Dad O'Brien," one of the worst criminals I have ever known. Fifty odd
years of age, forty years a thief and twenty-five years behind the bars.
The sentence in the jail was a light one--one year and a half--for
having received stolen property, but he had stolen from one to tens of
thousands. He was son of a prominent physician of Cincinnati, for twenty
years professor of anatomy in the Ohio Medical College. He began by
stealing from his mother's purse and then, when punished by his father,
would steal his father's instruments and sell them for revenge. His
father, being a very stern man, drove "Billy" from home, and the night
came on with no place to go.


    Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that heareth my word, and
    believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall
    not come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto
    life.--John 5:24.


He led a low, degraded life, and was finally arrested and sentenced to
serve ten years in the Columbus penitentiary. When he was about to serve
his first sentence--which seemed to him a lifetime--a young lady, an old
schoolmate and who had been visiting him in jail, proposed marriage to
him, so she could have the right to visit him in Columbus and provide
him with the comforts of life, as far as possible. She was a girl of
means, and he was stunned by the proposal. For, he said, he had not
thought of such a thing as a wife. But he told her to come back the next
day and he would let her know. She did, and he accepted and they were
married on the eve of his leaving for the penitentiary. He only served
part of the sentence, and when released went to the home of the girl and
began life in a new way, only to fall in the old rut in a short time. He
kept up his criminal life for years.


    "But this is a people robbed and spoiled; they are all of them
    snared in holes, are for a prey, and none delivereth: for a
    spoil, and none saith, Restore. Who among you will give ear to
    this? Who will harken and hear for the time to come?"--Isaiah
    42:22.


The good wife died, and after her death he became one of the most
notorious bank robbers in this country. While in the county jail at
Louisville, Ky., Dad's friends were standing nobly by him. He had plenty
of money sewed in his clothes to meet his every need. I tried hard to
reach him, but he was determined not to have anything to do with a "Sky
Pilot," as he called me. The first time I spoke to him he almost spit in
my face, but that never daunted me. I was more determined to win him. I
saw he was a diamond in the rough. He had a bright mind, a man filled
with history.

While in prison in Louisville, Ky., he became interested, and determined
to quit the old life. After this determination he immediately wrote his
intentions to his old pals on the outside, and told them not to send him
any more money, for he was done with that life. They told him he was a
fool and had gone crazy, and everything else they could think of.

But he was that kind, when he made up his mind to do a thing he did it.


    The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our
    refuge.--Psalm 46:7.


Then it was my opportunity for the practical side of Christianity, for I
believe in that side. His clean laundry must be supplied, extra food
that his old companions had been having sent in from the restaurants
must now be brought by the missionary from home. Many are the baskets of
food I have carried from my cottage home to this man. But the time was
coming when he was to be released and nowhere to go, and that was the
thing that seemed to trouble him most.

I said: "Never mind, 'Dad,' when you get out of this prison-house come
to my home, I'll take care of you and help you to a good life." Well,
one night, at about 8 o'clock he knocked on the door. How glad wife and
I were to see him! He often said, "How warm the fire looks and how
home-like to see you all sitting around." We gave him a good warm
supper, a good bed, the best room in the house, but that was not all he
needed. The next day was the beginning of the real battle. The
detectives were hounding him. But to keep them from rearresting him we
sent him across the river until we could plead with the officers to give
this man another chance. We believe had it not been for the great
interest taken by John R. Pflanz, the jailer, at this time for this man,
that he would have died in a cell in some far Eastern prison. He said,
"What's the use? Let me alone; there is only one thing for me and that
is to go back to the old life." We said, "'D,' we'll see you through."


    I know not how to go.--1 Kings 3:7.


All this time we were trying to find employment for him. All this time
he was growing impatient and would say: "A great big husky fellow like
me laying around on a little man like Brother Herr." He weighed about
190 pounds, but we would encourage him by saying, "Well, Dad, you know
God's people have all things in common, and he knows you are here, and
when he sends to us he sends it for you as well."

One day when we were talking, he said: "Brother Herr, those old charges
in Chicago, St. Louis, Pittsburg, Cincinnati and New York are hanging
over me and I must face them."

We said, "Well, Dad, if you have made up your mind you would rather live
for God behind the bars than to live for the devil on the outside or the
inside, God will see you through. Go and face these charges, and if you
mean business, God will take care of you."


    I will guide thee.--Ps. 32:8.


He went first to St. Louis and told the judge on the bench that he had
quit the old life forever. They looked at him, and even those who were
his bitter enemies, said, "Give him another chance; go and be a man and
we will help you." He came back to our home from St. Louis, stayed a few
weeks and started for the other charges, encouraged by the last trip. He
went to Chicago first, and they told him the same thing there; then he
went to Cincinnati, then to Pittsburg, and they said, "Dad, if you mean
business you shall have a chance." Then he went to New York where he
and three other men had robbed a bank of $175,000. When he went in to
see the New York people they did not know him. He had been living a
Christian life for several months. Salvation changes the looks of a man,
and takes away the hard lines and softens the eye; and when he told them
who he was, they said: "My God! where did you come from and what are you
doing here?"

He told these gentlemen what had taken place in his life, and of his
determination for the future. Said one wealthy man, "Well, Dad, go on
your way and may God be with you and help you."


    Fear thou not; for I am with thee; be not dismayed; for I am thy
    God. I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee.--Is. 41:10.


He went on a hunt for the old friend "Hinky Dink" down in the first
ward. "Hinky Dink" saw him, paid for a week's lodging at the Mills
Hotel, and gave him money for meals each day. Finally one day "Hinky
Dink" and Dad, standing in the front of his (Hinky Dink's) saloon,
called "the workingmen's bar," where they line up by the fifties at a
time, looking in, "Hinky Dink" said, "Dad, you are worth $18 a week to
me behind that bar." Dad said, "Me? Not me for $1,800 a week. I am a
Christian, I have quit all that, never to return again." "Hinky Dink"
said: "Well, what do you want, anyhow?" Dad said: "I want to go to
Cincinnati to the Holiness camp meeting." "Hinky Dink" said, "Where?"
(this being all Greek to him), as it was not in his line, he knew.

"Dad" repeated what he had said, and "Hinky Dink" said: "Come right over
here and I'll buy you a ticket." He took him over to the railroad
office, and bought him a limited ticket to Cincinnati. Dad said, when
telling us, "He thought he was shipping me in the quickest way possible,
but it was the Lord taking care of 'Old Dad,' and sending him in
first-class style."

Again he came back to our home, stayed several weeks, then we got him
$20 worth of religious books to travel around to the camp meetings to
sell, and to tell his experience, for the people were eager to hear this
wonderful experience of God's transforming power, wherever he went. We
started him off, and he soon felt his call to preach the gospel. He was
ordained in Indianapolis in 1905, and preached up and down the land,
winning lost men and women for Jesus. His life was a miracle of what
God's grace can do. He married a fine Christian woman, who was a great
help to him in his work.

In the fall of 1908 he died a triumphant death, leaving a glorious
testimony behind.


Jim O'Brien Passes Away

The Courier-Journal republishes herewith from the Indianapolis Herald an
editorial by the Rev. George E. Bueler, pastor of the Methodist
Episcopal church, Indianapolis, Ind.:

"The Rev. William H. Frazier, alias Jim O'Brien," died at Indianapolis
on Monday, October 30, 1908.

"At an early age Frazier began associating with bad boys on the streets
of Cincinnati and of course was soon drawn into sin. At the age of 14 he
began stealing, at first on a small scale, and increasing with the years
until he became one of the most daring and successful bank robbers known
in America. He was arrested and in prison many times, but when at
liberty he drifted back into crime again. For forty years he was a
criminal; of that time twenty-three years and six months was spent
behind prison bars. Although he stole hundreds of thousands of dollars
he was released from prison the last time in Louisville with only $2.40
left. What wages for forty years in the service of Satan! While
incarcerated in the Jefferson County jail, at Louisville, Ky.,
Missionary George L. Herr found this wretched man and through many
months of persistent effort found a way to his heart. At first the
missionary was met with curses and abuses, but love conquered, and the
result was Jim's conversion, a miracle indeed, for, from that time in
January, 1903, "Dad," as he was known, lived a godly life and retrieved
for the past by telling everywhere he went his life story, showing forth
the glory of God's redeeming grace. No one knew better than Bro. Frazier
what it meant for a man to be released from prison and again face the
world. With the disgrace and odium upon him it is well nigh impossible
for him to find honest employment, for no one knowing him to be an
exconvict wants him in their employ, the temptation to return to the old
life is strong. With this in view he began making homes for such men in
large cities. While Bro. Frazier was working and starting a home in
Cincinnati he was made prison chaplain for the entire city. During the
past summer he and his wife came to Indianapolis. While here his
physical condition gave way; he knew his end was near. To those who
waited on him in his last hours he constantly affirmed his faith in God
and passed peacefully away. The funeral was conducted by the Revs.
Parker, Stevens and Bueler, with special singing by Mr. Maxwell, Mrs.
Bueler and Mrs. Nelson. All who want a more complete account of this
wonderful life should read his book, "From Crime to Christ."




CHAPTER TEN

COLUMBUS OHIO PRISON

[Ohio Penitentiary News]


The Rev. George L. Herr, prison evangelist, returned yesterday from St.
Louis, where he went in the interest of the men "behind the bars." The
Rev. Mr. Herr also had a delightful visit with his son, of St. Louis.
Mr. Herr, on his return home, received the following letter from the
Rev. D. J. Starr, D.D., chaplain at Columbus, O., penitentiary:

Dear Brother: I thank you for your letter informing me that you will
spend Sunday, March 8, with us at this prison. We intend to make good
use of you for the Master's cause. We will wish you, unless it will
weary you to do so, to speak to our Sunday-school at 8 o'clock; address
the prayer meeting at 9 o'clock; preach in chapel at 10 o'clock; attend
Female Bible class and talk at 3 p.m., and men's Bible class at 7 p.m.




    "I was in prison, and ye came unto me."--Matt. 25:36.


The Courier-Journal republishes herewith from the Ohio Penitentiary News
an editorial by the Rev. D. J. Starr, D.D., chaplain at the Columbus,
O., prison:

"The Rev. George L. Herr, whose address delivered in our chapel last
Sunday morning was charmingly refreshing, is a man whose vicissitudes of
life lead through a labyrinth that would require a half century of years
to make its journey at an ordinary pace. But George L. Herr is not the
man to do anything in an ordinary way. The itinerary of his life shows
few curves--mostly acute angles. He was born in an old Kentucky family
of the city of Louisville. His ancestral stock was golden, and his
infancy was fed with a golden spoon on sugar and cream. When he was
three months old his Christian mother went to be with God. When he was
18 years old his father, Richard S. Herr, a capitalist of Louisville,
died and left George the heir of a large patrimony.

"The orphan was genial, sportive, rich and without domestic restraint.
Men seized the opportunity to take advantage of his tendencies and youth
to filch from him his wealth. He yielded, and threw on the neck of
appetite the slackened rein and became woefully dissipated. He mounted
the toboggan and went down the slide, landing in a few years in the
gulch of destitution and near the precipice of suicide.


    Teach me thy way, O Lord.--Ps. 86:11.


"Here in destitution and despair on the day after Christmas, 1893, the
Rev. S. P. Holcombe, of Louisville, found the prodigal and led him into
the Union Gospel Mission, where he sought and came to know God as a
personal Saviour. What a change! New bottles for the new wine of the
Spirit! As language cannot picture the degradation of the prodigal,
neither can it picture the exaltation of the son restored to the Father.
George was as whole-hearted in his new life as in his old. He had beauty
for ashes and a spirit of praise instead of heaviness. After nearly five
years of the new life George L. Herr, in the city of his fall and his
recovery, was married by the Rev. Dr. Carter H. Jones, pastor of
Broadway Baptist Church, to Miss Lillie M. Joyce. George says that if a
man ever outmarried himself he's the man. He says God gave him this
priceless treasure of a Christian wife in answer to prayer. Those who
know Mrs. Herr speak of her as sweet-spirited, noble, devout, gifted in
song and speech and one in spirit with her husband in the work of saving
those who are out of the way. Their home is filled with the aroma of
grace and their united lives are spent in doing good. How wonderfully
God fulfills His ancient promise to present-day prodigals: 'As ye were a
curse, so will I save you, and ye shall be a blessing.'"


                The Big Ohio "Pen" Week by Week

        Weekly Budget of Personal, Local and Other Newsbits.

                   To-morrow in the Chapel.

  Sunday School                                     8 A.M.
  Prayer Meeting                                    9 A.M.
  The Great Congregation                           10 A.M.
  Entry March                                         Band
                (Thomas McCaskie, Leader.)
  Gloria Patri                         Entire Congregation
      (Directed by Choirmaster Prof. J. H. Chavers.)

                       Invocation.

  Songs                               By Miss Luale Bethel

                    "A Rose in Heaven."
                     "Life's Lullaby."

                  First Scripture Lesson.

  Anthem                                             Choir
  Morning Prayer                                  Chaplain
  Lord's Prayer                          Response by Choir

                  Second Scripture Lesson.

  Hymn No. 3                                         Choir

                    "Within Thy Courts."

  Sermon                               Rev. George L. Herr
  Hymn No. 355                                       Choir

                         "Calvary."

            Doxology.                Benediction.

    Band.                  March.                 Exit.


Chapel Services

In the Bible-school at 8 o'clock through the doorway of life beyond,
which Christ left open that men might both look in and go in, the 300
students saw some of the things that "God hath prepared for them that
love Him." The germinal thoughts of John 14:1-14 are that heaven is a
place--a roomy place, a prepared place, a place where the Lord abides
and where he will have his prepared people to abide with him. And that
in this doctrine is the cure for human sorrow. "Let not your heart be
troubled * * believe."

At the 9 o'clock meeting the quotation of Scripture verses appeared like
apples of gold in pictures of silver. Rev. George L. Herr was introduced
and the hearts of hearers beat warm under their jackets as the speaker
sang and talked to them of Jesus and His love. It was good to be there.

The Great Congregation gathered at 10 o'clock and was welcomed with the
stirring notes of the band men. The many voices lifted in the chant,
"Gloria Patri," showed how grand the effect would be if all would join
in the song. Why not all?


    Give me understanding.--Ps. 119:34.


"A Rose in Heaven," and "Life's Lullaby," were admirably sung by Miss
Lucile Bethel with her sister Miss Bethel as accompanist at the piano.
The anthem, "Ashamed of Jesus? Never, No Never," was sung by the choir
as the author of the song might have wished to hear it rendered.



That old story of the prodigal son was the subject on which Rev. George
L. Herr of Louisville, Ky., preached to the inmates of the penitentiary
Sunday morning in the chapel, but it was the twentieth century prodigal
who formed his main theme.

Mr. Herr is known all over the country as the prison missionary. He has
all the vivacity and warmth of the Southerner. He illuminated the old
parable with the story of his descent from the position of a son of a
wealthy Kentucky home, possessing a large estate, to the destitution of
a linen duster for a December coat, and from a seat in a Pullman to
riding the bumpers of a cattle train. That was his condition sixteen
years ago. The men enjoyed the object lesson and cheered the moral
heroism evinced in the life-story of the missionary.




    I am understanding.--Prov. 8:14.


The Courier-Journal republishes herewith from the Evangel an editorial
by the Rev. L. B. Haines at Columbus, O.:

"The editors of the Evangel were pleased to meet Mr. George L. Herr
while in Columbus a few days ago. He addressed the prisoners at the Ohio
penitentiary and was heartily received by all who heard him. He is doing
a noble work in the prisons all over our country. We spent a pleasant
afternoon together, visiting the sick in the prison hospital, and we
believe God blessed the seed sown. The Evangel wishes him and his dear
wife God speed in their self-sacrificing efforts for the lost. We take
great pleasure in calling the attention of the readers of the Evangel to
Herr's new book entitled "The Nation Behind Prison Bars," a notice of
which you will find on another page of this issue.--Eds."


    For God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son,
    that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have
    everlasting life.--Jno. 3:16.





CHAPTER ELEVEN

INCONTESTABLE PROOF

OUR MOTTO:

"Seeking the Lost."

"Helping the Helpless to Help Themselves."

JAILER PFLANZ PAYS A HIGH COMPLIMENT TO EVANGELIST GEO. L. HERR

                                      Louisville, Ky., March 12, 1901.

Mr. Geo. L. Herr,

Dear Sir: I have recently been asked by several persons on different
occasions if I thought much good could come out of the rescue work done
at the county jail. In every instance I would answer "yes." A great deal
of good is done through the Christian workers, and especially by you,
who not only give your time and attention to this work, preaching the
gospel on the Sabbath, but on every day of your life doing everything in
your power to lighten the burden of the unfortunates confined in the
jail.


    My glad heart says in the language of the Psalmist: "Bless the
    Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits."


[Illustration: REV. C. S. HANLEY

President of International Federation of Christian Workers, by whom we
were ordained in Chicago, Ill., in 1907.]

I have known prisoners of all classes look forward to your arrival each
day with gladness, knowing that if you did not have something to
distribute among them you would give them a cheery good morning.

As a rule you always have something to give them, which gladden their
hearts and make them think better of our harsh world, wherein they are
buffeted around like so many things to be despised.

I have never known you to come to this jail that you were not interested
in some poor fellow's case, and often have I known you to call on either
the Judge of the Police or Criminal Court to intercede for some person
confined in our jail. I have noticed that whenever you come you are
asked by more than one of our prisoners to go on some mission, either to
a father, mother, or some other relative. Distance and barriers have no
terror for you, as was evidenced in your recent trip fifteen hundred
miles for one of our prisoners to see his parents.

In every case you have with promptness attended to requests, always with
a cheerfulness that is surprising to those who cannot understand and
will not learn. These are the things that lift up the hearts of the poor
unfortunate prisoner and make him feel that there is something worth
living for.


    Draw nigh unto my soul and redeem it.--Ps. 69:18.


My wish and prayer is that you may go on in the good work you are doing.

                                                   Sincerely yours,
                                                         JOHN R. PFLANZ.



Following are letters of endorsement to Missionary George L. Herr and
his wife in their life-work among outcasts, fallen ones and victims of
sin. Among those who have lent substantial aid and hearty encouragement
to the work will be noted many of our leading citizens, men of
irreproachable character and standing in society, who have not hesitated
to add their quota of praise to the universal word of approbation
accorded the missionary in his efforts to lead the wayward ones back
into the path of self-respect and manhood.


    Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me; Lord be thou my
    helper.--Ps. 30:10.


                                      Frankfort, Ky., Nov. 22, 1904.

Dear Bro. Herr: I regret that you and your good wife and "Sunshine" can
not be with us in our services next week at the Frankfort Penitentiary,
but am glad to have you promise to be with us soon. No one understands
this work for the salvation and elevation of those in our penal
institutions,--the possibilities, the discouragements, the trials, the
triumphs, the rejoicing--as we do who are constantly engaged in it. Your
frequent visits to us are always appreciated both by the chaplain and
the prisoners, and your sermons and talks and songs are blessed by God
to the furtherance of the work of grace in our midst. I can truly say
there are eyes that "mark your coming and look brighter when you come."
I wish also to say for your encouragement and those who work with you
that your faithful labors are plainly manifest in the lives of many whom
you come in contact with--the deep and lasting impressions made upon
their minds and hearts so we are enabled to take up the well begun work
and by God's help carry it on to salvation of the soul. May God bless
you abundantly in your noble work.

                                             Truly yours,
                                         T. T. TALIAFERRO,
                               Chaplain Ky. State Penitentiary.


    Forsake me not, O Lord.--Ps. 38:21.




Rev. H. C. Morrison, D.D., Editor Pentecostal Herald, Louisville, Ky.,
and President Wilmore College, Wilmore, Ky., says:

I take pleasure in commending my friend and brother, Geo. L. Herr, as a
devout Christian and earnest worker for the salvation of men. He has
had wide experience on both sides of the line, and has been greatly
blessed in rescuing men who have gone down into the depths of sin. He
has been especially blessed in prison work. Those who help him forward
in the good work in which he is now engaged will do me a personal favor.

Wishing him and his wife great success as they shall go from prison to
prison seeking after the lost,

                               I am           Respectfully yours,
                                                        H. C. MORRISON.



Rev. James M. Taylor, world-wide evangelist, says:

I have read with soul-stirring interest the sad, heart-rending
experience of Bro. Herr, and the miraculous deliverance by the grace of
God, how by a life of sin he squandered a fortune, how God found him a
bond slave of appetite and other sins and delivered him, the romantic
way in which his God-given companion entered his life, and how they are
being used perhaps as no other persons today in helping those "behind
the bars." This story will warn the reckless, encourage the "cast out"
and put a desire in the heart to help the fallen.

                                          JAMES M. TAYLOR, Evangelist.
  Knoxville, Tenn.


(Frankfort Journal.)

The Rev. Geo. L. Herr, of Louisville, will spend the fourth as the guest
of Rev. Jos. Severance, chaplain of the State prison, today. Rev. Herr
is a widely known, talented and enthusiastic prison evangelist, and has
a national reputation as such. He will shortly publish his famous
sermon, "Man's Worst Enemy," and will place numerous copies of it in
every penal institution of the United States.






Prison Evangelist's Good Work

(Courier-Journal.)


Prison evangelists published in 1906-07 36,000 sermons in booklet form
and sent them North, South, East and West. The Rev. George L. Herr and
wife closed a most remarkable year. The meetings which they have held
for the most part have been in large prison houses, erected for sinful
men and women.

Mr. Herr has delivered sermons to many thousand listeners; many have
professed conversion and thousands have asked for prayer. The good that
this work has done will probably never be fully known until the business
of this old world has been brought to a close. Influences have been set
in motion that are going to roll on until time shall be no more.

Rev. W. O. Vreeland, chaplain Frankfort Reformatory, says:

It gives me great pleasure to testify of the splendid work among the
prisoners done by a man I believe to be deeply consecrated to the work
of rescuing the "fallen brother." George Herr is worthy of the highest
commendation.

                                               W. O. VREELAND.
  Oct. 12, 1912.






A Grand Work Highly Commended


                                    Louisville, Ky., July 24, 1902.

Rev. Geo. L. Herr,

Dear Brother Herr: I regret very much to learn of your departure from
the city, and the work you have so nobly, and for so long a time,
engaged in at this institution and elsewhere. To say that you will be
missed by us is but faintly expressing my feelings at your departure.
You will not only be missed by myself and other officials at the jail,
but by the poor unfortunates placed in my custody, for I know I can
truthfully say we will never be able to get any one who will take the
pains and do the great good you have done for all with whom you have
come in contact.


    I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.--Heb. 13:5.


I can assure you that your farewell sermon to all of the one hundred and
eighty prisoners in this jail on yesterday was the cause of great
depression in the spirits of all who heard you on that occasion, for
every one of them felt that he or she was about to lose their best
friend, who had not only ministered to their spiritual wants but made
their troubles his own, and in every way in his power relieved them of
their every ailment.

You and your good wife were as father and mother to them, their guardian
angels, who made their rugged paths smooth and their futures bright and
happy.

It is with much sorrow that I write you today, and my only consolation
is in the hope that you may some day return and take up the good work
again for the betterment of the unfortunates who may be confined in this
and other institutions in which you have worked in this city.

                                           Sincerely yours,
                                                 JOHN R. PFLANZ.


    O Lord, make haste to help me.--Ps. 40:13.

    I will help thee, saith the Lord, and thy Redeemer, the Holy One
    of Israel.--Is. 41:14.





"Worked Wonders"

Declares Dr. Garvin, Physician Jefferson County Jail


                                   Louisville, Ky., July 24th, 1902.

Rev. George L. Herr,

My Dear Brother Herr: It is with much regret I have heard of your
determination to leave us. You and your good wife have now been engaged,
for about four years, in the noble work of saving souls in the Jefferson
County jail, and to the success of your efforts I can truly bear
testimony.

I must confess that at first I had little hope of much good being
accomplished, but your constant devotion at all hours, night and day,
has worked wonders, and I am satisfied that many who came steeped in sin
and in their own minds hopelessly lost, have left the prison at peace
with God, and with a determination in the future to lead a better life.

Wherever you go, may God be with you, is the wish of all who know you,
and especially that of your friend,

                                                   SAM'L H. GARVIN.
                                      Physician to Jefferson County Jail.




Strong Endorsements

Evangelist Herr's work commended by Minister.

[Louisville Evening Times]

Louisville, Ky., June 21, 1905.

Rev. Horace G. Ogden, D.D., Pastor Trinity M. E. Church, Louisville,
Ky., says:

To Whom It May Concern:

I take pleasure in commending Mr. Geo. Herr to the esteem and confidence
of the public. I have been placed where I have known intimately his work
as Prison Evangelist in Jefferson County Jail--a place incomparable in
my opinion for testing the character and power of a Christian worker. I
can say he has made a superb record and been able by divine assistance
to rescue many from the life of crime. He has taken an enlarged field of
work because he has been convinced it was the call of the Highest, and I
have every confidence in his increased usefulness. I cheerfully commend
him and his work. His book is true and merits large circulation. Mr.
Herr is a fine public speaker.

                                           Sincerely,
                                                       HORACE G. OGDEN.




Speaks to Prisoners


The Rev. J. A. Holton, Chaplain Eddyville Penitentiary, commends Rev.
Herr's work:

The Rev. George L. Herr, the well-known Louisville prison evangelist,
conducted the chapel services at the Eddyville State penitentiary,
Eddyville, Ky., on Sunday, February 16. Mr. Herr's address to the
prisoners made a very decided impression upon the men. In a letter to
Louisville, J. A. Holton, Chaplain of the penitentiary, writes of Mr.
Herr's visit to Eddyville as follows:

"Brother Herr is a fluent and earnest talker and speaks from personal
experience and observation with telling effect, timely words that tend
to the betterment of his hearers. No one who is acquainted with his
personal history and present effort in the cause of prison reform could
doubt his sincerity. It is not a surprise, therefore, that from every
sphere of his labor along the line of evangelistic work in the prisons
of the land come unsolicited testimonials commending him and his
work."--The Louisville Times.


    And God spake all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God,
    which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the
    house of bondage.--Ex. 20:1-2.





Sad and Pitiful Stories

[The Louisville Herald]


For fifteen years Mr. Herr has carried the great truths to the outcasts,
giving warning of the danger, and thousands have repented and have been
rescued from lives of sin and shame and are now blessings to the
community. Hundreds of thousands of tracts, sermons, books, papers,
etc., have been distributed, the results of which can never be known.

"One of the saddest features of this work is that we are constantly
beset by the sad-faced, grief-stricken, broken-hearted mothers and wives
who have been so unfortunate as to lose their loved ones in sin,"
declared Rev. Herr. "They come to us and plead for us to help find the
wanderer.

"The pitiful stories of disgrace, shame and disappointment that come
from the broken hearts who are victims are beyond expression and almost
enough to melt the heart of stone into a river of tears, and to stir us
who hear them and see the helplessness of unfortunate ones.

"There never was a place where the gospel was needed more and where it
would do more good, than in the prison houses of our beautiful land."


    Open them mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of
    thy law.--Ps. 119:18.





Resolution That Was Never Broken

    "I am done with a life of thieving."--E. B.


Another of the days in jail that will long be remembered by some of the
poor unfortunates who have been making this place their residence for
some time. The missionary who makes prison work the work of his life
preached to the men today, the service being in the place of the regular
Saturday services, because the convicted men were to go to the
penitentiary Saturday morning, and Brother Herr intended to go to
Cincinnati, Ohio, this evening. So the good brother gave the men some
good, wholesome advice.

And in opening the services, that always appropriate song of "Let a
little sunshine in" was sung, and the good God knows that if any one in
this world needs "sunshine" that person is the one who is behind prison
bars.


    Thou shalt have no other gods before me.


I have seen some curious things in my wandering life, and some very
curious and saddening sights are to be seen in jail. To see men right in
the prime of their manhood going to a living tomb, to actually bury
themselves for years, is a sight not easily forgotten. Oh, the misery,
the shame, and the degradation of it all. It is no wonder that some of
the unfortunates weep. The sight of so much misery seen at one time is
enough to melt the heart of the most hardened criminal. As I watched the
men put up their hands in reply to the question of "How many of you men
want to lead a better life?" I could not blame any one of the prisoners
for putting up their hands in a resolve to lead a clean life.

My sympathy is with the unfortunate. I have been placed in positions
just like these men are placed in, but never again! Oh, I hope that when
I finish this term of imprisonment that I may find some means of
employment that will bring me in enough money to keep body and soul
together. From this time forward I am done with stealing. I hope that my
right hand may lose its cunning and my eyes grow dimmer, so dim that I
cannot see anything to steal. I am done, done with a life of thieving. I
don't know how I am going to exist, but I am not going to steal any
more. By the help of the good Lord I intend to reform.


    For thou wilt light my candle: the Lord my God will lighten my
    darkness.--Ps. 18:28.





What Is A Friend?


A friend is the first person who comes in when the world has gone out.

A bank of credit on which we can draw supplies of confidence, counsel,
sympathy, help and love.

One who considers my need before my deservings.

The triple alliance of the three great powers--love, sympathy and help.

One who understands our silence.

A jewel whose lustre the strong acids of poverty and misfortune cannot
dim.

One who smiles on our fortunes, frowns on our faults, sympathizes with
our sorrow, weeps at our bereavement, and is a safe fortress at all
times of trouble.

One who, gaining the top of the ladder, won't forget you if you remain
at the bottom.

The holly of life, whose qualities are overshadowed in the summer of
prosperity, but blossom forth in the winter of adversity.

He who does not adhere to the saying that No. 1 should come first.


    God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in
    trouble.--Psalm 41:6.


[Illustration:

When the author left Louisville to 1905 for Chicago to be ordained, he
was greatly helped by his friend Chas. F. Grainger, kindness never to be
forgotten.

HON. CHAS. F. GRAINGER

Former Mayor of Louisville; now President Louisville Water Co.

Mr. Grainger says, "Mr. Herr's work among prisoners has been very
successful, and through his efforts many have reformed."]

A watch which beats true, for all time, and never "runs down."

An earthly minister of heavenly happiness.

A friend is like ivy--the greater the ruin, the closer he clings.

One who to himself is true, and therefore must be so to you.

The same to-day, the same to-morrow, either in prosperity, adversity or
sorrow.

One who guards another's interest as his own and neither flatters nor
deceives.

One truer to me than I am myself.--Exchange.


    Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be
    acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength and my
    redeemer.--Ps. 19:14.





"Another Chance I Crave"

[Courier-Journal]


Austin, Tex., Dec. 2.--(Special.)--Jake McKinney, who was serving a life
term in the State penitentiary at Rusk for the murder of Robert Walker
in Jones county seven years ago, has just received his pardon from Gov.
O. B. Colquitt on the strength of an appeal for liberty in the form of a
poem that he wrote and sent to the Governor. This poetic application was
turned over to Mrs. Colquitt by the Governor and it was upon her
recommendation that McKinney was given his liberty. McKinney was
twenty-four years old at the time of his conviction. During the last
four years of his imprisonment he was editor of the prison newspaper,
the Alcalde Chronicle. He attended night school while in the
penitentiary. His poems and articles in the little newspaper that he
published attracted much favorable attention. His pardon application
reads in part as follows:

    Another chance, 'tis all I ask,
    In freedom's sun again to bask;
    To hear the voice of loved at home,
    And amid familiar scenes to roam.
    What saith the Scripture? Is it wise
    To gain a world and lose the prize
    Of future Joys of Him above,
    Who came to save because of love
    For sinful men imprisoned here
    In sin's corrupted atmosphere?
    Another chance to know the life
    Beyond the cruel prison strife,
    Where Beauty, Truth and Culture reign,
    And pleasure comes from Labor's gain;
    To see the golden sun at dawn
    Spring forth to kiss the rural lawn,
    Wet with the kiss of midnight dew,
    And brightens to a gorgeous hue,
    To please the eye of all mankind.
    A gift of God to man so blind,
    Another chance to show the world
    That darkness hid my flag unfurled;
    That flame of ingenuity
    Burns brightest where the darkest be;
    As all is not as some would tell;
    "A soul defiled and booked for hell."
    Another chance I crave of thee,
    Oh, Governor, but feel and set me free!
    Make the conditions what you may,
    I will live up to them every day;
    I have no friends to plead for me,
    Dear Governor, can't you set me free?

           Most sincerely
                   JAKE MCKINNEY.

[Illustration: JUDGE AARON KOHN

One of the greatest criminal lawyers of the American bar

There is none in this world who has been a greater friend in my sorest
need.]




Letter from the Late Col. Will S. Hays

Editor, Poet, and Song Writer


My Dear Rev. Geo. L. Herr: It is a pleasure to express the sentiment of
pure friendship I have for you and for the Christian work in which you
are now engaged. Knowing you from boyhood, I am free to say you are one
of God's chosen ones to do his will and work, and heaven never had a
more faithful representative than yourself. May your words and works in
the Master's cause result in adding souls to the kingdom of glory, and
may God and the angels watch over and guard you through life is the
prayer of your friend,

                                                        WILL S. HAYS.


    The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul.--Ps. 19:7.





The Late J. P. Scheider

Captain of Police


I have met him at all times and in all places, from the palace to the
prison, striving to better the conditions of his fellowmen. At the same
time serving our Lord in such a noble manner as to attract the attention
of the least appreciative person. He has taken for his duty the task of
working principally among the criminal classes that frequent our city
prisons, and to my personal knowledge has done more to benefit the
inmates than any other man of his vocation. Oh! how far more pleasant
this life would be if the world was full of just such noble,
good-spirited men as my friend George L. Herr, whom I know to be serving
our God in the most appropriate manner known to mankind.

                             Respectfully,
                                      JOHN P. SCHEIDER




Profanity Shows Mental Deficiency

[Louisville Herald]


The habitual user of profane and indecent language was mercilessly
flayed by Bishop Charles E. Woodcock, of the Episcopal Church, at the
Board of Trade noon-day Lenten service yesterday, where in the course of
his sermon the Bishop pronounced the profane man to be intellectually
deficient, corrupt, morally and wholly unchristian.

"No gentleman will use profane language; it is only the low-born and
vulgar-minded person who will do so," declared the Bishop. "No man who
believes in God and in God's commandments can be profane."

Among other things stated by the Bishop of a like nature are the
following:

"The profane man in God's eyes is on the same plane as the murderer or
thief. He violates the ten commandments."

"Swearing, aside from being sinful, is low, vicious, vulgar and most
reprehensible."

"The man who is well thought of in a community is nine times out of ten
the man who does not curse."


    Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God In vain; for
    the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in
    vain.


[Illustration: RT. REV. CHAS. E. WOODCOCK, D.D.

Episcopal Bishop of Kentucky]

"The profane man is in many cases and in most cases the man who will
steal, slander, lie and violate the every commandment of God."

In beginning his sermon the Bishop spoke of the work of the noon-day
Lenten services. He said in part:

"By coming before you men and preaching we rectors hope to arouse,
encourage and bring out all the good in you. We aim to plant high ideals
in your hearts and make you better men. It is one of the greatest
pleasures I have--preaching these noon-day Lenten sermons. It is my
earnest and sincere wish to do good and to carry a message to you.

"Christ will lighten your eyes: He will enable you to see things worth
being and worth doing. The worth while in life is what makes life worth
living. He will give you a view of yourself. He will make you see
yourselves as others see you. He will not only do this, but he will set
a guard before your lips.


    The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; my God,
    my strength, in whom I trust.--Ps. 18:2.


"No man ever regretted keeping from impure speech. Habitual obscene
story telling grows like other vicious habits. It is a manly thing to
possess clean lips. Does not the Bible say, 'Blessed are the pure in
heart?' Well, no man can be pure in heart and impure in speech. Would
you tell some of the stories you tell your fellow men to your wives and
daughters? No, I do not think you would. Then say to yourself, 'Thou God
hearest me.'

"Keep your lips from profanity. The profane man in God's eyes is on the
same plane as is the murderer and thief. He, like both, violates the ten
commandments. Swearing, aside from being sinful, is low, vicious and
vulgar and most reprehensible. The man who will curse and swear is in
most cases the man who will steal, slander, lie and violate every
commandment of God.

"I have been in hotels and in public places where I have heard men swear
as though they thought it a virtue. These men I find are seldom well
thought of in a community. The man who is well thought of will not
swear.

"The man who will swear will say mean things about his friend; he will
gossip and slander. If you keep your lips clean you will never besmirch
a man's or woman's character. You will never speak until you know it is
time; you will be restrained from telling vicious things, because you
will reason whether or not it is right, and whether or not it ought to
be told."


    Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak: for your
    work shall be rewarded.--2 Chron. 15:7.





At Cincinnati Workhouse

[Louisville Times]


Never did Mr. Herr have a more interested audience than greeted him in
the Cincinnati work house yesterday when he preached for an hour in the
prison chapel. The men and women wept as his words brought conviction to
their hearts. Were it not for this wonderful gospel, said the speaker,
he himself might be as the worst prisoner among them. At the close of
the sermon he asked all those who desired to lead better lives to bow
their heads in prayer, and almost every man and woman in the chapel fell
on their knees, while the eloquent evangelist lifted his voice in their
behalf. The closest attention was accorded him during the whole time and
when the prisoners were dismissed and passed out of the chapel amid a
stillness that was very impressive, Mr. Herr spoke to a great number
personally shaking them by the hand and urging them to repent and
believe the gospel.




Extermination of Habitual Criminals


The extermination of the habitual criminal--his removal like a weed from
a garden--was advocated today in a startling address made in Minneapolis
to the Interstate Sheriffs' Association by Charles W. Peters, chief
deputy sheriff of Cook County.

The unexpected suggestion that the man who will not reform ought to be
slain by legal means aroused much discussion in Chicago among ministers,
lawyers and laymen.

Leniency for first offenders, parole for the worthy, an adult probation
law, were advocated by Mr. Peters, who then insisted that in cases where
life has proved a failure, where efforts of reformation have been
ineffectual and the criminal is a body sore on the social system, that
extermination should be resorted to.


Only One True Reform.

Furthermore, he created intense surprise by his assertion that in twenty
years' experience in handling criminals he could recall only one case of
true reformation on the part of an "habitual."

[Illustration: THE HON. AND MRS. JOHN L. WHITMAN, CHICAGO, ILL.

Mr. Whitman is Superintendent of the Bridewell. They have been friends
to thousands in need of friends.]

[Illustration: Gospel Service at the County Jail, Chicago, Ill.]

In his address to the Association, Mr. Peters recommended various ways
of dealing with crime and its perpetrators, and then for the
irredeemably incorrigible made this recommendation:

"And then if they fail to embrace the many opportunities offered them,
and after everything has been done that is possible for mankind to do,
they repeatedly persist in returning to their old ways, I think in such
a case life has proven a failure, and they become a menace and a burden
to our social welfare and should be exterminated.


Like Weeds in a Garden.

"They are like weeds in a garden and unless removed will supersede the
useful plants.

"Many students of criminology have suggested life imprisonment, but in
my opinion that has proven a failure. By that method the menace is
removed, but the burden remains.

"I am sorry to acknowledge that in the twenty odd years of my experience
in the handling of criminals I can recall only one case of true
reformation on the part of habitual criminals, and that man is employed
in a bridge works, where it would be impossible for him to carry
anything off."


"Judge Not," Says Pastor.

Among the ministers who commented on the startling theory of
extermination were:

Rev. P. J. O'Callaghan, pastor of St. Mary's Church and the priest who
saved Herman Billik from the gallows--What is man that he should put
himself in judgment on a fellow and say that the culprit is beyond
reformation and redemption and slay him? Man is too fallible to condemn
another as an habitual criminal and exterminate him. No one knows when a
man has passed beyond the pale of reform. As a matter of fact, many and
many a criminal branded as 'habitual' has been saved to a useful life. I
most heartily disagree with any suggestion to execute any man on the
theory that he is irredeemable.


Hope While There Is Life.

Rabbi Tobias Scharfarber--In the first place I am opposed to capital
punishment, but, in any event, I should not agree with this suggestion
of Mr. Peters. It is much like Osler's plan to kill off men of sixty or
more years of age, or Ingersoll's suggestion that when a man believed
himself to be a failure and useless to the world he should go and shoot
his brains out. While a man lives there is hope for him, and no one has
either power or right to say that he will always be a menace to society.

    "Christ in His charity taught those who came to Him,
      Ill deeds should pardoned be seventy times seven;
    Succor the least here and you do the same to Him;
      These are his precepts on earth and in heaven.
    Oh, then, when laboring hard for humanity,
      Never believe that your labor is vain.
    Kindness will conquer the criminal insanity;
      Speak to him gently and try him again."




Criminal Becomes Minister

[Courier-Journal]


"Do you know who I am?" once said a person in the jail here to the Rev.
George L. Herr, prison evangelist. "I will tell you. I am the worst and
most treacherous man in this prison." Then the Rev. Mr. Herr says he
told him the story of his fearful crimes. "I have been in prison North,
South, East and West, I have been in the dismal, solitary cell for one
year, have been put in large tanks of ice water, have been punished over
and over again, but it has always made me more of a demon. Would you
like to know what the officer who last locked me up said about me?"

"'Take him and lock him up like a brute beast, for that is what he is.'"

Then he turned and said: "Do you think there is any hope for me?" "I was
at once on ground where I could speak without hesitation," said Mr.
Herr, "and I told him simply that if he was through with an evil life,
if he was tired of wrong-doing and was determined to do right, there was
a love that could forgive him, and a power that could help and keep him
in the future. When at last we knelt together there I prayed that God,
who could bring light into our darkness, might dispel the thick clouds
that had shut in this soul from hope, and bring to him the revelation
that would change his life. There were tears in our eyes as we parted,
and, taking my hand in his he said: "I will try, Brother Herr."

"He did try, and, more than that he conquered. At first it was a stern
battle of an awakened will and conscience fighting against desperate
odds. The feeling that friends were watching and waiting anxiously for
good reports proved an undoubted incentive. It was not long before he
sought and found Christ as his Saviour, and he became an earnest
Christian, and to-day is an ordained Methodist minister, at the head of
a great rescue work in an Eastern city, and also chaplain of a model
penal institution."




    "For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son,
    that whosoever believeth on him should not perish, but have
    everlasting life."--John 3:16.





To Brother George L. Herr

By Joseph M. McGuire


    The days are long and dreary,
      And the hours go slowly by,
    While the prisoner, sad and weary,
      Longs for the time to fly.
    But one brings joy and sunshine
      To the prisoners sad at heart,
    And it is but a short time
      'Till with him we'll have to part.
    We cannot find another,
      Search, I care not where,
    Who will do as much for a brother
      As our Bro. George L. Herr.

    He comes early in the morning,
      And never leaves till night;
    He always seems untiring,
      Helping wayward men do right.
    He is always up and willing
      Whene'er a prisoner call,
    To go and do the bidding
      Of a man behind the wall.
    And then there is another,
      Who shares his joy and strife;
    She is called by the prisoners "Mother,"
      And is Bro. Herr's good wife.

    Early Sunday morning,
      In rain, snow, sleet, or hail,
    You will find him holding meeting
      In the Jefferson County Jail.
    I love to hear him tell the story
      Of the "Prodigal Son,"
    And of the "Mighty Prince of Glory,"
      From whom salvation sprung.
    Round his good face there seems a halo,
      His work is for One on high,
    He makes sunshine out of sorrow,
      Whenever he is nigh.




Success of Reformed Criminals

After Blotting Out the Past


"Once a Thief, Always a Thief," has been disproved in thousands of cases
according to Mr. William A. Pinkerton.

"Do criminals ever reform, really turn over a new leaf and become good
citizens?"

I fired the question at random, little dreaming what a wealth of
interesting and convincing anecdote it would evoke. I expected the time
honored cynical reply, something to the effect of "Once a thief, always
a thief," But I was disappointed--agreeably disappointed. For my answer
was a quick, emphatic, earnest "Yes."

And the man who said "Yes" was William A. Pinkerton, and he knows.

Probably no living man knows more intimate details about the individual
members of the underworld, those who are active criminals to-day, as
well as the notorious crooks of the past, than the head of the Pinkerton
Detective Agency. And every crook will tell you, what every honest man
who knows Mr. Pinkerton will tell you, that when he says "Yes" there
is no possibility that the correct answer should be "No."

[Illustration: WILLIAM A. PINKERTON

Head of the Pinkerton Detective Agency

New York]

"I know what the average man thinks--that a real crook never turns
straight. But it isn't so. Thousands of crooks--and I don't mean
one-time offenders, but men in the class we call hardened
criminals--have become honest men to my knowledge. It is not true, as
some recent writer said, that as many crooks turn honest as there are
honest men turn crooked, but I believe that one of the reasons is that
so few men are willing to lend a helping hand. I don't mean that every
crook is ready to reform if he is encouraged, but I do mean that society
makes it hard for any man who has once been a criminal to lead an honest
life.

"And I'll tell you another thing," continued Mr. Pinkerton: "I'm prouder
of the fact that I have helped a few criminals to become honest men than
of all the work I have done in putting criminals behind the bars. I'm
proud of the fact that every crook knows that Pinkerton will deal
squarely with him if he will deal squarely with Pinkerton--that I
believe it is as important to keep faith with a bank thief as with a
bank president.

"I know a score of business men in Chicago--not saloonkeepers, but
reputable merchants--who have criminal records. These men have done time
and have paid their debt to society for their crimes. I cannot tell you
their names, for it would be unfair to them and to their wives and
families, many of whom have no suspicion that there is anything wrong in
the pasts of their husbands and fathers. Besides, when society discovers
that a man is a former criminal it is not content to cancel the debt no
matter how much imprisonment at hard labor the former crook may have
given in expiation of his sin.

"I know men in trusted positions in New York who were convicts. In many
cases only the man himself and his employer know the secret and
sometimes the employer does not know it. I know men scattered all over
the West--business men, professional men, many of them wealthy and
prominent citizens--who have seen the inside of Joliet, Moyomensing,
Sing Sing or Leavenworth. They have sons and daughters who never have
suspected and never will suspect the truth.

"These are good men--as good men as any living. They have turned away
from their old ways, in many cases have changed their names, and who
shall say they are not as much to be respected as the honest man who
never was tempted, never was forced into crime? I'll tell you about some
of them.

"When I was a boy in Chicago there were two brothers, neighbors, about
the age of myself and my younger brother, and we were friends. When the
civil war broke out I went into the army secret service at the age of
fifteen, and the older of these two boys, John, enlisted in an Illinois
regiment. Jerry, the younger, was not old enough, but a little later,
when the government began offering a bounty for soldiers, he became a
bounty jumper. He would enlist, get the bounty money, then desert and
enlist over again under another name. He was with a band of young
fellows who were engaged in that way of getting easy money, and who
found it so easy that they turned to other kinds of crime.

"When the war was over John came back to Chicago and settled down as a
rather plodding sort of a mechanic. He tried to get Jerry to straighten
out, but the younger brother was too far along the road to prison.

"In those days the Northwestern Railroad used wood for fuel, and the
wood agent of the road was Amos Snell--the same Snell who was later
murdered by 'Willie Tascott.' He lived in a suburb of Chicago, and one
night Jerry and his crowd went out there and 'stuck' up the whole
family--robbed them of everything they had. John was along with them,
lying in the bottom of the hack. The police got a clew through the
hack-driver and rounded up the whole band. All of them, including John,
were sentenced to five years each except Jerry. When he came into the
hands of the police a citizen who had been held up on the street some
time before identified him as the hold-up man, and on the strength of
that the Judge gave him fifteen years. It was an unjust sentence, for
Jerry had not committed the hold-up--that was found out later.

"Well, John's old Colonel and some other army men and my father got
together and got a pardon for John, who had merely gone along with the
crowd and had taken no part in the robbery. He went back to work at his
trade of brass finisher, but Jerry stayed in Joliet, rebelling against
those long unjust years of his sentence.

Jerry was put to work in the engine room of the prison and soon
displayed great aptitude for machinery. He served out his term with time
off for good behavior and finally got out. I met him in Chicago. He was
despondent. He felt that he had no chance to be anything but a crook,
but he knew the terrible chances a once convicted man runs if he returns
to crime. I told him the best thing for him to do was to go to New York,
and I sent him on to my brother Robert, who had also known him as a
boy.


Reform of Jerry.

"Now, here's a part of this story that will interest you. Robert had a
friend who was chief engineer of a building in Ann street. He told this
friend about Jerry, and the engineer said he'd take a chance on him. He
put Jerry to work stoking the boiler at a dollar and a half a day. After
a year or so there was a vacancy and Jerry became assistant engineer. A
little while later the chief engineer resigned and Jerry after awhile,
the ex-crook, became chief engineer. He left there after awhile to take
charge of a big plant on Long Island, and he sent for his brother John
and gave him a job.

"A few years later the two brothers called on me in Chicago. They had
saved about $6,000 between them and were on their way to a new town in
the West to start a manufacturing business of their own. Each had
married a girl who knew nothing of their prison record and had children.
They prospered exceedingly. John died several years ago, but only a few
months ago, when my brother Robert died, an old man, whom nobody but
myself recognized, came from the West for the funeral and shed tears at
the grave. It was Jerry. He is still living, and is the leading citizen
of his town and worth at least half a million dollars.

"Criminals who reform? There are thousands of them. I remember a little
Liverpool Irishman who was a pickpocket around New York. He was known as
'Jimmy the Nibbler'. The police picked him up in Tennessee, where he
lifted somebody's pocketbook, and he was sent to Nashville for seven
years. In the prison they put him to work in the hospital. Then the
cholera epidemic broke out. "Jim" helped the doctors and nurses, and
when the doctors got sick he nursed them and the warden and his family
and helped save a good many lives. After the epidemic was over the
warden and the Prison Board were so grateful they got "Jim" a pardon and
made up a purse of $350 for him. With the money in his pocket he came
right to Chicago to see me. I began to lecture him on the futility of
going back to the life he had led before.

"'I've cut that all out,' he said. 'I'm not going to be a gun any more.
I've been studying medicine down there in Nashville. The doctors have
been telling me things and giving me medical books to read and now I
want to get into one of these colleges where I can get a diploma quick.'

"There were a number of diploma factories, as the lower class of medical
colleges were called, running in Chicago then, and Jim found he had
money enough to go through one of them--in the front door and out the
back. But he got his diploma and license to practise and started for one
of the new towns in the West. I looked him up a while ago. He comes
pretty near being the most prominent citizen in the town. He is a
director in a national bank and the leading physician, and has
officiated at the births of half the present population. Moreover, he is
an enthusiastic church member. But how long do you think it would take
for the whole town to turn against him if they should ever learn out
there that he is 'Jimmy the Nibbler'?

"Crooks that turn straight? Your next door neighbor, your family
physician, even your clergyman, may be one of them. The world is full of
them. There was one man, a professional thief, a fellow who had done
time in half a dozen State prisons and penitentiaries, whom I used to
labor with earnestly every time he got out, but he apparently never
tried to reform. He was always doing time, it seemed.

"I lost track of him for several years. Then two years ago, when the
National Association of Chiefs of Police was in session in Buffalo, I
found a note in my box in my hotel signed by this man's name. He said he
was going to call at seven o'clock. There was a banquet on for that
evening, and hundreds of police officials from every part of the United
States were there. I wondered if he knew what sort of a lion's den he
was walking into. Sure enough he came into the hotel and spoke to me.

"'Don't you know that you are surrounded by policemen, some of whom are
sure to spot you?' I asked him.

"'You're the only man in the world who knows me,' he said, 'My name now
is So and So'--giving me another name--'and I'm a respected and
prosperous man. I just wanted to let you know before you found it out
for yourself, for I knew you'd be on the square with me.' And I was. So
far as I knew he was not wanted for anything, and what good would have
come of exposing him?

"Thieves who resist the temptation to steal? Hundreds of them. There's
one right here, only a few blocks from where we are talking. He's the
watchman in a big silk warehouse--and if there's anything your
professional thief likes to steal, short of money or diamonds, it's
silk, for you can get so much value into so small a package. This man
was a professional safe blower, and did several big jobs. When he got
out of prison I helped him to get the job he has now. His employer knows
his record. I told it to him on the man's own request. When work stops
for the day this man is left alone in charge of hundreds of thousands
of dollars worth of valuable silks. He isn't bonded, for he couldn't get
a bondsman if he wanted to. He has held the job seven years now, and not
a cent's worth has been taken from the warehouse in that time.

"You may say that he does not dare to steal--that he knows a single
false move on his part will bring instant punishment. But I say he has
no desire to steal--that he has reformed. And thousands of other
criminals would reform if society would give them half a chance.


Baffling Hotel Robberies.

"Several years ago there was a series of hotel robberies in New York
that baffled the police. The thief always worked with keys, opening
doors and then unlocking baggage left in rooms, and he always got away
with the goods. At last one night the word came to headquarters that a
man had been caught in one of the big hotels who was suspected of being
the author of all the robberies. I was visiting Chief Devery at the time
and he asked me to go with him to the West Thirtieth street station to
look the man over.

"The man arrested was a well dressed, respectable looking little man,
with a white beard--the last man who would be taken for a thief if seen
in a hotel corridor. His face was vaguely familiar to me, but I had
some difficulty in placing him. Finally it struck me. I had seen him
nearly thirty years before on the occasion of a big prize fight in New
Orleans, when he had been arrested for the same trick. It came over me
like a flash and I told him I knew him.

"'What's the use of making trouble?' he asked. 'These fools don't know
anything about me unless you put them wise.'

"I told Chief Devery what I remembered about the man, who protested
violently that he had never been in New Orleans in his life. Then
another thought struck me.

"'You've been in New Orleans more than once,' I said. 'The last time was
about six months ago, when you got Denman Thompson's diamonds in the St.
Charles Hotel.' I remembered the report of that case, but it was a
chance shot on my part, for no one had seen the thief. The old fellow
denied this vigorously.

"He was wearing a new derby hat. I don't know what impulse prompted me,
but I took the hat off his head and looked inside. It bore the mark of a
New Orleans hatter.

"The Chief and I left the station and had just turned into Sixth avenue
when I remembered the old fellow's name. We went back to the station
house and I confronted him again. I told him his name. He denied that
it was his.

"'What's the use of making trouble, Mr. Pinkerton?' he pleaded. His
inadvertent use of my name, which had not been mentioned there, gave him
away.

"'I don't know what kind of a case the police here have on you,' I told
him, 'but we are retained by the Jewelers' Protective Association, and
if you get after any jewelry drummers I'll make it hot for you.' And as
a precaution I got his photograph from the New York police. They didn't
have much of a case on him and he got off.

"Not long after a jewelry drummer was robbed in a Chicago hotel of about
three thousand dollars' worth of diamonds which he had carelessly left
in his grip instead of putting them in the safe. The same day a friend
of mine who was stopping in another hotel lost his new overcoat and told
me about it. I thought of the old man in the first job, and found a
chambermaid and bellboy who had seen him on the floor, but didn't
connect him with the second because he had never stolen anything but
very valuable articles, so far as I knew. My friend had to leave for New
York that night, and some time in the evening I got a telegram from him
which had been filed in Fort Wayne.

"'Positive man who got my coat is in same sleeper, ticketed to New
York,' it read. I wired my friend at a point further along the line to
get off at Pittsburg and hold a white handkerchief in his hand so he
could be identified and be prepared to point out the thief. Then I got
in touch with Pittsburg by wire, and sure enough back came a wire after
a while to the effect that they had got the man, whom my friend
identified, and found on him besides the overcoat about $3,000 worth of
diamonds. I asked for a description and the one they wired fitted that
of the man I had seen in New York. I referred Pittsburg to the man's
photograph, which had been published that week in a police periodical,
and they were sure they had the same man. And so it proved. He was
brought back to Chicago and convicted of the jewelry theft. He served a
short sentence, and when he got out he came to me.

"Mind you, this was an old man, who had been a thief all his life--I had
known him as a thief more than thirty years before. It is criminals of
that kind that are commonly regarded as the most difficult to reform,
but even hardened and lifelong offenders like this man will go straight
if they get the right kind of encouragement. I found this old man
apparently anxious to be honest, but he had never had a chance after
his first slip as a young man. I determined to do what I could for him
and I got him a job in New York. He is more than seventy years old now,
but he is still holding that job, and he hasn't made a false step since
he got out of prison the last time.

"Do criminals ever reform? I think I have told you enough to prove that
they do--and I could tell you of hundreds of other instances if you
needed any further proof."






A LETTER FROM EDITOR-IN-CHIEF OF THE "STAR OF HOPE" PAPER PUBLISHED IN
SING SING PRISON.


                                  Ossining, N. Y., April 9, 1906.

Dear Brother Herr:

Your book, "Light in Dark Places," received. I do so much appreciate
your kindness in remembering poor me in durance. I not only voice the
sentiments expressed in this precious book, but add thereto my message
of Christ's power to cleanse the wicked one and bring back into God's
path the weak and unfortunate. May God spare you and yours many years,
and give you manifold blessings in your great work.

                                      Sincerely yours,
                                               54179,
                                                   Editor in Chief.




"Lost and Is Found"

Noted Prison Worker issues an Interesting Book

(Louisville Herald)


An interesting booklet containing the sermon "Lost and Is Found," the
newest publication of the Rev. George L. Herr, the noted prison
evangelist whose home is in this city, has just been issued from the
press. The sermon is one of the strongest yet issued by the Rev. Herr,
and is written in the characteristic vein which marks all those issued
by the prison worker.

Rev. Herr holds a unique position in the evangelistic field. He is
considered the greatest evangelist among prisoners in the United States.
Scarcely a big prison in the country has not been visited by him in his
work, and the number of men in stripes who have been reformed by the
indefatigable prison worker reaches into thousands.

Some of the most notable redemptions of so-called "hardened criminals"
known to evangelistic work have been accomplished by the Rev. Herr. All
of the booklets by him have been extensively read and quoted, and it is
probable none will attract more interest than that which has just been
issued by him.




Christmas at Frankfort Prison


The prisoners had what was unanimously voted the best Christmas dinner
in many years. There were 1100 lbs. of turkey, cranberries, mashed
potatoes, oranges, and bananas. There were about 75 fine cakes, 68 of
which were sent from Lexington by Mrs. Frances H. Beauchamp, Pres. W. C.
T. U. The entire dinner was well cooked and heartily enjoyed by all.

At 11:30, Bro. Jos. Severance, Chaplain, Bro. Geo. L. Herr, of
Louisville, Mrs. M. B. R. Day, of Frankfort, and Miss Nellie E.
Williams, Junior C. E. Superintendent, of Maysville, entered, and took
seats on the stage; these are four of our truest and strongest friends
and are most heartily welcomed.

Bro. Severance opened the services by reading the Christmas lesson, i.
e., the 2nd chapter of Matthew, which gives the most beautiful
description of the birth of the lowly Jesus.

Bro. Herr then offered a fervent prayer.

Bro. Severance' remarks were few; he is still grieving over the loss of
his two children, and simply said that this Christmas had lost all of
its charms for him, for instead of feeling joyful, he felt sad all of
to-day and yesterday, and that we understood why, for instead of four
little girls, he had only two. He felt his inability to proceed further,
and gave the meeting over into the hands of Bro. Herr to conduct as he
saw fit, and catching an idea from the foregoing remarks, Bro. Herr
referred to the fact that years ago, Christmas was very sad to him. That
he was lying in a saloon in the city of Louisville without friends and
without hope. Then in a jovial manner showed by comparison what a
difference then and now.

He then said: "I am so glad that Jesus said: 'Him that cometh to me, I
will in no wise cast out; I am so glad that he is the same yesterday,
to-day and forever. He said: 'Follow me, and I will make you fishers of
men. There is not a man behind prison bars that Jesus Christ cannot
clean up and make him a man."

The audience sat up and took notice when he mentioned a man who had been
a homeless wretch, and a degraded sinner, who had spent thirty-two years
of his life behind prison bars, but had been converted in the Louisville
jail and was now a man of God, the leader in a Rescue Mission in one of
our largest cities, and had the financial support of eight of the
wealthiest men in that city. He said that whenever a man goes blind, or
deaf, or is afflicted in any other way, he is sent to a hospital for
treatment, and that this prison is a sort of hospital, and that some of
us are so blind that we cannot tell the difference between our own and
other peoples' horses. This simile was put forth in such a humorous
manner as to cause much laughter.

He then launched into an earnest exhortation to the men to do better. To
quit their meanness, as Sam Jones said. "Cease from evil and learn to do
well." That to quit one's evil ways was only half the duty, and that the
remainder consisted in doing the right thing, and you may have this
assurance that the man who is serving the Lord will not get into
trouble. "An idle mind is the devil's work-shop." In this connection he
gave a very pretty illustration of how one's energies are used in either
the right way or wrong way; that if you build a fire under a steam
boiler, place the proper quantity of water in it, and then open the
throttle and allow the steam to get into the engine, the entire
machinery will perform a good work, but if you shut off the steam and
tie down the safety valve, the steam is going to exert itself in a
disastrous manner by an explosion, and the killing of several men.

"The wages of sin is death, and if you can only open your eyes and see
that, you can also see that "The gift of God is eternal life." The only
way under heaven by which a man can be saved, is to come over to the
service of God and begin to do that which is right.

Now what is the purpose of Christmas day? The world has agreed that this
is as near the birth of Christ as we can possibly figure it; it means
that 1907 years ago Jesus was born into the world, and the star of
Bethlehem came and stood over the place where the young child lay; the
angels sang "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth, peace, good will
towards men," and we celebrate the day in memory of that event.

What is the trouble to-day that causes all these penitentiaries over our
land; why all these jails and the strong arm of the law? It is because
men will not allow the gospel of Jesus Christ to reign in their hearts.
As long as the children of Israel served the Lord, they were happy and
prosperous, but as soon as they turned to the flesh pots of Egypt, they
began to despair and shame came upon them.

If you were asked what you would rather have above all things, you would
say, Just a piece of paper with the great seal of the state impressed
upon it, and the signature of the Governor attached. Why? Because prison
life is a hard life and you are tired of it. If I were a prisoner, I
would want to make my confinement as pleasant as possible and I would
become converted immediately, for of all men on earth the man in prison
should be the quickest to accept Jesus Christ. I would not want to be a
prisoner all my physical life, and then a spiritual prisoner throughout
eternity. Did it ever occur to you that hell must be infinitely worse
than it is pictured? We read of a place "Where their worm dieth not, and
the fire is not quenched." If this is a picture of hell, then what must
the reality be? There is a chance for every man to get out of this
prison, but there will be no chance whatever to get out of hell.


    The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath
    anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent
    me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the
    captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are
    bound.--Isa. 61:1.


    Oh, my friend, there is hope,
      Will you come this hour;
    For Jesus is yours
      With all His Power;
    Look upward, not back.
      Or in, or around;
    But up to Christ,
      Where hope is found.




Hundreds of Letters

    Below appear but a few of the Hundreds of Letters we have
    received from those Helped by Our Work


If you have asked the question, "Does it pay to labor among the fallen
ones in prison--are the results from this work permanent in character?"
let the answer be found in these letters. They come from writers'
spontaneous offerings of gratitude, who have been restored to society as
useful respected citizens:

My Dearest Friend: It is very gratifying to find myself alone long
enough to pen you a few lines.

Arrived at 6:05 p.m. Well, I cannot tell you how very pleased everyone
was to see me. Went in at once to see the president of a concern and
told him everything. He was entirely satisfied and told me to commence
work in the morning, which I did. They all have used me fine, and I
would never know I had been away for no one mentions it. Brother, I
think of you fifty times a day, of the unselfish, never fatiguing
interest you manifested in my behalf, of the hundred and one favors, and
when I think that was only a single factor in your work, I cannot but
wonder how you stand the strain.

Cannot tell you how much I prize liberty, and I owe having it, to a
great extent, to your dear self. I assure you your efforts and prayers
of yourself and wife for me done wonders. I have fully resolved to be a
good man.

Brother Herr, I am going to close, for I am going to write to you every
few days, as I consider you as dear as an own brother. Give my sincere
regards to any inquiring friends. My heartiest to your dear wife, and
may God bless you both. I do.

                                           I am affectionately yours,
                                                          W.




A TRIBUTE FROM JOS. M. O'HARA.


The success that has attended the efforts of this truly pious and
angelic woman in her noble and heroic work of rescuing sinful men and
women from the vortex of ruin and perdition is marvelous; and her labor
among the prisoners of the county jail is not less remarkable. Mrs.
Herr, unlike many religious workers, realizes that before attempting to
moralize with a prisoner, his confidence must first be gained, and to
accomplish this she invariably succeeds in dispelling that false and
erroneous opinion so prevalent among criminals, that they are held in
contempt by society and are considered undeserving of sympathy and
assistance; then, by kind and encouraging words and gentle deed,
instills, not by the dry and laborious way of the brain, but into the
heart, the story of the kind and loving Saviour.

Like her contemporary, Mrs. Ballington Booth, Mrs. Herr possesses that
divinely urgent and persistent, yet gentle and sympathetic spirit that
can persuade where others cannot convince; that can subdue where others
cannot conquer.

The writer of this article through her kind and encouraging words, has
been led from the error of his way, and to take up again the thread laid
down in early years; has realized that though the fruitage of the tragic
and pathetic life that ended in the ignominious death of Him who was the
grandest character, the most sublime ideal and the highest type of
humanity the world has ever seen--Jesus of Nazareth--we can, if we come
with faith and hope, be cleansed from our sins and iniquities. May the
Omnipotent God, who holds the destiny of nations, pour out his blessings
upon this saintly woman and her noble hearted husband and guide them
through long and honored days, and when the "shadows of even" gather and
the sun of life is setting, show them in the darkness of the end, "words
of light we never saw by day."

                                                     JOS. M. O'HARA.




FISHING FOR MEN.


Dear Brother Herr: We, as prisoners in the Jefferson County Jail,
desire, for your encouragement, and because it is the spontaneous
expression of our hearts, to thank you for your continued, untiring and
unselfish devotion to our interests, spiritual and temporal. We desire
in this manner to show you and the public that we thoroughly appreciate
the efforts of those who try to draw us from the broad road of vice and
crime into the narrow path of virtue where we are satisfied alone peace
and happiness can be found. Many persons, Bro. Herr, who have attempted
the task of rescuing the fallen have become discouraged and given up the
work because they could see no good resulting from their efforts. Those
persons had not the faith to continue their work and leave results with
God. A prisoner who was an inmate of this jail several years ago
recently found himself again an inmate, and expressed surprise at the
changed tone, as it were, of the jail, and he laughingly asked if the
world was getting better, for he said the men now in jail were more
refined in their conversation, more unselfish in their actions toward
each other, and of a higher moral tone generally. What this man said is
undoubtedly true, and it is the result of the efforts of yourself and
other Christian workers who do not become weary in well-doing. But it is
you, Brother Herr, whom we especially desire to thank, because you are
with us daily and no day passes that you do not perform some act of
kindness for some one of our number, who, but for you, would have no
friend. That perfect man, Jesus of Nazareth, has said, "by their fruits
ye shall know them," and it is by this standard we as prisoners have
measured you and have not found you wanting. You have gained our
confidence and we have proved your sincerity and we love you, Brother
Herr, because you daily prove your love for us. Prisoners are naturally
inclined to suspect the sincerity of those who profess an interest in
their welfare, but when once you gain their confidence they are
teachable.

A London lawyer who wrote the tragedy "Ion" makes one of his characters
say, "It is but a little thing to speak a word of kindness which by
daily use has almost lost its sense, but on the ear of him who thought
to die unmourned will fall like sweetest music." Many are the words of
kindness which daily fall from your lips, by which we are soothed and
blessed, and we firmly believe that they do not fall upon stony ground
and that the good God will reward you in his own good time with a
bountiful harvest of redeemed lives.

                               Your grateful friends,
                                         JAMES L. DORAN
                                         HARRY GRAVEN
                                         JOHN CARTER
                                         JOS. M. O'HARA
                                         JULIUS PHILLIPS
                    Committee of Prisoners of Jefferson County Jail.

[Illustration: LOUISVILLE FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY--MAIN BUILDING

Branch of this Library in the County Jail.]




Branch Library in the Jail

[Courier-Journal]


Prison libraries are nearly always more or less poor, indefinite sort of
affairs, with a questionable lot of reading matter, mostly paper-backs
and second-hand magazines, forming its contents. But the Jefferson
county jail has marked a departure from the routine of prison life in
the establishment of a library station for its inmates.

This little institution is a remarkable affair. Mrs. Chester Mayer is
responsible for its organization. Mrs. Mayer is a member of the visiting
board at the county jail, and noticing the absence of good reading
matter, the continual idling of prisoners, she took up the matter with
Jailer John R. Pflanz, who approved the idea of a library station. Then
she approached her husband, Dr. Mayer, a member of the Board of Trustees
of the Louisville Free Public Library.

When George T. Settle, the recently elected librarian, was approached,
he gave his hearty consent. One hundred volumes were sent immediately
for the men's department and fifty for the women prisoners. The books
were selected by Miss Annie V. Pollard, former acting librarian, who
gave considerable time to a study of the most desirable literature. The
books sent were non-denominational, nonpolitical, and mostly fiction,
works of the popular authors, but nothing too heavy for the mental
appetite of the inmates. The books were taken from the open-shelf room.

As these books are used they are changed. Since the establishment of the
jail library station the circulation has reached 2,000 books. Of course,
the same book is read by nearly all the regular borrowers.

An interesting sight is presented when the prisoners are at liberty in
the open places at the jail. About 75 per cent. of the prisoners can
read. The other 25 per cent. gather about an appointed reader, who reads
aloud.

How much better is this for those unfortunates than idling their time,
brooding, planning evil deeds, perhaps, or thinking criminal thoughts!

The Rev. George L. Herr, prison evangelist, is in charge of the work and
he and Jailer Pflanz have made it a success.

[Illustration: CURTIS JETT

How he found God, he tells you in his own words. God bless Curt, and
give him the desires of his heart, is the prayer of the Author.]




CHANGE COMES IN CURT JETT.

[Courier-Journal]


Frankfort, Ky., March 14.--(Special.)--Although he is serving two life
sentences for murder, Curt Jett, "the wild dog of the mountains," has
not yet abandoned hope of getting a pardon and being given another
chance to show that his reformation has been sincere and final. He says
that God has pardoned him for his crimes and he thinks the Governor
ought to.

"The best thing ever happened to me was when I was sent to the
penitentiary," said Jett last night in his cell in the prison here as he
was talking to some newspaper men, who were inside the cellhouse for
another purpose than talking to Jett. "I realize that I never would have
been reformed but for being put in here," continued Jett. "I only wish
that they would give me another chance to show that I really have
changed my ways."


License To Teach Sunday-School.

Jett showed the newspaper men who had stopped to talk to him, when they
saw him lying on his cot reading, a certificate from the International
Sunday-school League entitling him to teach in a Sunday-school. He was
prouder of that than he ever was of his ability to shoot and he showed
it with great pride. Jett recently wrote out his religious experiences
for the Rev. Geo. L. Herr, the prison evangelist, and last night Jett
said he would give the story to the newspapers if Col. E. E. Mudd, the
prison warden, had no objections. Col. Mudd was with the newspaper men
and readily consented to Jett giving out the story. He had written it
with a pencil and gave it to the newspaper men, desiring that it be
published.

Jett's cell is covered with pictures, most of them selected with care as
to their beauty, and he has shown taste in arranging them. One of the
newspaper men remarked on the decorations in the cell last night and
Jett said:

"Yes, it cheers this cell up a little and makes it brighter."


Expression On Face Changed.

Even the expression of Jett's face has changed and he has none of that
hard look that he used to wear. He is bright and cheerful and Col. Mudd
says there is not a better prisoner in the penitentiary than Jett. Col.
Mudd said that he could not say that Jett's conversion was genuine from
a religious standpoint, but he says Jett has certainly changed inside
the prison. The Rev. Joseph Severance, the prison chaplain, says that
Jett is one of the best Bible scholars he ever saw and knows more about
the Bible than many earnest church workers.

In his story which he gave out last night Jett freely admits his guilt
of the crimes that are charged against him. He added, when he said that
it was a good thing that he had been put in the penitentiary:

"I do not mean that it was good to kill men."

He said that whisky was largely responsible for his misdeeds and he
wanted to do good now that he had done so much harm. The following is
Jett's story as he wrote it in his cell:


Jett's Story.

"State Prison, Frankfort, Ky., March 13, 1909.--To the Whole World: I
want to let the whole world know what God in his great mercy has done
for me, and prove to you by words which are true that Jesus is willing,
able and does save to the uttermost. After a life of sin and shame, God
sent his Holy Spirit into my soul and made a new man out of me. It was
in this wise: A dear, good woman who is dead now, but who then lived in
Lexington; her name was Mrs. Fanny A. Penn--I shall never forget that
name--she wrote me a good Christian letter, full of good advice, and
begged me to become a Christian. I had never seen her, or she me, as I
know of; she had only read in the press regarding what a desperado and
outlaw I was. I read her letter and it sounded like a fairy tale to me,
with no sense in it; but after reflection, I answered it, and we began
to be good friends, and she kept begging me to turn from my sinful ways
and be a Christian man.


Read New Testament.

"I want to state right here that because a man is in prison, he don't
have to be a Christian or behave himself; and Mrs. Penn sent me a small
revised Testament and begged me to read it. At first I laid it up and
would not read it. I don't remember of ever reading a whole chapter in a
Bible up until that time in my whole life; and at last, by her begging
me in every letter to read my Testament, I began to read it, and started
out with a resolution to read it through, and after I began to read, I
became interested in it, and the more I read it the deeper I became
interested in it, and God's Holy Spirit began to work in me, and I began
to pray. At first it seemed that I was afraid that God would not answer
my prayers, but still something made me pray anyway, and it wasn't long
until I was praying to God every night from one to three times, from the
depths of my heart. I had taken his name in vain ever since I was a
child, and I asked him to make me quit taking his name in vain, and
after a day at my work, and when I would curse God, I would think of my
prayers, and then at night when I would go to my cell, I would let my
thoughts wander over a day that had just passed, and I could tell after
reflecting that I hadn't cursed so much that day. And little by little
God removed that evil spirit, cursing, from me, until one night when I
went to my cell and my thoughts wandered over the day that had just
passed, and not an oath had I uttered, and I was happier than ever
before, I fell on my knees on the hard stone floor, and thanked God for
His goodness and for removing that swearing away from me.


Quits Smoking Cigarettes.

"I had smoked cigarettes for at least fifteen years and I quit them. I
was full of revenge and hatred, and I cried aloud to God in my lonely
cell to redeem my soul, which He did, and it wasn't long before I was a
friend to everyone and praising God for full and free salvation. He has
made a new man out of me. The Holy Spirit is like a fever, and it is all
and all before a man gets right with God. Condemning and deceitful
spirits will rise up in a man, but all we have to do is to ask God and
he will remove them all; to live a true Christian life is the
straightest life that anyone ever tried to walk. It is a great warfare.
I read and study my Bible and have learned a great deal about God's word
since I joined the church, a few short months ago, under a great, good
and noble man of Frankfort by the name of C. R. Hudson, and I love him
as a very dear brother. There is not a man in all this world that I hold
the least bit of malice against, and before I got right with God I had
revenge in me against many.


Warns Young Men.

"Young men, as you read this, from one who has done many and great
wrongs, take warning; shun evil companions and don't do as I have done
in days gone by. Don't be led astray by older heads, for the man that
will advise you to do a wrong is not your friend; but I could not see it
that way. God has given me a new mind and I know as well as I know that
I am living that religion is true, real and no fake, as I once thought.


Has Been Born Again.

"I was raised on a Bluegrass farm in Madison County, Kentucky, and my
parents were as good a father and mother as ever lived; but my father
died while I was young and I went from bad to worse, committing crime
after crime, and I am guilty of the charges against me, but God has
forgiven me of every wrong I ever did. Why won't the Governor? All the
punishment that I will ever have to go through with will be on this
earth, for God has forgiven me of every wrong and I have a clear
conscience now, for I have been born again. There are so many men in
prison that trample the lowly God under foot to try and gain their
freedom in that way, and I hope that no one single person that reads
this will think that I am making mockery of God's love, for I am sincere
with God, as I used to be with Satan. I wish that every paper in the
whole world would publish this so that it could have a chance to touch
the hearts of many sinful men; I long to tell the story to young men,
from East to West, from North to South, how God redeemed my soul.


Refers to Scriptures.

"We have organized a Bible reading circle here in the prison which is a
grand and good work. Now I refer you to some Scripture which I hope
everyone will read carefully, and it will show you how God will forgive
a man for the crime of murder and for all crimes except one.

"Read Exodus ii., 11, 12, 13, 14, 15; II. Samuel xi. and xii.; Ezekiel
xviii., from 20th verse to end of chapter; Jeremiah xxxiii., 8, 9;
Mathew xii., 31; Luke xv.; Acts vii., 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60; Acts
viii., 1 to 7; 16, 17, 22; Galatians iii., 24.

"I ask for the sincere prayers of every good Christian in this whole
world; pray for me, that I may be true to God the rest of my life. When
I was repenting my whole face would draw and I could feel the hot,
burning love of God in my whole being. I am in prison, maybe never to
hear the birds sing or the rippling of the water again, a free man, but
I say unto you that I am a free man in Jesus; I have found a friend that
sticks closer than a brother. People, let your light shine, for I
believe that there are many diamonds in the rough. I am yours in Jesus,

                                                     "CURTIS JETT ."




Christian Endeavor at Frankfort Prison


                                         Frankfort, Ky., Penitentiary.
 Rev. Geo. L. Herr,
     Prison Evangelist,
            Louisville, Ky.

Dear Brother Herr:

As you have been so kind to me and have asked a somewhat detailed
account of Christian Endeavor work in this prison and my connection with
same, it is my pleasure to comply, especially as you do not visit us
as often as we would like and cannot see for yourself all that goes on.

[Illustration: HENRY E. YOUTSEY

The Author knows of no man behind prison bars in whom he is more
interested than Henry E. Youtsey.]

When I commenced my life sentence here, February 6th, 1901, I fell in
love with our Christian Endeavor Society at first sight, and in all
those 104 months I have only missed about 15 meetings, due to
unavoidable causes. I was ill for three months with malaria and could
not go at all.

During the early days of my imprisonment our membership at its best
averaged about 100, but during the summer months when the boys were
given their choice between the open air of the yard and attendance at
the meetings the average was less than 20.

In the summer of 1905, and at the instance of Mrs. M. B. R. Day, of
Frankfort, I organized and managed a memorizing contest in which a
number of prisoners learned and recited verses of scripture, and I
obtained a number of handsome Teachers' Bibles and other presents which
were given to them as prizes on Thanksgiving day. I continued this work
for the three following summers, and in all forty-five prisoners learned
and recited a grand total of 33,332 verses, (over four times as many as
are contained in the New Testament), which is an average of 741 verses
per man. The men studied so hard that some of them injured their eyes,
and it was thought best to discontinue the work for a while.

I was Corresponding Secretary of our Society for about two and one-half
years, and last December I was elected its President by the largest
majority ever given any candidate for the office.

I started in to raise our membership to two hundred, and succeeded in
getting it as high as one hundred and sixty-six. It was also my desire
to have better attendance during the hot months, and I used every means
I could think of to make our meetings attractive, and I was frequently
both pleased and surprised to count from sixty-five to seventy, more
than three times what it used to be. Some of our members being delicate
are in great need of all the fresh air they can get and remain in the
yard all day Sundays in pretty weather although their hearts are with
us.

A part of our pledge binds the members to carefully read the Bible every
day, and I wondered how they were going to keep that pledge without the
Bibles, so I set to work again writing letters in every direction, and
almost before I knew it our Ky. C. E. Societies sent us 50 Bibles, and
Miss Mary B. Rohrer, of Franklin, Pa., sent me 150 of the prettiest
Bibles you ever saw; they have flexible, over-lapping backs,
red-under-gold edges, maps, and other helps. This is the most
magnificent present we have ever received from outside parties, and
besides all these, the Prison Commissioners offered us 100 more, which
we could not use. One thing that has impressed me very forcibly is the
fact that the Christian people outside are ready at all times to shower
blessings upon us, and all we have to do is to ask for them.

At the suggestion of Bro. Jos. Severance, our splendid Chaplain, I
numbered the Bibles and gave them out to the members, keeping a careful
record of them, and the men were instructed to return the Bibles to the
Society on leaving the prison, and although about a score of our members
have gone out since then we have only lost one Bible, which speaks
volumes for their honesty.

A few Sundays ago I proposed that the Society set apart a small sum of
money for prizes, and that all the members who wished to do so would be
invited to write compositions on the subject, "What Christian Endeavor
has done for me." Nine brothers entered this symposium, and their
compositions signed, "Amo Rolo, Sunflower, Rhododendron, Laurel, Merry
Heart, Happy Bird, Mizpah, and Christian, aggregate about 7,500 words,
and make fine reading; Bro. Severance was appointed Judge.

This summer I organized a little band of workers who go with me to the
hospital every Sunday, where we hold little services of song, prayer and
Bible reading at the bedsides of those who are ill, and I have found
great joy in this work.

We have had some splendid C. E. meetings, the best ones being those when
the Senior and Junior societies of the Frankfort Christian Church and
the Epworth League of the Methodist Church united with us. Of course, we
could not go to them, but they came to us, and gave us rare spiritual
and intellectual treats. The music was specially beautiful.

Quite recently I assisted Bro. Severance in re-organizing a Bible class,
of which I am Secretary. We are studying Moninger's "Training for
Service," and have 52 members. Splendid progress is being made. So you
see my hands are pretty full, and when Sunday night comes I am about
ready to drop in my tracks. Of course, it is all voluntary, and I do not
have to turn my hand over if I do not want to.

I am going to add a "Soul-winners Department" to our C. E. Society for
the purpose of assisting Bro. Severance in the conversion of the men,
but I am in some doubt as to how to proceed as there is no chance to get
at the men in the winter time. However, I am determined to find
opportunity somehow.

We have a new Superintendent of Prison C. E. work, in the person of
Miss Georgia Dunn, of Marksbury, Ky. She is the most energetic little
Christian lady I have seen in a long time, and our society will surely
hum this winter under her guidance, as we are all very proud of our good
little sister.

January 1st, I commenced to read my Bible through, at the rate of three
chapters each week night, and five each Sunday night, in order to get
through by December 31st, but I read more than that and finished up
three months ahead of time. Although I have read the good book
constantly during the last eight years, this is the first continuous
reading to completion that I ever did.

I have enjoyed Bro. Severance's sermons very much and I believe there is
nothing that thrills and inspires me with enthusiasm like fine
preaching, and right here I am going to tell you something which you
must keep under your hat; one Sunday Bro. Severance was unexpectedly
called away, and asked for a volunteer to fill his place, and I was
delighted at the opportunity, and although I could not fill it I
"rattled about in it," for about 30 minutes, and one dear fellow
accepted the gospel invitation and joined the church. As soon as my
sermonette was over quite a number of friends crowded around me and
showered congratulations on me. This was a temptation to try again, and
the next time three brothers joined the church, and that pleased me
immensely, you know.

I have many good friends in Louisville, including Dr. Powell, of the
Christian Church; Dr. T. M. Hawes, of the Highland Presbyterian Church,
whose C. E. Society sent us $7.50, and, say, there is a pastor after
God's own heart. Give them all my love when you see them, and say to
them that while I am ashamed of the sins that brought me here I am
trying to leave foot-prints that I will be proud of in the great day of
judgment.

The Christian Endeavor Societies of Newport, Paris, Winchester and
Lexington have helped us wonderfully. Lexington is the principal center
of Christian Endeavor activity, from my point of view, and I have an
especially warm place in my heart for those societies.

How is Mr. John R. Pflanz getting along? He is another whom I love, and
I hope that he will get every office that he goes after.

Be sure and give my kindest regards to your most excellent wife; she is
certainly a queen among women.

Trusting that I have not tired you, and that you will excuse my
remissness in failing to write sooner, I am,

                                         Most respectfully yours,
                                                        H. E. YOUTSEY.




Capital Punishment


The following forceful expressions regarding capital punishment by Gov.
Geo. W. Hunt, of Arizona, are in exact keeping with the thoughts of the
author. "Thou shalt not kill" applies to governments, corporations,
societies and individuals alike.

Capital punishment is simply the commission by the State of an act which
is regarded as a horrible crime if committed by an individual. One man
must not kill another man, but several men vested with official titles
can hold a conference and send a soul to eternity. The State says: "You
must not kill; but if you do, I will kill you." This theory of a State's
power or duty owes its origin to the lowest class of barbarians in the
early history of the world. Their logic, if it may be called that,
sprang solely from a spirit of revenge. The idea that a legal execution
would deter others from committing murder probably never occurred to
them. Their crude minds did not rise above the thought that the victim
should be avenged, and that adequate vengeance could be found only in
the hangman's noose or the guillotine.

There are a thousand other practices originating with barbarians which
the footsteps of civilization and progress have crushed. But capital
punishment, the worst heritage of the dark ages, lingers with us,
betraying one of the spots in humanity where the veneer of civilization
is thin. I am inclined to think that the spirit of revenge still is the
ruling motive back of the legal execution, even though pleas are made in
its behalf which barbarians never thought of. They could not very well
think of such punishment as a curb to more murders, for even they could
not help seeing that the beheading and quartering of offenders had no
such effect. The legal execution has no such effect today, a fact which
any fair-minded man will recognize after proper investigation. And if
that plea falls down, as it does and must continue to do, what defense
of the legal killing of our fellowman is left us? The moment we are
convinced that the number of murders is on the increase, or does not
decrease, in spite of the rope and electric chair, we will have to
justify capital punishment on some other ground. What is that other
ground, if it is not the old savage impulse of meting revenge--a species
of revenge, at the last analysis, confers no good whatever upon society
as a whole, and is of no consolation or comfort to the family circle
most affected by the original murder?

Arizona has taken most advanced ground upon social and economic
questions, and while the old territorial law, permitting capital
punishment, is still on the statute books, it must be remembered that
statehood has been in operation less than a year, and that the first
State Legislature was overwhelmed with work during the comparatively
short session prescribed by the Constitution. I am confident that public
sentiment in Arizona is opposed to capital punishment. During the
special session of the Legislature, which will be held early in 1913, an
effort will be made to repeal the old law. If the Legislature is too
busy to give the matter attention, or is disinclined to assume the
responsibility, the initiative provision of the State Constitution will
be invoked, thus putting the question square up to the people. I have no
fears for the outcome. Arizona citizenship has proved itself too
intelligent to lag behind the advanced thought and progress of
civilization.

                                              GEO. W. H. HUNT,
                                                  Governor of Arizona.




Indiana Reformatory

Inmates Subscribe for Pipe Organ


Each one a Carnegie in proportion to his ability to give, a majority of
the 1,204 inmates of the Indiana Reformatory yesterday voluntarily
contributed toward the purchase of a pipe organ for the handsome chapel
of the institution, the total offerings approximated $900. When the
contribution cards were checked up by the Rev. W. E. Edgin, chaplain of
the reformatory, he was surprised at the generosity shown by the
inmates. The individual sums given ranged from 25 cents to $35.

When Gov. J. Frank Hanly was a guest at the Reformatory recently he was
asked by Mr. Edgin as to the best plan to pursue to get from Andrew
Carnegie a contribution sufficient to buy a pipe organ. Gov. Hanly
replied that this sum could be raised in Indiana, and he started the
list with $100. It then occurred to Mr. Edgin to ask voluntary
contributions from the inmates, and permission was given by Supt.
Whittaker. Cards were left in each cell, with blanks for subscriptions,
but it was distinctly stated that all offerings should be entirely
voluntary. A great many of the inmates bring money with them to the
Reformatory, and this, with that which they earn by overtime work, which
is considerable, is credited to them.

When the success of the offering was learned the inmates were as much
pleased as Chaplain Edgin. The new organ soon will be forthcoming.






                           PROGRAM.


             Indiana Reformatory Chapel Services.

                   Sunday, April 14, 1907.


  March--"Camp Organ"                              Narovec
  March--"Steel King"                            St. Clair

                      Musical Selection.

  Paraphrase--"Melody in F"                     Rubenstein

                          Doxology.

                     The Lord's Prayer.


                    I SHALL BE LIKE HIM.

    When I shall reach the more excellent glory,
      And all my trials are passed,
    I shall behold Him, O wonderful story!
      I shall be like Him at last.

    Cho: I shall be like Him, I shall be like Him,
      And in His beauty shall shine;
    I shall be like Him, wondrously like Him,
      Jesus my Savior divine.

    We shall not wait till the glorious dawning
      Breaks on the vision so fair,
    Now we may welcome the heavenly morning,
      Now we His image may bear.

    More and more like Him, repeat the blest story,
      Over and over again,
    Changed by His Spirit from glory to glory,
      I shall be satisfied then.

                                Prayer.

  Piano Solo                                J. S. Hathaway
  Selection--From "Romeo and Juliet"                Gounod


THE VIRTUE OF SHAME.

Confession is a duty too little regarded even by many Christians. Some
men are ashamed to confess that they have done wrong. Sir John Lubbock
says: "It is well to be ashamed of yourself if you are in the wrong; but
never be ashamed to own it." The Bible says: "Confess your faults one to
another."


CONQUEST.

    Creation's heir, the world, the world is mine.--Goldsmith.
    All things are yours.--Paul.

    The world is mine. I hold no title-deed
    To one small acre, yet have all I need,
    And should Dame Fortune proffer me her store
    I could not linger wistful, at her door.

    Unfortunate is he beyond compute,
    Whose love of fortune makes his conscience mute.
    I will not look to fortune. I will do
    My best, though small that best to her or you.

    All things are mine. I walk with firmer tread
    Than Caesar at his best; for I am led
    By mightier One than Fortune or than Fate,
    And I shall conquer all things, soon or late.

    All things? Yes, all. Then well may Fortune frown,
    And clutch with trembling hand her imperial crown.
    I will stoop to conquer. I will rise
    And climb the rugged path where duty lies.

  Sermon                                      Geo. L. Herr

                        Benediction.

  March--"Boston Press Club"                     Rollinson
  March--"Yankee Grit"                             Holzman




"CLING TO THE BIBLE."

    Tis the anchor of hope and the lamp that gives light,
      Tis the star that will shine thro' your life's darkest night,
    If you follow its guidance, you'll always be right,
      So cling to the Bible and walk in its light.


To neglect, reject or doubt the Bible in any particular is but an
entering wedge to spiritual apathy. The "Bible tinkers" of this or any
other age have been men whose hearts are cold and whose soul saving
powers were limited.

To obey the Bible, will lead to a perfect salvation, make possible a
victorious faith, surmount the difficulties of life and gain an
"inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled and that fadeth not away,
reserved in heaven for you."

Watson says, "The Bible is a rock of diamonds; a chain of pearls; the
sword of the Spirit, a chart by which the Christian sails to eternity,
the map by which he daily walks; the sun dial by which he sets his life;
the balance by which he weighs his actions."




                             The
                            Bible
                           contains
                          3,566,480
                         letters, 810-
                        697 words, 31-
                       175 verses, 1,189
                       chapters, and  66
                      books. The  longest
                     chapter is the 119th
                     Psalm.  The  shortest
                    and middle  chapter the
                   117   Psalm.  The  middle
                 verse is the 8th of the 118th
                 Psalm.  The  longest  name  is
                in  the  8th  chapter of Isaiah.
                The  word  "and"  occurs  46,627
               times;  the "Lord"  858 times. The
              37th chapter  of  Isaiah and the 9th
             chapter  of the  2d book of  Kings  are
            alike.  The longest  verse is  the  9th of
          the 8th  chapter of  Esther and  the shortest
           verse is  the 35th of  the 11th  chapter of
            John.  In  the  21st  verse  of  the 7th
             chapter of Ezra is  the alphabet.  The
               name of  God  is not  mentioned in
                the  book of Esther.  The model
                 prayer is the 17th chapter of
                   John. The 13th chapter of
                    1st Corinthians is the
                       most   practical.
                        It   Contains
                          Knowledge
                          Holiness
                           Wisdom
                          and Love
              The Tree of Life and Knowledge




"DO YOU KNOW THE WORLD IS DYING FOR A LITTLE BIT OF LOVE?"


Practical results are happy homes, husbands and fathers restored to
their families, wives and children made happy, multitudes rescued, and
the world made better.

The magnitude of this work will never be known until Eternity's records
are disclosed. Little did we think twenty years ago that so humble a
beginning would be attended with such remarkable results.

Rev. Herr holds a unique position in the evangelistic field. He is
considered the greatest evangelist among prisoners in the United
States.--Louisville Herald, May 17, 1909.

When you help the missionaries, you help the poor fellow in trouble.
When you help those in trouble, you help yourself, and when you thus
help the missionary, the outcast, and yourself, God will help you.


OUR MOTTO:

      "Seeking the lost."
      "Helping the helpless to help themselves."
    All along life's pathway there are men and women in need:
        Go and help somebody just now.
    With a word of kindness or a loving deed,
        Go and help somebody just now.


Dear Friend--Our country is taxed with a burden of thousands of
prisoners. These people are crippled, not in body, not in mind, but
almost always in morals, which is the most serious. It is to help or
recover them that we are giving our lives. Our labors have not been in
vain, as the testimonials will show you. We want you to "hold the rope
while we go down into the pit," by subscribing for our support and
transportation in this work of prison evangelism; and in so doing you
become the benefactor of a submerged class.

May we not hope to have your check to help in this concerted effort? I
am,

                                          Yours sincerely,
                                              GEO. L. HERR,
                                                   Louisville, Ky.




    "He that hath the Son, hath life, and he that hath not the Son
    of God hath not life."--1 John 5:12.

    "How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?"--Heb.
    2:3.

    "For what shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world
    and lose his own soul?"--Mark 8:36.

    "But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness; and
    all these things shall be added unto you."--Matt. 6:33.





GET REV. HERR'S NEW BOOK.


Entitled "The Nation Behind Prison Bars," for your good; but chiefly for
the good of others.

The nation behind the bars is an interesting nation, a pitiful nation, a
needy nation. Help them and interest yourself in them by buying and
reading this book.

"You have a superb record."--Rev. Horace G. Ogden, D.D.

"He has wide experience on both sides of the line."--Rev. H. C.
Morrison, Editor Pentecostal Herald.

"His labors are abundantly blessed."--Rev. Joseph Severance.

"The large number who have been helped by hearing your message will be
still further benefited by reading your book."--Rev. Albert J. Steelman,
Ph.D., Chaplain, Illinois State Penitentiary.

"You and your good wife were father and mother to the prisoners."--John
R. Pflanz, Jailer.

"George L. Herr is not the man to do anything in an ordinary way."--Rev.
D. J. Starr, D.D., Chaplain of Columbus, O., Penitentiary.

"His work among prisoners has been very successful, and through his
efforts many erring creatures have been induced to reform."--Charles F.
Grainger.