VOYAGES from MONTREAL
THROUGH THE CONTINENT of NORTH AMERICA

TO THE
FROZEN and PACIFIC OCEANS
IN 1789 and 1793

WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE RISE
AND STATE OF THE FUR TRADE

By

ALEXANDER MACKENZIE


WITH MAP


IN TWO VOLUMES

VOL. II.


NEW YORK
A. S. BARNES AND COMPANY
1903




Registered at the
Library of Congress, August, 1902
A. S. BARNES & COMPANY




Table of Contents.


CHAPTER I.

Removed from the tent to the house.  Build habitations
 for the people.  The hardships they suffer.  Violent
 hurricane.  Singular circumstances attending
 it.  The commencement of the new year.  An
 Indian cured of a dangerous wound.  State of
 the weather.  Curious customs among the Indians,
 on the death of a relation.  Account of a
 quarrel.  An Indian's reasoning on it.  Murder
 of one of the Indians.  The cause of it.  Some
 account of the Rocky Mountain Indians.  Curious
 circumstance respecting a woman in labour, etc.  A
 dispute between two Indians, which arose from
 gaming.  An account of one of their games.  Indian
 superstition.  Mildness of the season.  The Indians
 prepare snow shoes.  Singular customs.  Further
 account of their manners.  The slavish state of the
 women.  Appearance of spring.  Dispatch canoes
 with the trade to Fort Chepewyan.  Make preparations
 for the voyage of discovery.


CHAPTER II.

Proceed on the voyage of discovery.  Beautiful
 scenery.  The canoe too heavily laden.  The
 country in a state of combustion.  Meet with a
 hunting party.  State of the river, etc.  Meet
 with Indians.  See the tracks of bears, and one of
 their dens.  Sentiment of an Indian.  Junction of
 the Bear River.  Appearance of the country.  State
 of the river.  Observe a fall of timber.  Abundance
 of animals.  See some bears.  Come in sight of the
 rocky mountains.  The canoe receives an injury and
 is repaired.  Navigation dangerous.  Rapids and
 falls.  Succession of difficulties and dangers.


CHAPTER III.

Continuation of difficulties and dangers.  Discontents
 among the people.  State of the river and
 its banks.  Volcanic chasms in the earth.  Dispatch
 various persons to discover ways across the
 mountain.  Obstacles present themselves on all
 sides.  Preparations made to attempt the mountain.
 Account of the ascent with the canoe and baggage.
 The trees that are found there.  Arrive at the
 river.  Extraordinary circumstances of it.  Curious
 hollows in the rocks.  Prepare the canoe.  Renew
 our progress up the river.  The state of it.  Leave
 some tokens of amity for the natives.  The weather
 very cold.  Lost a book of my observations for
 several days.  Continue to proceed up the river.
 Send a letter down the current in a rum-keg.
 Came to the forks, and proceed up the Eastern
 branch.  Circumstances of it.


CHAPTER IV.

Continue our voyage.  Heavy fog.  The water
 rises.  Succession of courses.  Progressive account
 of this branch.  Leave the canoe to proceed,
 and ascend a hill to reconnoitre.  Climb a tree to
 extend my view of the country.  Return to the
 River.  The canoe not arrived.  Go in search of
 it.  Extreme heat, musquitoes, etc.  Increasing anxiety,
 respecting the canoe.  It at length appears.  Violent
 storm.  Circumstances of our progress.  Forced
 to haul the canoe up the stream by the branches
 of trees.  Succession of courses.  Wild parsnips
 along the river.  Expect to meet with natives.  Courses
 continued.  Fall in with some natives.  Our
 intercourse with them.  Account of their dress, arms,
 utensils, and manners, etc.  New discouragements
 and difficulties present themselves.


CHAPTER V.

Continue the voyage.  State of the river.  Succession
 of courses.  Sentiment of the guide.  Conical
 mountain.  Continuation of courses.  Leave the main
 branch.  Enter another.  Description of it.  Saw
 beaver.  Enter a lake.  Arrive at the upper source
 of the Unjigah, or Peace River.  Land, and cross
 to a second lake.  Local circumstances.  Proceed
 to a third lake.  Enter a river.  Encounter
 various difficulties.  In danger of being lost.  The
 circumstances of that situation described.  Alarm
 and dissatisfaction among the people.  They
 are at length composed.  The canoe repaired.  Roads
 cut through woods.  Pass morasses.  The guide
 deserts.  After a succession of difficulties, dangers,
 and toilsome marches, we arrive at the great river.


CHAPTER VI.

Rainy night.  Proceed on the great river.  Circumstances
 of it.  Account of courses.  Come to rapids.  Observe
 several smokes.  See a flight of white ducks.  Pass
 over a carrying-place with the canoe, etc.  The
 difficulties of that passage.  Abundance
 of wild onions.  Re-embark on the river.  See some
 of the natives.  They desert their camp and fly into
 the woods.  Courses continued.  Kill a red deer,
 etc.  Circumstances of the river.  Arrive at an Indian
 habitation.  Description of it.  Account of a curious
 machine to catch fish.  Land to procure bark for the
 purpose of constructing a new canoe.  Conceal a
 quantity of pemmican for provision on our
 return.  Succession of courses.  Meet with some
 of the natives.  Our intercourse with them.  Their
 information respecting the river, and the country.
 Description of those people.


CHAPTER VII.

Renew our voyage, accompanied by two of the natives.
 Account of courses.  State of the river.  Arrive at a
 subterranean house.  See several natives.  Brief
 description of them.  Account of our conference with
 them.  Saw other natives.  Description of them.  Their
 conduct, etc.  The account which they gave of the
 country.  The narrative of a female prisoner.  The
 perplexities of my situation.  Specimen of the
 language of two tribes.  Change the plan of my
 journey.  Return up the river.  Succession of dangers
 and difficulties.  Land on an island to build
 another canoe.


CHAPTER VIII.

Make preparations to build a canoe.  Engage in that
 important work.  It proceeds with great expedition.
 The guide who had deserted arrives with another
 Indian.  He communicates agreeable intelligence.  They
 take an opportunity to quit the island.  Complete
 the canoe.  Leave the island, which was now named the
 Canoe Island.  Obliged to put the people on short
 allowance.  Account of the navigation.  Difficult
 ascent of a rapid.  Fresh perplexities.  Continue our
 voyage up the river.  Meet the guide and some of his
 friends.  Conceal some pemmican and other
 articles.  Make preparations for proceeding over
 land.  Endeavour to secure the canoe till our
 return.  Proceed on our journey.  Various circumstances
 of it.


CHAPTER IX.

Continue our journey.  Embark on a river.  Come to a
 weir.  Dexterity of the natives in passing it.  Arrive
 at a village.  Alarm occasioned among the natives.  The
 subsequent favourable reception, accompanied with a
 banquet of ceremony.  Circumstances of it.  Description
 of a village, its houses, and places of
 devotion.  Account of the customs, mode of living, and
 superstition of the inhabitants.  Description of the
 chief's canoe.  Leave the place, and proceed on
 our voyage.


CHAPTER X.

Renew our voyage.  Circumstances of the river.
 Land at the house of a chief.  Entertained by
 him.  Carried down the river with great rapidity
 to another house.  Received with kindness.  Occupations
 of the inhabitants on its banks.  Leave the canoe
 at a fall.  Pass over land to another village.
 Some account of it.  Obtain a view of an arm of
 the sea.  Lose our dog.  Procure another canoe.
 Arrive at the arm of the sea.  Circumstances of
 it.  One of our guides returns home.
 Coast along a bay.  Some description of it.  Meet
 with Indians.  Our communication with them.
 Their suspicious conduct towards us.  Pass onwards.
 Determine the latitude and longitude.
 Return to the river.  Dangerous encounter with
 the Indians.  Proceed on our journey.


CHAPTER XI.

Return up the river.  Slow progress of the canoe,
 from the strength of the current.  The hostile
 party of the natives precedes us.  Impetuous conduct
 of my people.  Continue our very tedious
 voyage.  Come to some houses; received with
 great kindness.  Arrive at the principal, or Salmon
 Village.  Our present reception very different from
 that we experienced on our former visit.
 Continue our journey.  Circumstances of it.
 Find our dog.  Arrive at the Upper, or Friendly
 Village.  Meet with a very kind reception.  Some
 further account of the manners and customs of
 its inhabitants.  Brief vocabulary of their language.


CHAPTER XII.

Leave the Friendly Village.  Attentions of the natives
 at our departure.  Stop to divide our provisions.
 Begin to ascend the mountains.  Circumstances of the
 ascent.  Journey continued.  Arrive at the place from
 whence we set out by land.  Meet with Indians there.
 Find the canoe, and all the other articles in a state
 of perfect security and preservation.  Means employed
 to compel the restoration of articles which were
 afterwards stolen.  Proceed on our homeward bound
 voyage.  Some account of the natives on the river.
 The canoe is run on a rock, etc.  Circumstances
 of the voyage.  Enter the Peace River.  Statement of
 courses.  Continue our route.  Circumstances of it.
 Proceed onwards in a small canoe, with an Indian,
 to the lower fort, leaving the rest of the people
 to follow me.  Arrive at Fort Chepewyan.  The voyage
 concluded.




CHAPTER I.


DECEMBER 23, 1792.

I this day removed from the tent into the house which had been erected
for me, and set all the men to begin the buildings intended for their
own habitation.  Materials sufficient to erect a range of five houses
for them, of about seventeen by twelve feet, were already collected.  It
would be considered by the inhabitants of a milder climate, as a great
evil, to be exposed to the weather at this rigorous season of the year,
but these people are inured to it, and it is necessary to describe in
some measure the hardships which they undergo without a murmur, in order
to convey a general notion of them.

The men who were new with me, left this place in the beginning of last
May, and went to the Rainy Lake in canoes, laden with packs of fur,
which, from the immense length of the voyage, and other concurring
circumstances, is a most severe trial of patience and perseverance:
there they do not remain a sufficient time for ordinary repose, when
they take a load of goods in exchange, and proceed on their return, in a
great measure, day and night.  They had been arrived near two months,
and, all that time, had been continually engaged in very toilsome
labour, with nothing more than a common shed to protect them from the
frost and snow.  Such is the life which these people lead; and is
continued with unremitting exertion, till their strength is lost in
premature old age.

The Canadians remarked, that the weather we had on the 25th, 26th, and
27th of this month, denoted such as we might expect in the three
succeeding months.  On the 29th, the wind being at North-East, and the
weather calm and cloudy, a rumbling noise was heard in the air like
distant thunder, when the sky cleared away in the South-West; from
whence there blew a perfect hurricane, which lasted till eight.  Soon
after it commenced, the atmosphere became so warm that it dissolved all
the snow on the ground; even the ice was covered with water, and had the
same appearance as when it is breaking up in the spring.  From eight to
nine the weather became calm, but immediately after a wind arose from
the North-East with equal violence, with clouds, rain, and hail, which
continued throughout the night till the evening of the next day, when it
turned to snow.  One of the people who wintered at Fort Dauphin in the
year 1780, when the small pox first appeared there, informed me, that
the weather there was of a similar description.


_January 1, 1793._--On the first day of January, my people, in
conformity to the usual custom, awoke me at the break of day with the
discharge of fire-arms, with which they congratulated the appearance of
the new year.  In return, they were treated with plenty of spirits, and
when there is any flour, cakes are always added to their regales, which
was the case, on the present occasion.

On my arrival here last fall, I found that one of the young Indians had
lost the use of his right hand by the bursting of a gun, and that his
thumb had been maimed in such a manner as to hang only by a small strip
of flesh.  Indeed, when he was brought to me, his wound was in such an
offensive state, and emitted such a putrid smell, that it required all
the resolution I possessed to examine it.  His friends had done every
thing in their power to relieve him; but as it consisted only in singing
about him, and blowing upon his hand, the wound, as may be well
imagined, had got into the deplorable state in which I found it.  I was
rather alarmed at the difficulty of the case, but as the young man's
life was in a state of hazard, I was determined to risk my surgical
reputation, and accordingly took him under my care.  I immediately
formed a poultice of bark, stripped from the roots of the spruce-fir,
which I applied to the wound, having first washed it with the juice of
the bark: this proved a very painful dressing: in a few days, however,
the wound was clean, and the proud flesh around it destroyed.  I wished
very much in this state of the business to have separated the thumb from
the hand, which I well knew must be effected before the cure could be
performed; but he would not consent to that operation, till, by the
application of vitriol, the flesh by which the thumb was suspended, was
shrivelled almost to a thread.  When I had succeeded in this object, I
perceived that the wound was closing rather faster than I desired.  The
salve I applied on the occasion was made of the Canadian balsam, wax and
tallow dropped from a burning candle into water.  In short, I was so
successful, that about Christmas my patient engaged in a hunting party,
and brought me the tongue of an elk: nor was he finally ungrateful.
When he left me I received the warmest acknowledgments, both from
himself and his relations with whom he departed, for my care of him.  I
certainly did not spare my time or attention on the occasion, as I
regularly dressed his wound three times a day, during the course of a
month.

On the 5th in the morning the weather was calm, clear, and very cold;
the wind blew from the South-West, and in the course of the afternoon it
began to thaw.  I had already observed at Athabasca, that this wind
never failed to bring us clear mild weather, whereas, when it blew from
the opposite quarter, it produced snow.  Here it is much more
perceptible, for if it blows hard South-West for four hours, a thaw is
the consequence, and if the wind is at North-East it brings sleet and
snow.  To this cause it may be attributed, that there is now so little
snow in this part of the world.  These warm winds come off the Pacific
Ocean, which cannot, in a direct line, be very far from us; the distance
being so short, that though they pass over mountains covered with snow,
there is not time for them to cool.

There being several of the natives at the house at this time, one of
them, who had received an account of the death of his father, proceeded
in silence to his lodge, and began to fire off his gun.  As it was
night, and such a noise being so uncommon at such an hour, especially
when it was so often repeated, I sent my interpreter to inquire into the
cause of it, when he was informed by the man himself, that this was a
common custom with them on the death of a near relation, and was a
warning to their friends not to approach, or intrude upon them, as they
were, in consequence of their loss, become careless of life.  The chief,
to whom the deceased person was also related, appeared with his war-cap
on his head, which is only worn on these solemn occasions, or when
preparing for battle, and confirmed to me this singular custom of firing
guns, in order to express their grief for the death of relations and
friends.[1] The women alone indulge in tears on such occasions; the men
considering it as a mark of pusillanimity and a want of fortitude to
betray any personal tokens of sensibility or sorrow.

The Indians informed me, that they had been to hunt at a large lake,
called by the Knisteneaux, the Slave Lake, which derived its name from
that of its original inhabitants, who were called Slaves.  They
represented it as a large body of water, and that it lies about one
hundred and twenty miles due East from this place.  It is well known to
the Knisteneaux, who are among the inhabitants of the plains on the
banks of the Saskatchiwine river; for formerly, when they used to come
to make war in this country, they came in their canoes to that lake, and
left them there; from thence, there is a beaten path all the way to the
Fork, or East branch of this river, which was their war-road.


_January 10._--Among the people who were now here, there were two
Rocky Mountain Indians, who declared, that the people to whom we had
given that denomination, are by no means entitled to it, and that their
country has ever been in the vicinity of our present situation.  They
said, in support of their assertion, that these people were entirely
ignorant of those parts which are adjacent to the mountain, as well as
the navigation of the river; that the Beaver Indians had greatly
encroached upon them, and would soon force them to retire to the foot of
these mountains.  They represented themselves as the only real natives
of that country then with me; and added, that the country, and that part
of the river that intervenes between this place and the mountains, bear
much the same appearance as that around us; that the former abounds with
animals, but that the course of the latter is interrupted, near, and in
the mountains, by successive rapids and considerable falls.  These men
also informed me, that there is another great river towards the midday
sun, whose current runs in that direction, and that the distance from it
is not great across the mountains.

The natives brought me plenty of furs.  The small quantity of snow, at
this time, was particularly favourable for hunting the beaver, as from
this circumstance, those animals could, with greater facility, be traced
from their lodges to their lurking-places.

On the 12th our hunter arrived, having left his mother-in-law, who was
lately become a widow with three small children, and in actual labour of
a fourth.  Her daughter related this circumstance to the women here
without the least appearance of concern, though she represented her as
in a state of great danger, which probably might proceed from her being
abandoned in this unnatural manner.  At the same time without any
apparent consciousness of her own barbarous negligence, if the poor
abandoned woman should die, she would most probably lament her with
great outcries, and, perhaps cut off one or two joints of her fingers as
tokens of her grief.  The Indians, indeed, consider the state of a woman
in labour as among the most trifling occurrences of corporal pain to
which human nature is subject, and they may be, in some measure
justified in this apparent insensibility from the circumstances of that
situation among themselves.  It is by no means uncommon in the hasty
removal of their camps from one position to another, for a woman to be
taken in labour, to deliver herself in her way, without any assistance
or notice from her associates in her journey, and to overtake them
before they complete the arrangements of their evening station, with her
new-born babe on her back.

I was this morning threatened with a very unpleasant event, which,
however, I was fortunately able to control.  Two young Indians being
engaged in one of their games, a dispute ensued, which rose to such a
height, that they drew their knives, and if I had not happened to have
appeared, they would I doubt not, have employed them to very bloody
purposes.  So violent was their rage, that after I had turned them both
out of the house, and severely reprimanded them, they stood in the fort
for at least half an hour, looking at each other with a most vindictive
aspect, and in sullen silence.

The game which produced this state of bitter enmity, is called that of
the Platter, from a principal article of it.  The Indians play at it in
the following manner.

The instruments of it consist of a platter, or dish, made of wood or
bark, and six round or square but flat pieces of metal, wood, or stone,
whose sides or surfaces are of different colours.  These are put into
the dish, and after being for some time shaken together, are thrown into
the air, and received again into the dish with considerable dexterity;
when, by the number that are turned up of the same mark or colour, the
game is regulated.  If there should be equal numbers, the throw is not
reckoned; if two or four, the platter changes hands.

On the 13th, one of these people came to me, and presented in himself a
curious example of Indian superstition.  He requested me to furnish him
with a remedy that might be applied to the joints of his legs and
thighs, of which he had, in a great measure lost the use for five
winters.  This affliction he attributed to his cruelty about that time,
when having found a wolf with two whelps in an old beaver lodge, he set
fire to it and consumed them.

The winter had been so mild, that the swans had but lately left us, and
at this advanced period there was very little snow on the ground: it
was, however, at this time a foot and a half in depth, in the environs
of the establishment below this, which is at the distance of about
seventy leagues.

On the 28th the Indians were now employed in making their snow-shoes, as
the snow had not hitherto fallen in sufficient quantity to render them
necessary.


_February 2._--The weather now became very cold, and it froze so hard
in the night that my watch stopped; a circumstance that had never
happened to this watch since my residence in the country.

There was a lodge of Indians here, who were absolutely starving with
cold and hunger.  They had lately lost a near relation, and had
according to custom, thrown away every thing belonging to them, and even
exchanged the few articles of raiment which they possessed, in order, as
I presume, to get rid of every thing that may bring the deceased to
their remembrance.  They also destroy every thing belonging to any
deceased person, except what they consign to the grave with the late
owner of them.  We had some difficulty to make them comprehend that the
debts of a man who dies should be discharged, if he left any furs behind
him: but those who understand this principle of justice, and profess to
adhere it, never fail to prevent the appearance of any skins beyond such
as may be necessary to satisfy the debts of their dead relation.

On the 8th I had an observation for the longitude.  In the course of
this day one of my men, who had been some time with the Indians, came to
inform me that one of them had threatened to stab him; and on his
preferring a complaint to the man with whom he now lived, and to whom I
had given him in charge, he replied, that he had been very imprudent to
play and quarrel with the young Indians out of his lodge, where no one
would dare to come and quarrel with him; but that if he had lost his
life where he had been, it would have been the consequence of his own
folly.  Thus, even among these children of nature, it appears that a
man's house is his castle, where the protection of hospitality is
rigidly maintained.

The hard frost which had prevailed from the beginning of February
continued to the 16th of March, when the wind blowing from the
South-West, the weather became mild.

On the 22d a wolf was so bold as to venture among the Indian lodges, and
was very near carrying off a child.

I had another observation of Jupiter and his satellites for the
longitude.  On the 13th some geese were seen, and these birds are always
considered as the harbingers of spring.  On the first of April my
hunters shot five of them.  This was a much earlier period than I ever
remember to have observed the visits of wild fowl in this part of the
world.  The weather had been mild for the last fortnight, and there was
a promise of its continuance.  On the 5th the snow had entirely
disappeared.

At half past four this morning I was awakened to be informed that an
Indian had been killed.  I accordingly hastened to the camp, where I
found two women employed in rolling up the dead body of a man, called
the White Partridge, in a beaver robe, which I had lent him.  He had
received four mortal wounds from a dagger, two within the collar bone,
one in the left breast, and another in the small of the back, with two
cuts across his head.  The murderer, who had been my hunter throughout
the winter, had fled; and it was pretended that several relations of the
deceased were gone in pursuit of him.  The history of this unfortunate
event is as follows:--

These two men had been comrades for four years; the murderer had three
wives; and the young man who was killed, becoming enamoured of one of
them, the husband consented to yield her to him, with the reserved power
of claiming her as his property, when it should be his pleasure.

This connection was uninterrupted for near three years, when, whimsical
as it may appear, the husband became jealous, and the public amour was
suspended.  The parties, how ever, made their private assignations,
which caused the woman to be so ill treated by her husband, that the
paramour was determined to take her away by force; and this project
ended in his death.  This is a very common practice among the Indians,
and generally terminates in very serious and fatal quarrels.

In consequence of this event all the Indians went away in great apparent
hurry and confusion, and in the evening not one of them was to be seen
about the fort.

The Beaver and Rocky Mountain Indians, who traded with us in this river,
did not exceed an hundred and fifty men, capable of bearing arms; two
thirds of whom call themselves Beaver Indians.  The latter differ only
from the former, as they have, more or less, imbibed the customs and
manners of the Knisteneaux.  As I have already observed, they are
passionately fond of liquor, and in the moments of their festivity will
barter any thing they have in their possession for it.

Though the Beaver Indians made their peace with the Knisteneaux, at
Peace Point, as already mentioned, yet they did not secure a state of
amity from others of the same nation, who had driven away the natives of
the Saskatchiwine and Missinipy Rivers, and joined at the head water of
the latter, called the Beaver River: from thence they proceeded West by
the Slave Lake just described, on their war excursions, which they often
repeated, even till the Beaver Indians had procured arms, which was in
the year 1782.  If it so happened that they missed them, they proceeded
Westward till they were certain of wreaking their vengeance on those of
the Rocky Mountain, who being without arms, became an easy prey to their
blind and savage fury.  All the European articles they possessed,
previous to the year 1780, were obtained from the Knisteneaux and
Chepewyans, who brought them from Fort Churchill, and for which they
were made to pay an extravagant price.

As late as the year 1786, when the first traders from Canada arrived on
the banks of this river, the natives employed bows and snares, but at
present very little use is made of the former, and the latter are no
longer known.  They still entertain a great dread of their natural
enemies, but they are since become so well armed, that the others now
call them their allies.  The men are in general of a comely appearance,
and fond of personal decoration.  The women are of a contrary
disposition, and the slaves of the men: in common with all the Indian
tribes polygamy is allowed among them.  They are very subject to
jealousy, and fatal consequences frequently result from the indulgence
of that passion.  But notwithstanding the vigilance and severity which
is exercised by the husband, it seldom happens that a woman is without
her favourite, who, in the absence of the husband, exacts the same
submission, and practises the same tyranny.  And so premature is the
tender passion, that it is sometimes known to invigorate so early a
period of life as the age of eleven or twelve years.  The women are not
very prolific: a circumstance which may be attributed in a great
measure, to the hardships that they suffer for except a few small dogs,
they alone perform that labour which is allotted to beasts of burthen in
other countries.  It is not uncommon, while the men carry nothing but a
gun, that their wives and daughters follow with such weighty burdens,
that if they lay them down they cannot replace them, and that is a
kindness which the men will not deign to perform; so that during their
journeys they are frequently obliged to lean against a tree for a small
portion of temporary relief.  When they arrive at the place which their
tyrants have chosen for their encampment, they arrange the whole in a
few minutes, by forming a curve of poles, meeting at the top, and
expanding into circles of twelve or fifteen feet diameter at the bottom,
covered with dressed skins of the moose sewed together.  During these
preparations, the men sit down quietly to the enjoyment of their pipes,
if they happen to have any tobacco.  But notwithstanding this abject
state of slavery and submission, the women have a considerable influence
on the opinion of the men in every thing except their own domestic
situation.

These Indians are excellent hunters, and their exercise in that capacity
is so violent as to reduce them in general to a very meagre appearance.
Their religion is of a very contracted nature, and I never witnessed any
ceremony of devotion which they had not borrowed from the Knisteneaux,
their feasts and fasts being in imitation of that people.  They are more
vicious and warlike than the Chepewyans, from whence they sprang, though
they do not possess their selfishness, for while they have the means of
purchasing their necessaries, they are liberal and generous, but when
those are exhausted they become errant beggars: they are, however,
remarkable for their honesty, for in the whole tribe there were only two
women and a man who had been known to have swerved from that virtue, and
they were considered as objects of disregard and reprobation.  They are
afflicted with but few diseases, and their only remedies consist in
binding the temples, procuring perspiration, singing, and blowing on the
sick person, or affected part.  When death overtakes any of them, their
property, as I have before observed, is sacrificed and destroyed; nor is
there any failure of lamentation or mourning on such occasion: they who
are more nearly related to the departed person, black their faces, and
sometimes cut off their hair; they also pierce their arms with knives
and arrows.  The grief of the females is carried to a still greater
excess; they not only cut their hair, and cry and howl, but they will
sometimes, with the utmost deliberation, employ some sharp instrument to
separate the nail from the finger, and then force back the flesh beyond
the first joint, which they immediately amputate.  But this
extraordinary mark of affliction is only displayed on the death of a
favourite son, a husband, or a father.  Many of the old women have so
often repeated this ceremony, that they have not a complete finger
remaining on either hand.  The women renew their lamentations at the
graves of their departed relatives, for a long succession of years.
They appear, in common with all the Indian tribes, to be very fond of
their children, but they are as careless in their mode of swadling them
in their infant state, as they are of their own dress: the child is laid
down on aboard, of about two feet long, covered with a bed of moss, to
which it is fastened by bandages, the moss being changed as often as the
occasion requires.  The chief of the nation had no less than nine wives,
and children in proportion.

When traders first appeared among these people, the Canadians were
treated with the utmost hospitality and attention; but they have, by
their subsequent conduct, taught the natives to withdraw that respect
from them, and sometimes to treat them with indignity.  They differ very
much from the Chepewyans and Knisteneaux, in the abhorrence they profess
of any carnal communication between their women and the white people.
They carry their love of gaming to excess; they will pursue it for a
succession of days and nights, and no apprehension of ruin, nor
influence of domestic affection, will restrain them from the indulgence
of it.  They are a quick, lively, active people, with a keen,
penetrating, dark eye; and though they are very susceptible of anger,
are as easily appeased.  The males eradicate their beards, and the
females their hair in every part, except their heads, where it is strong
and black, and without a curl.  There are many old men among them, but
they are in general ignorant of the space in which they have been
inhabitants of the earth, though one of them told me that he recollected
sixty winters.

An Indian in some measure explained his age to me, by relating that he
remembered the opposite hills and plains, now interspersed with groves
of poplars, when they were covered with moss, and without any animal
inhabitant but the rein-deer.  By degrees, he said, the face of the
country changed to its present appearance, when the elk came from the
East, and was followed by the buffalo; the rein-deer then retired to the
long range of high lands that, at a considerable distance, run parallel,
with this river.

On the 20th of April I had an observation of Jupiter and his satellites,
for the longitude, and we were now visited by our summer companions the
gnats and musquitoes.  On the other side of the river, which was yet
covered with ice, the plains were delightful; the trees were budding,
and many plants in blossom.  Mr. Mackay brought me a bunch of flowers of
a pink colour, and a yellow button, encircled with six leaves of a light
purple.  The change in the appearance of nature was as sudden as it was
pleasing, for a few days only were passed away since the ground was
covered with snow.  On the 25th the river was cleared of the ice.

I new found that the death of the man called the White Partridge, had
deranged all the plans which I had settled with the Indians for the
spring hunting.  They had assembled at some distance from the fort, and
sent an embassy to me, to demand rum to drink, that they might have an
opportunity of crying for their deceased brother.  It would be
considered as an extreme degradation in an Indian to weep when sober,
but a state of intoxication sanctions all irregularities.  On my
refusal, they threatened to go to war, which, from motives of interest
as well as humanity, we did our utmost to discourage; and as a second
message was brought by persons of some weight among these people, and on
whom I could depend, I thought it prudent to comply with the demand, on
an express condition, that they would continue peaceably at home.

The month of April being now past, in the early part of which I was most
busily employed in trading with the Indians, I ordered our old canoes to
be repaired with bark, and added four new ones to them, when, with the
furs and provisions I had purchased, six canoes were loaded and
dispatched on the 8th of May, for Fort Chepewyan.  I had, however,
retained six of the men, who agreed to accompany me on my projected
voyage of discovery.  I also engaged my hunters, and closed the business
of the year for the company by writing my public and private dispatches.

Having ascertained, by various observations, the latitude of this place
to be 56. 9. North, and longitude 117. 35. 15. West: on the 9th day of
May, I found, that my achrometer was one hour forty-six minutes slow to
apparent time; the mean going of it I had found to be twenty-two seconds
slow in twenty-four hours.  Having settled this point, the canoe was put
into the water; her dimensions were twenty-five feet long within,
exclusive of the curves of stem and stern, twenty-six inches hold, and
four feet nine inches beam.  At the same time she was so light, that two
men could carry her on a good road three or four miles without resting.
In this slender vessel, we shipped provisions, goods for presents, arms,
ammunition, and baggage, to the weight of three thousand pounds, and an
equipage of ten people; viz. Alexander Mackay, Joseph Landry, Charles
Ducette,[2] Francois Beaulieux, Baptist Bisson, Francois Courtois, and
Jaques Beauchamp, with two Indians, as hunters and interpreters.  One of
them, when a boy, used to be so idle, that he obtained the reputable
name of Cancre, which he still possesses.  With these persons I embarked
at seven in the evening.  My winter interpreter, with another person,
whom I left here to take care of the fort, and supply the natives with
ammunition during the summer, shed tears on the reflection of those
dangers which we might encounter in our expedition, while my own people
offered up their prayers that we might return in safety from it.


[1] When they are drinking together, they frequently present their guns
to each other, when any of the parties have not other means of procuring
rum.  On such an occasion they always discharge their pieces, as a
proof, I imagine, of their being in good order, and to determine the
quantity of liquor they may propose to get in exchange for them.

[2]Joseph Landry and Charles Ducette were with me in my former voyage.




CHAPTER II.


MAY, 1793.

 _Thursday, 9._--We began our voyage with a course South by West
against a strong current one mile and three quarters, South-West by
South one mile, and landed before eight on an island for the night.


_Friday, 10._--The weather was clear and pleasant, though there was a
keenness in the air; and at a quarter past three in the morning we
continued our voyage, steering South-West three quarters of a mile,
South-West by South one mile and a quarter, South three quarters of a
mile, South-West by South one quarter of a mile, South-West by West one
mile, South-West by South three miles, South by West three quarters of a
mile, and South-West one mile.  The canoe being strained from its having
been very heavily laden, became so leaky, that we were obliged to land,
unload, and gum it.  As this circumstance took place about twelve, I had
an opportunity of taking an altitude, which made our latitude
55. 58. 48.

When the canoe was repaired we continued our course, steering South-West
by West one mile and an half, when I had the misfortune to drop my
pocket-compass into the water; West half a mile, West-South-West four
miles and an half.  Here, the banks are steep and hilly, and in some
parts undermined by the river.  Where the earth has given way, the face
of the cliffs discovers numerous strata, consisting of reddish earth and
small stones, bitumen, and a greyish earth, below which, near the
water-edge, is a red stone.  Water issues from most of the banks, and
the ground on which it spreads is covered with a thin white scurf, or
particles of a saline substance: there are several of these salt
springs.  At half past six in the afternoon the young men landed, when
they killed an elk and wounded a buffalo.  In this spot we formed our
encampment for the night.

From the place which we quitted this morning, the West side of the river
displayed a succession of the most beautiful scenery I had ever beheld.
The ground rises at intervals to a considerable height, and stretching
inwards to a considerable distance: at every interval or pause in the
rise, there is a very gently-ascending space or lawn, which is alternate
with abrupt precipices to the summit of the whole, or, at least as far
as the eye could distinguish.  This magnificent theatre of nature has
all the decorations which the trees and animals of the country can
afford it: groves of poplars in every shape vary the scene; and their
intervals are enlivened with vast herds of elks and buffaloes: the
former choosing the steeps and uplands, and the latter preferring the
plains.  At this time the buffaloes were attended with their young ones
who were frisking about them: and it appeared that the elks would soon
exhibit the same enlivening circumstance.  The whole country displayed
an exuberant verdure; the trees that bear a blossom were advancing fast
to that delightful appearance, and the velvet rind of their branches
reflecting the oblique rays of a rising or setting sun, added a splendid
gaiety to the scene, which no expressions of mine are qualified to
describe.  The East side of the river consists of a range of high land
covered with the white spruce and the soft birch, while the banks abound
with the alder and the willow.  The water continued to rise, and the
current being proportionately strong, we made a greater use of setting
poles than paddles.


_Saturday, 11._--The weather was overcast.  With a strong wind a-head,
we embarked at four in the morning, and left all the fresh meat behind
us, but the portion which had been assigned to the kettle; the canoe
being already too heavily laden.  Our course was West-South-West one
mile, where a small river flowed in from the East, named _Quiscatina
Sepy_, or River with the High Banks; West half a mile, South half a
mile, South-West by West three quarters of a mile, West one mile and a
quarter, South-West a quarter of a mile, South-South-West half a mile,
and West by South a mile and a half.  Here I took a meridian altitude,
which gave 55. 56.  3. North latitude.  We then proceeded West three
miles and a half, West-South-West, where the whole plain was on fire,
one mile, West one mile, and the wind so strong a-head, that it
occasioned the canoe to take in water, and otherwise impeded our
progress.  Here we landed to take time, with the mean of three
altitudes, which made the watch slow 1. 42. 10.

We now proceeded West-South-West one mile and a quarter, where we found
a chief of the Beaver Indians on a hunting party.  I remained, however,
in my canoe, and though it was getting late, I did not choose to encamp
with these people, lest the friends of my hunters might discourage them
from proceeding on the voyage.  We, therefore, continued our course, but
several Indians kept company with us, running along the bank, and
conversing with my people, who were so attentive to them, that they
drove the canoe on a stony flat, so that we were under the necessity of
landing to repair the damages, and put up for the night, though very
contrary to my wishes.  My hunters obtained permission to proceed with
some of these people to their lodges, on the promise of being back by
the break of day; though I was not without some apprehension respecting
them.  The chief, however, and another man, as well as several people
from the lodges, joined us, before we had completed the repair of the
canoe; and they made out a melancholy story, that they had neither
ammunition or tobacco sufficient for their necessary supply during the
summer.  I accordingly referred him to the Fort, where plenty of those
articles were left in the care of my interpreter, by whom they would be
abundantly furnished, if they were active and industrious in pursuing
their occupations.  I did not fail, on this occasion, to magnify the
advantages of the present expedition; observing, at the same time, that
its success would depend on the fidelity and conduct of the young men
who were retained by me to hunt.  The chief also proposed to borrow my
canoe, in order to transport himself and family across the river;
several plausible reasons, it is true, suggested themselves for
resisting his proposition; but when I stated to him, that, as the canoe
was intended for a voyage of such consequence, no woman could be
permitted to be embarked in it, he acquiesced in the refusal.  It was
near twelve at night when he took his leave, after I had gratified him
with a present of tobacco.


_Sunday, 12._--Some of the Indians passed the night with us, and I was
informed by them, that according to our mode of proceeding, we should,
in ten days, get as far as the rocky mountains.  The young men now
returned, to my great satisfaction, and with the appearance of
contentment; though I was not pleased when they dressed themselves in
the clothes which I had given them before we left the Fort, as it
betrayed some latent design.

At four in the morning we proceeded on our voyage, steering West three
miles, including one of our course yesterday, North-West by North four
miles, West two miles and a half, North-West by West a mile and a half,
North by East two miles, North-West by West one mile, and
North-North-West three miles.  After a continuation of our course to the
North for a mile and a half, we landed for the night on an island where
several of the Indians visited us, but unattended by their women, who
remained in their camp, which was at some distance from us.

The land on both sides of the river, during the two last days, is very
much elevated, but particularly in the latter part of it, and, on the
Western side, presents in different places, white, steep, and lofty
cliffs.  Our view being confined by these circumstances, we did not see
so many animals as on the 10th.  Between these lofty boundaries, the
river becomes narrow and in a great measure free from islands; for we
had passed only four: the stream, indeed, was not more than from two
hundred to three hundred yards broad; whereas before these cliffs
pressed upon it, its breadth was twice that extent and besprinkled with
islands.  We killed an elk, and fired several shots at animals from the
canoe.

The greater part of this band being Rocky Mountain Indians, I
endeavoured to obtain some intelligence of our intended route, but they
all pleaded ignorance, and uniformly declared, that they knew nothing of
the country beyond the first mountain: at the same time they were of
opinion, that, from the strength of the current and the rapids we should
not get there by water; though they did not hesitate to express their
surprise at the expedition we had already made.

I inquired, with some anxiety, after an old man who had already given
me an account of the country beyond the limits of his tribe, and was
very much disappointed at being informed, that he had not been seen
for upwards of a moon.  This man had been at war on another large
river beyond the Rocky Mountain, and described to me a fork of it
between the mountains; the Southern branch of which he directed me
to take; from thence, he said, there was a carrying-place of about
a day's march for a young man to get to the river.  To prove the truth
of his relation, he consented, that his son, who had been with him in
those parts, should accompany me; and he accordingly sent him to the
fort some days before my departure; but the preceding night he deserted
with another young man, whose application to attend me as a hunter,
being refused, he persuaded the other to leave me.  I now thought it
right to repeat to them what I had said to the chief of the first band,
respecting the advantages which would be derived from the voyage,
that the young men might be encouraged to remain with me; as without
them I should not have attempted to proceed.


_Monday, 13._--The first object that presented itself to me this
morning was the young man whom I have already mentioned, as having
seduced away my intended guide.  At any other time or place, I should
have chastised him for his past conduct, but in my situation it was
necessary to pass over his offence, lest he should endeavour to exercise
the same influence over those who were so essential to my service.  Of
the deserted he gave no satisfactory account, but continued to express
his wish to attend me in his place, for which he did not possess any
necessary qualifications.

The weather was cloudy, with an appearance of rain; and the Indians
pressed me with great earnestness to pass the day with them, and hoped
to prolong my stay among them by assuring me that the winter yet
lingered in the rocky mountains; but my object was to lose no time, and
having given the chief some tobacco for a small quantity of meat, we
embarked at four, when my young men could not conceal their chagrin at
parting with their friends, for so long a period as the voyage
threatened to occupy.  When I had assured them that in three moons we
should return to them, we proceeded on our course West-North-West half a
mile, West-South-West one mile and a half, West by North three miles,
North-West by West two miles and a half, South-West by West half a mile,
South-South-West a mile and a half, and South-West a mile and a half.
Here I had a meridian altitude, which gave 56. 17. 44. North latitude.

The last course continued a mile and a half, South by West, three
quarters of a mile, South-West by South three miles and a half, and
West-South-West two miles and a half.  Here the land lowered on both
sides, with an increase of wood, and displayed great numbers of animals.
The river also widened from three to five hundred yards, and was full of
islands and flats.  Having continued our course three miles, we made for
the shore at seven, to pass the night.

At the place from whence we proceeded this morning, a river falls in
from the North; there are also several islands, and many rivulets on
either side, which are too small to deserve particular notice.  We
perceived along the river, tracks of large bears, some of which were
nine inches wide, and of a proportionate length.  We saw one of their
dens, or winter-quarters, called _watee_, in an island, which was ten
feet deep, five feet high, and six feet wide; but we had not yet seen
one of those animals.  The Indians entertain great apprehension of this
kind of bear, which is called the grisly bear, and they never venture to
attack it but in a party of at least three or four.  Our hunters, though
they had been much higher than this part of our voyage, by land, knew
nothing of the river.  One of them mentioned, that having been engaged
in a war expedition, his party on their return made their canoes at some
distance below us.  The wind was North throughout the day, and at times
blew with considerable violence.

The apprehensions which I had felt respecting the young men were not
altogether groundless, for the eldest of them told me that his uncle had
last night addressed him in the following manner:--"My nephew, your
departure makes my heart painful.  The white people may be said to rob
us of you.  They are about to conduct you into the midst of our enemies,
and you may nevermore return to us.  Were you not with the Chief,[1] I
know not what I should do, but he requires your attendance, and you must
follow him."


_Tuesday, 14._--The weather was clear, and the air sharp, when we
embarked at half past four.  Our course was South by West one mile and a
half, South-West by South half a mile, South-West.

We here found it necessary to unload, and gum the canoe, in which
operation we lost an hour; when we proceeded on the last course one mile
and a half.  I now took a meridian altitude, which gave 56. 1. 19. North
latitude, and continued to proceed West-South-West two miles and a half.
Here the Bear River which is of a large appearance, falls in from the
East; West three miles and an half, South-South-West one mile and an
half, and South-West four miles and an half, when we encamped upon an
island about seven in the evening.

During the early part of the day, the current was not so strong as we
had generally found it, but towards the evening it became very rapid,
and was broken by numerous islands.  We were gratified as usual, with
the sight of animals.  The land on the West side is very irregular, but
has the appearance of being a good beaver country; indeed we saw some of
those animals in the river.  Wood is in great plenty, and several
rivulets added their streams to the main river.  A goose was the only
article of provision which we procured to-day.  Smoke was seen, but at a
great distance before us.


_Wednesday, 15._--The rain prevented us from continuing our route till
past six in the morning, when our course was South-West by West three
quarters of a mile; at which time we passed a river on the left, West by
South two miles and a half.  The bank was steep, and the current strong.
The last course continued one mile and a half, West-South-West two
miles, where a river flowed in from the right, West by South one mile
and a half, West-North-West one mile, and West by North two miles.  Here
the land takes the form of an high ridge, and cut our course, which was
West for three miles, at right angles.  We now completed the voyage of
this day.

In the preceding night the water rose upwards of two inches, and had
risen in this proportion since our departure.  The wind, which was
West-South-West, blew very hard throughout the day, and with the
strength of the current, greatly impeded our progress.  The river, in
this part of it, is full of islands; and the land, on the South or left
side, is thick with wood.  Several rivulets also fall in from that
quarter.  At the entrance of the last river which we passed, there was a
quantity of wood, which had been cut down by axes, and some by the
beaver.  This fall, however, was not made, in the opinion of my people,
by any of the Indians with whom we were acquainted.

The land to the right is of a very irregular elevation and appearance,
composed in some places of clay, and rocky cliffs, and others exhibiting
stratas of red, green, and yellow colours.  Some parts, indeed, offer a
beautiful scenery, in some degree similar to that which we passed on the
second day of our voyage, and equally enlivened with the elk and the
buffalo, who were feeding in great numbers, and unmolested by the
hunter.  In an island which we passed, there was a large quantity of
white birch, whose bark might be employed in the construction of canoes.


_Thursday, 16._--The weather being clear, we re-embarked at four in
the morning, and proceeded West by North three miles.  Here the land
again appeared as if it run across our course, and a considerable river
discharged itself by various streams.  According to the Rocky Mountain
Indian, it is called the Sinew River.  This spot would be an excellent
situation for a fort or factory, as there is plenty of wood, and every
reason to believe that the country abounds in beaver.  As for the other
animals, they are in evident abundance, as in every direction the elk
and the buffalo are seen in possession of the hills and the plains.  Our
course continued West-North-West three miles and a half, North-West one
mile and a half, South-West by West two miles; (the latitude was by
observation 56. 16. 54.)  North, West by North half a mile,
West-North-West three quarters of a mile; a small river appearing on the
right, North-West one mile and a half, West by North half a mile, West
by South one mile and a half, West one mile; and at seven we formed our
encampment.

Mr. Mackay, and one of the young men, killed two elks, and mortally
wounded a buffalo, but we only took a part of the flesh of the former.
The land above the spot where we encamped, spreads into an extensive
plain, and stretches on to a very high ridge, which, in some parts,
presents a face of rock, but is principally covered with verdure, and
varied with the poplar and white birch tree.  The country is so crowded
with animals as to have the appearance, in some places, of a stall-yard,
from the state of the ground, and the quantity of dung which is
scattered over it.  The soil is black and light.  We this day saw two
grisly and hideous bears.


_Friday, 17._--It froze during the night, and the air was sharp in the
morning, when we continued our course West-North-West three miles and a
half, South-West by South two miles and a half, South-West by West one
mile and a half, West three quarters of a mile, West-South-West one mile
and a quarter, and South-West by South one mile and a half.  At two in
the afternoon the rocky mountains appeared in sight, with their summits
covered with snow, bearing South-West by South: they formed a very
agreeable object to every person in the canoe, as we attained the view
of them much sooner than we expected.  A small river was seen on our
right, and we continued our progress South-West by South six miles, when
we landed at seven, which was our usual hour of encampment.

Mr. Mackay, who was walking along the side of the river, discharged his
piece at a buffalo, when it burst near the muzzle, but without any
mischievous consequences.  On the high grounds, which were on the
opposite side of the river, we saw a buffalo tearing up and down with
great fury, but could not discern the cause of his impetuous motions; my
hunters conjectured that he had been wounded with on arrow by some of
the natives.  We ascended several rapids in the course of the day, and
saw one bear.



_Saturday, 18._--It again froze very hard during the night, and at
four in the morning we continued our voyage, but we had not proceeded
two hundred yards, before an accident happened to the canoe, which did
not, however, employ more than three quarters of an hour to complete the
repair.  We then steered South by West one mile and three quarters,
South-West by South three miles, South-West by West one mile and a
quarter, West by South three quarters of a mile, South-West half a mile,
West by South one mile, South by West one mile and a half,
South-South-West, where there is a small run of water from the right,
three miles and a half, when the canoe struck on the stump of a tree,
and unfortunately where the banks were so steep that there was no place
to unload, except a small spot, on which we contrived to dispose the
lading in the bow, which lightened the canoe so as to raise the broken
part of it above the surface of the water; by which contrivance we
reached a convenient situation.  It required, however, two hours to
complete the repair, when the weather became dark and cloudy, with
thunder, lightning, and rain; we, however, continued the last course
half a mile, and at six in the evening we were compelled by the rain to
land for the night.

About noon we had landed on an island where there were eight lodges of
last year.  The natives had prepared bark here for five canoes, and there
is a road along the hills where they had passed.  Branches were out and
broken along it; and they had also stripped off the bark of the trees, to
get the interior rind, which forms part of their food.

The current was very strong through the whole of the day, and the coming
up along some of the banks was rendered very dangerous, from the
continual falling of large stones, from the upper parts of them.  This
place appears to be a particular pass for animals across the river, as
there are paths leading to it on both sides, every ten yards.

In the course of the day we saw a ground hog, and two cormorants.  The
earth also appeared in several places to have been turned up by the
bears, in search of roots.


_Sunday, 19._--It rained very hard in the early part of the night, but
the weather became clear towards the morning, when we embarked at our
usual hour.  As the current threatened to be very strong, Mr. Mackay,
the two hunters, and myself, went on shore, in order to lighten the
canoe, and ascended the hills, which are covered with cypress, and but
little encumbered with underwood.  We found a beaten path, and before we
had walked a mile, fell in with a herd of buffaloes, with their young
ones: but I would not suffer the Indians to fire on them, from an
apprehension that the report of their fowling pieces would alarm the
natives that might be in the neighbourhood; for we were at this time so
near the mountains, as to justify our expectation of seeing some of
them.  We, however, sent our dog after the herd, and a calf was soon
secured by him.  While the young men were skinning the animal, we heard
two reports of fire arms from the canoe, which we answered, as it was a
signal for my return; we then heard another, and immediately hastened
down the hill, with our veal, through a very close wood.  There we met
one of the men, who informed us that the canoe was at a small distance
below, at the foot of a very strong rapid, and that as several
waterfalls appeared up the river, we should be obliged to unload and
carry.  I accordingly hastened to the canoe, and was greatly displeased
that so much time had been lost, as I had given previous directions that
the river should be followed as long as it was practicable.  The last
Indians whom we saw had informed us that at the first mountain there was
a considerable succession of rapids, cascades, and falls, which they
never attempted to ascend; and where they always passed over land the
length of a day's march.  My men imagined that the carrying place was at
a small distance below us, as a path appeared to ascend a hill, where
there were several lodges, of the last year's construction.  The account
which had been given me of the rapids, was perfectly correct: though by
crossing to the other side, I must acknowledge with some risk, in such a
heavy laden canoe, the river appeared to me to be practicable, as far as
we could see: the traverse, therefore, was attempted, and proved
successful.  We now towed the canoe along an island, and proceeded
without any considerable difficulty, till we reached the extremity of
it, when the line could be no longer employed; and in endeavouring to
clear the point of the island, the canoe was driven with such violence
on a stony shore, as to receive considerable injury.  We now employed
every exertion in our power to repair the breach that had been made, as
well as to dry such articles of our loading as more immediately required
it: we then transported the whole across the point, when we reloaded,
and continued our course about three quarters of a mile.  We could now
proceed no further on this side of the water, and the traverse was
rendered extremely dangerous, not only from the strength of the current,
but by the cascades just below us, which, if we had got among them,
would have involved us and the canoe in one common destruction.  We had
no other alternative than to return by the same course we came, or to
hazard the traverse, the river on this side being bounded by a range of
steep, over-hanging rocks, beneath which the current was driven on with
resistless impetuosity from the cascades.  Here are several islands of
solid rock, covered with a small portion of verdure, which have been
worn away by the constant force of the current, and occasionally, as I
presume, of ice, at the water's edge, so as to be reduced in that part
to one fourth the extent of the upper surface; presenting, as it were,
so many large tables, each of which was supported by a pedestal of a
more circumscribed projection.  They are very elevated for such a
situation, and afford an asylum for geese, which were at this time
breeding on them.  By crossing from one to the other of these islands,
we came at length to the main traverse, on which we ventured, and were
successful in our passage.  Mr. Mackay, and the Indians, who observed
our manoeuvres from the top of a rock, were in continual alarm for our
safety, with which their own, indeed, may be said to have been nearly
connected: however, the dangers that we encountered were very much
augmented by the heavy loading of the canoe.

When we had effected our passage, the current on the West side was
almost equally violent with that from whence we had just escaped, but
the craggy bank being somewhat lower, we were enabled, with a line of
sixty fathoms, to tow the canoe, till we came to the foot of the most
rapid cascade we had hitherto seen.  Here we unloaded, and carried every
thing over a rocky point of an hundred and twenty paces.  When the canoe
was reloaded, I, with those of my people who were not immediately
employed, ascended the bank, which was there, and indeed, as far as we
could see, composed of clay, stone, and a yellow gravel.  My present
situation was so elevated, that the men, who were coming up a strong
point, could not hear me, though I called to them with the utmost
strength of my voice, to lighten the canoe of part of its lading.  And
here I could not but reflect, with infinite anxiety, on the hazard of my
enterprize; one false step of those who were attached to the line, or
the breaking of the line itself, would have at once consigned the canoe,
and every thing it contained, to instant destruction: it, however,
ascended the rapid in perfect security, but new dangers immediately
presented themselves, for stones, both small and great, were continually
rolling from the bank, so as to render the situation of those who were
dragging the canoe beneath it extremely perilous; besides, they were at
every step in danger, from the steepness of the ground, of falling into
the water: nor was my solicitude diminished by my being necessarily
removed at times from the sight of them.

In our passage through the woods, we came to an inclosure, which had
been formed by the natives for the purpose of setting snares for the
elk, and of which we could not discover the extent.  After we had
travelled for some hours through the forest, which consisted of the
spruce, birch, and the largest poplars I had ever seen, we sunk down
upon the river where the bank is low, and near the foot of a mountain;
between which, and a high ridge, the river flows in a channel of about
one hundred yards broad; though, at a small distance below, it rushes on
between perpendicular rocks, where it is not much more than half that
breadth.  Here I remained, in great anxiety, expecting the arrival of
the canoe, and after some time I sent Mr. Mackay with one of the Indians
down the river in search of it, and with the other I went up to it to
examine what we might expect in that quarter.  In about a mile and a
half I came to a part where the river washes the feet of lofty
precipices, and presented, in the form of rapids and cascades, a
succession of difficulties to our navigation.  As the canoe did not come
in sight, we returned, and from the place where I had separated with
Mr. Mackay, we saw the men carrying it over a small rocky point.  We met
them at the entrance of the narrow channel already mentioned; their
difficulties had been great indeed, and the canoe had been broken, but
they had persevered with success, and having passed the carrying-place,
we proceeded with the line as far as I had already been, when we crossed
over and encamped on the opposite beach; but there was no wood on this
side of the water, as the adjacent country had been entirely over-run by
fire.  We saw several elks feeding on the edge of the opposite
precipice, which was upwards of three hundred feet high.

Our course to-day was about South-South-West two miles and a half,
South-West half a mile, South-West by South one mile and a half, South
by West half a mile, South-West half a mile, and West one mile and a
half.  There was a shower of hail, and some rain from flying clouds.  I
now dispatched a man with an Indian to visit the rapids above, when the
latter soon left him to pursue a beaver, which was seen in the shallow
water on the inside of a stony island; and though Mr. Mackay, and the
other Indian joined him, the animal at length escaped from their
pursuit.  Several others were seen in the course of the day, which I by
no means expected, as the banks are almost every where so much elevated
above the channel of the river.  Just as the obscurity of the night drew
on, the man returned with an account that it would be impracticable to
pass several points, as well as the super-impending promontories.


_Monday, 20._--The weather was clear with a sharp air, and we renewed
our voyage at quarter past four, on a course South-West by West three
quarters of a mile.  We now, with infinite difficulty passed along the
foot of a rock, which, fortunately, was not an hard stone, so that we
were enabled to cut steps in it for the distance of twenty feet; from
which, at the hazard of my life, I leaped on a small rock below, where I
received those who followed me on my shoulders.  In this manner four of
us passed and dragged up the canoe, in which attempt we broke her.  Very
luckily, a dry tree had fallen from the rock above us, without which we
could not have made a fire, as no wood was to be procured within a mile
of the place.  When the canoe was repaired, we continued towing it along
the rocks to the next point, when we embarked, as we could not at
present make any further use of the line, but got along the rocks of a
round high island of stone, till we came to a small sandy bay.  As we
had already damaged the canoe, and had every reason to think that she
soon would risk much greater injury, it became necessary for us to
supply ourselves with bark, as our provision of that material article
was almost exhausted two men were accordingly sent to procure it, who
soon returned with the necessary store.

Mr. Mackay, and the Indians who had been on shore, since we broke the
canoe, were prevented from coming to us by the rugged and impassable
state of the ground.  We, therefore, again resumed our course with the
assistance of poles, with which we pushed onwards till we came beneath a
precipice, where we could not find any bottom; so that we were again
obliged to have recourse to the line, the management of which was
rendered not only difficult but dangerous, as the men employed in towing
were under the necessity of passing on the outside of trees that grew on
the edge of the precipice.  We, however, surmounted this difficulty, as
we had done many others, and the people who had been walking over land
now joined us.  They also had met with their obstacles in passing the
mountain.

It now became necessary for us to make a traverse, where the water was
so rapid, that some of the people stripped themselves to their shirts
that they might be the better prepared for swimming, in case any
accident happened to the canoe, which they seriously apprehended; but we
succeeded in our attempt without any other inconvenience, except that of
taking in water.  We now came to a cascade, when it was thought
necessary to take out part of the lading.  At noon we stopped to take an
altitude, opposite to a small river that flowed in from the left: while
I was thus engaged, the men went on shore to fasten the canoe, but as
the current was not very strong, they had been negligent in performing
this office; it proved, however, sufficiently powerful to sheer her off,
and if it had not happened that one of the men, from absolute fatigue
had remained and held the end of the line, we should have been deprived
of every means of prosecuting our voyage, as well as of present
subsistence.  But notwithstanding the state of my mind on such an
alarming circumstance, and an intervening cloud that interrupted me, the
altitude which I took has been since proved to be tolerably correct, and
gave 56. North latitude.  Our last course was South-South-West two miles
and a quarter.

We now continued our toilsome and perilous progress with the line West
by North, and as we proceeded the rapidity of the current increased, so
that in the distance of two miles we were obliged to unload four times,
and carry every thing but the canoe: indeed, in many places, it was with
the utmost difficulty that we could prevent her from being dashed to
pieces against the rocks by the violence of the eddies.  At five we had
proceeded to where the river was one continued rapid.

Here we again took every thing out of the canoe, in order to tow her up
with the line, though the rocks were so shelving as greatly to increase
the toil and hazard of that operation.  At length, however, the
agitation of the water was so great, that a wave striking on the bow of
the canoe broke the line, and filled us with inexpressible dismay, as it
appeared impossible that the vessel could escape from being dashed to
pieces, and those who were in her from perishing.  Another wave,
however, more propitious than the former, drove her out of the tumbling
water, so that the men were enabled to bring her ashore, and though she
had been carried over rocks by these swells which left them naked a
moment after, the canoe had received no material injury.  The men were,
however, in such a state from their late alarm, that it would not only
have been unavailing but imprudent to have proposed any further progress
at present, particularly as the river above us, as far as we could see,
was one white sheet of foaming water.

[1] These people, as well as all the natives on this side of Lake
Winipic, give the mercantile agent that distinguished appellation.




CHAPTER III.


MAY, 1793.

That the discouragements, difficulties, and dangers, which had hitherto
attended the progress of our enterprise, should have excited a wish in
several of those who were engaged in it to discontinue the pursuit,
might be naturally expected; and indeed it began to be muttered on all
sides that there was no alternative but to return.

Instead of paying any attention to these murmurs, I desired those who
had uttered them to exert themselves in gaining an ascent of the hill,
and encamp there for the night.  In the mean time I set off with one of
the Indians, and though I continued my examination of the river almost
as long as there was any light to assist me, I could see no end of the
rapids and cascades: I was, therefore, perfectly satisfied, that it
would be impracticable to proceed any further by water.  We returned
from this reconnoitring excursion very much fatigued, with our shoes
worn out and wounded feet; when I found that, by felling trees on the
declivity of the first hill, my people had contrived to ascend it.

From the place where I had taken the altitude at noon, to the place
where we made our landing, the river is not more than fifty yards wide,
and flows between stupendous rocks, from whence huge fragments sometimes
tumble down, and falling from such an height, dash into small stones,
with sharp points, and form the beach between the rocky projections.
Along the face of some of these precipices, there appears a stratum of a
bitumenous substance which resembles coal; though while some of the
pieces of it appeared to be excellent fuel, others resisted, for a
considerable time, the action of fire, and did not emit the least flame.
The whole of this day's course would have been altogether impracticable,
if the water had been higher, which must be the case at certain seasons.
We saw also several encampments of the Knisteneaux along the river,
which must have been formed by them on their war excursions: a decided
proof of the savage, blood-thirsty disposition of that people; as
nothing less than such a spirit could impel them to encounter the
difficulties of this almost inaccessible country, whose natives are
equally unoffending and defenceless.

Mr. Mackay informed me, that in passing over the mountains, he observed
several chasms in the earth that emitted heat and smoke, which diffused
a strong sulphureous stench.  I should certainly have visited this
phenomenon, if I had been sufficiently qualified as a naturalist, to
have offered scientific conjectures or observations thereon.


_Tuesday, 21._--It rained in the morning, and did not cease till about
eight, and as the men had been very fatigued and disheartened, I
suffered them to continue their rest till that hour.  Such was the state
of the river, as I have already observed, that no alternative was left
us; nor did any means of proceeding present themselves to us, but the
passage of the mountain over which we were to carry the canoe as well as
the baggage.  As this was a very alarming enterprize, I dispatched
Mr. Mackay with three men and the two Indians to proceed in a strait
course from the top of the mountain, and to keep the line of the river
till they should find it navigable.  If it should be their opinion, that
there was no practicable passage in that direction, two of them were
instructed to return in order to make their report; while the others
were to go in search of the Indian carrying-place.  While they were
engaged in this excursion, the people who remained with me were employed
in gumming the canoe, and making handles for the axes.  At noon I got an
altitude, which made our latitude 56. 0. 8.  At three o'clock had time,
when my watch was slow 1. 31. 32. apparent time.

At sun-set, Mr. Mackay returned with one of the men, and in about two
hours was followed by the others.  They had penetrated thick woods,
ascended hills and sunk into vallies, till they got beyond the rapid,
which, according to their calculation, was a distance of three leagues.
The two parties returned by different routes, but they both agreed, that
with all its difficulties, and they were of a very alarming nature, the
outward course was that which must be preferred.  Unpromising, however,
as the account of their expedition appeared, it did not sink them into a
state of discouragement; and a kettle of wild rice, sweetened with
sugar, which had been prepared for their return, with their usual regale
of rum, soon renewed that courage which disdained all obstacles that
threatened our progress: and they went to rest, with a full
determination to surmount them on the morrow.  I sat up, in the hope of
getting an observation of Jupiter and his first satellite, but the
cloudy weather prevented my obtaining it.


_Wednesday, 22._--At break of day we entered on the extraordinary
journey which was to occupy the remaining part of it.  The men began,
without delay, to cut a road up the mountain, and as the trees were but
of small growth, I ordered them to fell those which they found
convenient, in such a manner, that they might fall parallel with the
road, but, at the same time not separate them entirely from the stumps,
so that they might form a kind of railing on either side.  The baggage
was now brought from the water side to our encampment.  This was,
likewise, from the steep shelving of the rocks, a very perilous
undertaking, as one false step of any of the people employed in it,
would have been instantly followed by falling headlong into the water.
When this important object was attained, the whole of the party
proceeded with no small degree of apprehension, to fetch the canoe,
which, in a short time, was also brought to the encampment; and, as soon
as we had recovered from our fatigue, we advanced with it up the
mountain, having the line doubled and fastened successively as we went
on to the stumps; while a man at the end of it, hauled it around a tree,
holding it on and shifting it as we proceeded; so that we may be said,
with strict truth, to have warped the canoe up the mountain; indeed by a
general and most laborious exertion, we got every thing to the summit by
two in the afternoon.  At noon, the latitude was 56. 0. 47. North.  At
five, I sent the men to cut the road onwards, which they effected for
about a mile, when they returned:

The weather was cloudy at intervals, with showers and thunder.  At about
ten, I observed an emersion of Jupiter's second satellite; time by the
achrometer 8. 32. 20. by which I found the longitude to be 120. 29. 80
West from Greenwich.


_Thursday 23._--The weather was clear at four this morning, when the
men began to carry.  I joined Mr. Mackay and the two Indians in the
labour of cutting a road.  The ground continued rising gently till noon,
when it began to decline; but though on such an elevated situation, we
could see but little, as mountains of a still higher elevation, and
covered with snow, were seen far above us in every direction.  In the
afternoon the ground became very uneven; hills and deep defiles
alternately presented themselves to us.  Our progress, however, exceeded
my expectation, and it was not till four in the afternoon that the
carriers overtook us.  At five, in a state of fatigue that may be more
readily conceived than expressed, we encamped near a rivulet or spring
that issued from beneath a large mass of ice and snow.

Our toilsome journey of this day I compute at about three miles; along
the first of which the land is covered with plenty of wood, consisting
of large trees, encumbered with little underwood, through which it was
by no means difficult to open a road, by following a well-beaten elk
path: for the two succeeding miles we found the country overspread with
the trunks of trees, laid low by fire some years ago; among which large
copses had sprung up of a close growth, and intermixed with briars, so
as to render the passage through them painful and tedious.  The soil in
the woods is light and of a dusky colour; that in the burned country is
a mixture of sand and clay with small stones.  The trees are spruce,
red-pine, cypress, poplar, white birch, willow, alder, arrow-wood,
red-wood, liard, service-tree, bois-picant, &c.  I never saw any of the
last kind before.  It rises to about nine feet in height, grows in
joints without branches, and is tufted at the extremity.  The stem is of
an equal size from the bottom to the top, and does not exceed an inch in
diameter; it is covered with small prickles, which caught our trowsers,
and working through them, sometimes found their way to the flesh.  The
shrubs are, the gooseberry, the currant, and several kinds of briars.


_Friday, 24._--We continued our very laborious journey, which led us
down some steep hills, and through a wood of tall pines.  After much
toil and trouble in bearing the canoe through the difficult passages
which we encountered, at four in the afternoon we arrived at the river,
some hundred yards above the rapids or falls, with all our baggage.  I
compute the distance of this day's progress to be about four miles;
indeed I should have measured the whole of the way, if I had not been
obliged to engage personally in the labour of making the road.  But
after all, the Indian carrying-way, whatever may be its length, and I
think it cannot exceed ten miles, will always be found more safe and
expeditious than the passage which our toil and perseverance formed and
surmounted.

Those of my people who visited this place on the 21st, were of opinion
that the water had risen very much since that time.  About two hundred
yards below us, the stream rushed with an astonishing but silent
velocity, between perpendicular rocks, which are not more than
thirty-five yards asunder: when the water is high, it runs over those
rocks, in a channel three times that breadth, where it is bounded by far
more elevated precipices.  In the former are deep round holes, some of
which are full of water, while others are empty, in whose bottom are
small round stones, as smooth as marble.  Some of these natural
cylinders would contain two hundred gallons.  At a small distance below
the first of these rocks, the channel widens in a kind of zig-zag
progression; and it was really awful to behold with what infinite force
the water drives against the rocks on one side, and with what impetuous
strength it is repelled to the other: it then falls back, as it were,
into a more strait but rugged passage, over which it is tossed in high,
foaming, half-formed billows, as far as the eye could follow it.

The young men informed me that this was the place where their relations
had told me that I should meet with a fall equal to that of Niagara: to
exculpate them, however, from their apparent misinformation, they
declared that their friends were not accustomed to utter falsehoods, and
that the fall had probably been destroyed by the force of the water.  It
is, however, very evident that those people had not been here, or did
not adhere to the truth.  By the number of trees which appeared to have
been felled with axes, we discovered that the Knisteneaux, or some
tribes who are known to employ that instrument, had passed this way.  We
passed through a snare enclosure, but saw no animals, though the country
was very much intersected by their tracks.


_Saturday, 25._---It rained throughout the night, and till twelve this
day; while the business of preparing great and small poles, and putting
the canoe in order, &c. caused us to remain here till five in the
afternoon.  I now attached a knife, with a steel, flint, beads, and
other trifling articles to a pole, which I erected, and left as a token
of amity to the natives.  When I was making this arrangement, one of my
attendants, whom I have already described under the title of the Cancre,
added to my assortment, a small round piece of green wood, chewed at one
end in the form of a brush, which the Indians used to pick the marrow
out of bones.  This he informed me was an emblem of a country abounding
in animals.  The water had risen during our stay here one foot and a
half perpendicular height.

We now embarked, and our course was North-West one mile and three
quarters.  There were mountains on all sides of us, which were covered
with snow; one in particular, on the South side of the river, rose to a
great height.  We continued to proceed West three quarters of a mile,
North-West one mile, and West-South-West a quarter of a mile, when we
encamped for the night.  The Cancre killed a small elk.


_Sunday, 26._--The weather was clear and sharp, and between three and
four in the morning we renewed our voyage, our first course being West
by South three miles and a half, when the men complained of the cold in
their fingers, as they were obliged to push on the canoe with the poles.
Here a small river flowed in from the North.  We now continued to steer
West-South-West a quarter of a mile; West-North-West a mile and a half,
and West two miles, when we found ourselves on a parallel with a chain
of mountains on both sides of the river, running South and North.  The
river, both yesterday and the early part of to-day, was from four to
eight hundred yards wide, and full of islands, but was at this time
diminished to about two hundred yards broad, and free from islands, with
a smooth but strong current.  Our next course was South-West two miles,
when we encountered a rapid, and saw an encampment of the Knisteneaux.
We now proceeded North-West by West one mile, among islands, South-West
by West three quarters of a mile, South-South-East one mile, veered to
South-West through islands three miles and a half, and South by East
half a mile.  Here a river poured in on the left, which was the most
considerable that we had seen since we had passed the mountain.  At
seven in the evening we landed and encamped.

Though the sun had shone upon us throughout the day, the air was so cold
that the men, though actively employed, could not resist it without the
aid of their blanket coats.  This circumstance might, in some degree, be
expected from the surrounding mountains, which were covered with ice and
snow; but as they are not so high as to produce the extreme cold which
we suffered, it must be more particularly attributed to the high
situation of the country itself, rather than to the local elevation of
the mountains, the greatest height of which does not exceed fifteen
hundred feet; though in general they do not rise to half that altitude.

But as I had not been able to take an exact measurement, I do not
presume upon the accuracy of my conjecture.  Towards the bottom of these
heights, which were clear of snow, the trees were putting forth their
leaves, while those in their middle region still retained all the
characteristics of winter, and on the upper parts there was little or no
wood.


_Monday, 27._[1]--The weather was clear, and we continued our voyage
at the usual hour, when we successively found several rapids and points
to impede our progress.  At noon our latitude was 56. 5. 54. North.  The
Indians killed a stag; and one of the men who went to fetch it was very
much endangered by the rolling down of a large stone from the heights
above him.


_Tuesday, 28._--The day was very cloudy.  The mountains on both sides
of the river seemed to have sunk, in their elevation, during the voyage
of yesterday.  To-day they resumed their former altitude, and run so
close on either side of the channel, that all view was excluded of every
thing but themselves.  This part of the current was not broken by
islands; but in the afternoon we approached some cascades, which obliged
us to carry our canoe and its lading for several hundred yards.  Here we
observed an encampment of the natives, though some time had elapsed
since it had been inhabited.  The greater part of the day was divided
between heavy showers and small rain; and we took our station on the
shore about six in the evening, about three miles above the last rapid.


_Wednesday, 29._--The rain was so violent throughout the whole of this
day, that we did not venture to proceed.  As we had almost expended the
contents of a rum-keg, and this being a day which allowed of no active
employment, I amused myself with the experiment of enclosing a letter in
it, and dispatching it down the stream to take its fate.  I accordingly
introduced a written account of all our hardships, &c.  carefully
enclosed in bark, into the small barrel by the bung-hole, which being
carefully secured, I consigned this epistolatory cargo to the mercy of
the current.


_Thursday, 30._--We were alarmed this morning at break of day, by the
continual barking of our dog, who never ceased from running backwards
and forwards in the rear of our situation: when, however, the day
advanced, we discovered the cause of our alarm to proceed from a wolf,
who was parading a ridge a few yards behind us, and had been most
probably allured by the scent of our small portion of fresh meat.  The
weather was cloudy, but it did not prevent us from renewing our progress
at a very early hour.  A considerable river appeared from the left, and
we continued our course till seven in the evening, when we landed at
night where there was an Indian encampment.


_Friday, 31._--The morning was clear and cold, and the current very
powerful.  On crossing the mouth of a river that flowed in from the
right of us, we were very much endangered; indeed all the rivers which I
have lately seen, appear to overflow their natural limits, as it may be
supposed, from the melting of the mountain snow.  The water is almost
white, the bed of the river being of limestone.  The mountains are one
solid mass of the same material, but without the least shade of trees,
or decoration of foliage.  At nine the men were so cold that we landed,
in order to kindle a fire, which was considered as a very uncommon
circumstance at this season; a small quantity of rum, however, served as
an adequate substitute; and the current being so smooth as to admit of
the use of paddles, I encouraged them to proceed without any further
delay.  In a short time an extensive view opened upon us, displaying a
beautiful sheet of water, that was heightened by the calmness of the
weather, and a splendid sun.  Here the mountains which were covered with
wood, opened on either side, so that we entertained the hope of soon
leaving them behind us.  When we had got to the termination of this
prospect, the river was barred with rocks, forming cascades and small
islands.  To proceed onwards, we were under the necessity of clearing a
narrow passage of the drift wood, on the left shore.  Here the view
convinced us that our late hopes were without foundation, as there
appeared a ridge or chain of mountains, running South and North as far
as the eye could reach.

On advancing two or three miles, we arrived at the fork, one branch
running about West-North-West, and the other South-South-East.  If I had
been governed by my own judgment, I should have taken the former, as it
appeared to me to be the most likely to bring us nearest to the part
where I wished to fall on the Pacific Ocean, but the old man, whom I
have already mentioned as having been frequently on war expeditions in
this country, had warned me not, on any account, to follow it, as it was
soon lost in various branches among the mountains, and that there was no
great river that ran in any direction near it; but by following the
latter, he said, we should arrive at a carrying-place to another large
river, that did not exceed a day's march, where the inhabitants build
houses, and live upon islands.  There was so much apparent truth in the
old man's narrative, that I determined to be governed by it; for I did
not entertain the least doubt, if I could get into the other river, that
I should reach the ocean.

I accordingly ordered my steersman to proceed at once to the East
branch, which appeared to be more rapid than the other, though it did
not possess an equal breadth.  These circumstances disposed my men and
Indians, the latter in particular being very tired of the voyage, to
express their wishes that I should take the Western branch, especially
when they perceived the difficulty of stemming the current, in the
direction on which I had determined.  Indeed the rush of water was so
powerful, that we were the greatest part of the afternoon in getting two
or three miles--a very tardy and mortifying progress, and which, with
the voyage, was openly execrated by many of those who were engaged in
it: and the inexpressible toil these people had endured, as well as the
dangers they had encountered, required some degree of consideration; I
therefore employed those arguments which were the best calculated to
calm their immediate discontents, as well as to encourage their future
hopes, though, at the same time, I delivered my sentiments in such a
manner as to convince them that I was determined to proceed.

On the 1st of June we embarked at sun-rise, and towards noon the current
began to slacken; we then put to shore, in order to gum the canoe, when
a meridian altitude gave me 55. 42. 16. North latitude.  We then
continued our course, and towards the evening the current began to
recover its former strength.  Mr. Mackay and the Indians had already
disembarked, to walk and lighten the boat.  At sun-set we encamped on a
point, being the first dry land which had been found on this side the
river, that was fit for our purpose, since our people went on shore.  In
the morning we passed a large rapid river, that flowed in from the
right.

In no part of the North-West did I see so much beaver-work, within an
equal distance, as in the course of this day.  In some places they had
cut down several acres of large poplars; and we saw also a great number
of these active and sagacious animals.  The time which these wonderful
creatures allot for their labours, whether in erecting their curious
habitations or providing food, is the whole of the interval between the
setting and the rising sun.

Towards the dusky part of the evening we heard several discharges from
the fowling pieces of our people, which we answered, to inform them of
our situation; and some time after it was dark, they arrived in an equal
state of fatigue and alarm; they were also obliged to swim across a
channel in order to get to us, as we were situated on an island, though
we were ignorant of the circumstance, till they came to inform us.  One
of the Indians was positive that he heard the discharge of fire-arms
above our encampment; and on comparing the number of our discharges with
theirs, there appeared to be some foundation for his alarm, as we
imagined that we had heard two reports more than they acknowledged; and
in their turn, they declared that they had heard twice the number of
those which we knew had proceeded from us.  The Indians were therefore
certain, that the Knisteneaux must be in our vicinity, on a war
expedition, and consequently, if they were numerous, we should have had
no reason to expect the least mercy from them in this distant country.
Though I did not believe that circumstance, or that any of the natives
could be in possession of fire-arms, I thought it right, at all events,
we should be prepared.  Our fusees were, therefore, primed and loaded,
and having extinguished our fire, each of us took his station at the
foot of a tree, where we passed an uneasy and restless night.

The succeeding morning being clear and pleasant, we proceeded at an
early hour against a rapid current, intersected by islands.  About eight
we passed two large trees, whose roots having been undermined by the
current, had recently fallen into the river; and, in my opinion, the
crash of their fall had occasioned the noise which caused our late
alarm.  In this manner the water ravages the islands in these rivers,
and by driving down great quantities of wood, forms the foundations of
others.  The men were so oppressed with fatigue, that it was necessary
they should encamp at six in the afternoon.  We, therefore, landed on a
sandy island, which is a very uncommon object, as the greater part of
the islands consist of a bottom of round stones and gravel, covered from
three to ten feet with mud and old drift-wood.  Beaver-work was as
frequently seen as on the preceding day.

On the 3d of June we renewed our voyage with the rising sun.  At noon I
obtained a meridian altitude, which gave 55. 22. 3. North latitude.  I
also took time, and the watch was slow 1. 30. 14. apparent time.
According to my calculation, this place is about twenty-five miles
South-East of the fork.[2]

[1] From this day to the 4th of June the courses of my voyage are
omitted, as I lost the book that contained them.  I was in the habit of
sometimes indulging myself with a short doze in the canoe, and I imagine
that the branches of the trees brushed my book from me, when I was in
such a situation, which renders the account of these few days less
distinct than usual.

[2] I shall now proceed with my usual regularity, which, as I have
already mentioned, has been, for some days, suspended, from the loss of
my book of observation.




CHAPTER. IV.


JUNE 4, 1793.

We embarked this morning at four in a very heavy fog.
The water had been continually rising, and, in many places, overflowed
its banks.  The current also was so strong that our progress was very
tedious, and required the most laborious exertions.  Our course was this
day, South-South-East one mile, South-South-West half a mile, South-East
three quarters of a mile, North-East by East three quarters of a mile,
South-East half a mile, South-East by South one mile, South-South-East
one mile and three quarters, South-East by South half a mile, East by
South a quarter of a mile, South-East three quarters of a mile,
North-East by East half a mile, East by North a quarter of a mile,
South-East half a mile, South-East by South a quarter of a mile,
South-East by East half a mile, North-East by East half a mile,
North-North-East three quarters of a mile to South by East one mile and
a half.  We could not find a place fit for an encampment, till nine at
night, when we landed on a bank of gravel, of which little more appeared
above water than the spot we occupied.


_Wednesday, 5._--This morning we found our canoe and baggage in the
water, which had continued rising during the night.  We then gummed the
canoe, as we arrived at too late an hour to perform that operation on
the preceding evening.  This necessary business being completed, we
traversed to the North shore, where I disembarked with Mr. Mackay, and
the hunters, in order to ascend an adjacent mountain, with the hope of
obtaining a view of the interior part of the country.  I directed my
people to proceed with all possible diligence, and that, if they met
with any accident, or found my return necessary, they should fire two
guns.  They also understood, that when they should hear the same signal
from me, they were to answer, and wait for me, if I were behind them.

When we had ascended to the summit of the hill, we found that it
extended onwards in an even, level country; so that, encumbered as we
were, with the thick wood, no distant view could be obtained; I
therefore climbed a very lofty tree, from whose top I discerned on the
right a ridge of mountains covered with snow, bearing about North-West;
from thence another ridge of high land, whereon no snow was visible,
stretched towards the South: between which and the snowy hills on the
East side, there appeared to be an opening, which we determined to be
the course of the river.

Having obtained all the satisfaction that the nature of the place would
admit, we proceeded forward to overtake the canoe, and after a warm walk
came down upon the river, when we discharged our pieces twice, but
received no answering signal.  I was of opinion, that the canoe was
before us, while the Indians entertained an opposite notion.  I,
however, crossed another point of land, and came again to the waterside
about ten.  Here we had a long view of the river, which circumstance
excited in my mind, some doubts of my former sentiments.  We repeated
our signals, but without any return; and as every moment now increased
my anxiety, I left Mr. Mackay and one of the Indians at this spot to
make a large fire, and sent branches adrift down the current as notices
of our situation, if the canoe was behind us; and proceeded with the
other Indian across a very long point, where the river makes a
considerable bend, in order that I might be satisfied if the canoe was
a-head.  Having been accustomed, for the last fortnight, to very cold
weather, I found the heat of this day almost insupportable, as our way
lay over a dry sand, which was relieved by no shade, but such as a few
scattered cypresses could afford us.  About twelve, we arrived once more
at the river, and the discharge of our pieces was as unsuccessful as it
had hitherto been.  The water rushed before us with uncommon velocity;
and we also tried the experiment of sending fresh branches down it.  To
add to the disagreeableness of our situation, the gnats and mosquitoes
appeared in swarms to torment us.  When we returned to our companions,
we found that they had not been contented with remaining in the position
where I had left them, but had been three or four miles down the river,
but were come back to their station, without having made any discovery
of the people on the water.

Various very unpleasing conjectures at once perplexed and distressed us:
the Indians, who are inclined to magnify evils of any and every kind,
had at once consigned the canoe and every one on board it to the bottom;
and were already settling a plan to return upon a raft, as well as
calculating the number of nights that would be required to reach their
home.  As for myself, it will be easily believed, that my mind was in a
state of extreme agitation, and the imprudence of my conduct in leaving
the people, in such a situation of danger and toilsome exertion added a
very painful mortification to the severe apprehensions I already
suffered: it was an act of indiscretion which might have put an end to
the voyage that I had so much at heart, and compelled me at length to
submit to the scheme which my hunters had already formed for our return.

At half past six in the evening, Mr. Mackay and the Cancre set off to
proceed down the river, as far as they could before the night came on,
and to continue their journey in the morning to the place where we had
encamped the preceding evening.  I also proposed to make my excursion
upwards; and, if we both failed of success in meeting the canoe, it was
agreed that we should return to the place where we now separated.

In this situation we had wherewithal to drink in plenty, but with solid
food we were totally unprovided.  We had not seen even a partridge
throughout the day, and the tracks of rein-deer that we had discovered,
were of an old date.  We were, however, preparing to make a bed of the
branches of trees, where we should have had no other canopy than that
afforded us by the heavens, when we heard a shot, and soon after
another, which was the notice agreed upon, if Mr. Mackay and the Indian
should see the canoe: that fortunate circumstance was also confirmed by
a return of the signal from the people.  I was, however, so fatigued
from the heat and exercise of the day, as well as incommoded from
drinking so much cold water, that I did not wish to remove till the
following morning; but the Indian made such bitter complaints of the
cold and hunger he suffered, that I complied with his solicitations to
depart; and it was almost dark when we reached the canoe, barefooted,
and drenched with rain.  But these inconveniences affected me very
little, when I saw myself once more surrounded with my people.  They
informed me, that the canoe had been broken; and that they had this day
experienced much greater toil and hardships than on any former occasion.
I thought it prudent to affect a belief of every representation that
they made, and even to comfort each of them with a consolatory dram:
for, however difficult the passage might have been, it was too short to
have occupied the whole day, if they had not relaxed in their exertions.
The rain was accompanied with thunder and lightning.

It appeared from the various encampments which we had seen, and from
several paddles we had found, that the natives frequent this part of the
country at the latter end of the summer and the fall.  The course to-day
was nearly East-South-East two miles and a half, South by West one mile,
South-South-East one mile and a half, East two miles, and South-East by
South one mile.


_Thursday, 6._--At half past four this morning we continued our
voyage, our courses being South-East by South one mile, East by South
three quarters of a mile, South-East by East two miles.  The whole of
this distance we proceeded by hauling the canoe from branch to branch.
The current was so strong, that it was impossible to stem it with the
paddles; the depth was too great to receive any assistance from the
poles, and the bank of the river was so closely lined with willows and
other trees, that it was impossible to employ the line.  As it was past
twelve before we could find a place that would allow of our landing, I
could not get a meridian altitude.  We occupied the rest of the day in
repairing the canoe, drying our cloaths, and making paddles and poles to
replace those which had been broken or lost.


_Friday, 7._--The morning was clear and calm; and since we had been at
this station the water had risen two inches; so that the current became
still stronger; and its velocity had already been so great as to justify
our despair in getting up it, if we had not been so long accustomed to
surmount.  I last night observed an emersion of Jupiter's first
satellite, but inadvertently went to bed, without committing the exact
time to writing: if my memory is correct, it was 8. 18. 10. by the
timepiece.  The canoe, which had been little better than a wreck, being
now repaired, we proceeded East two miles and a quarter,
South-South-East half a mile, South-East a quarter of a mile, when we
landed to take an altitude for time.  We continued our route at
South-East by East three quarters of a mile, and landed again to
determine the latitude, which is 55. 2. 51.  To this I add, 2. 45.
Southing, which will make the place of taking altitude for time
55. 5. 36. with which I find that my time-piece was slow 1. 32. 23.
apparent time; and made the longitude obtained 122. 35. 50. West of
Greenwich.

From this place we proceeded East by South four miles and a half,
East-South-East one mile and a half, in which space there falls in a
small river from the East; East half a mile, South-East a mile and a
half, East a quarter of a mile, and encamped at seven o'clock.
Mr. Mackay and the hunters walked the greatest part of the day, and in
the course of their excursion killed a porcupine.[1] Here we found the
bed of a very large bear quite fresh.  During the day several Indian
encampments were seen, which were of a late erection.  The current had
also lost some of its impetuosity during the greater part of the day.


_Saturday, 8._--It rained and thundered through the night, and at four
in the morning we again encountered the current.  Our course was East a
quarter of a mile, round to South by East along a very high white sandy
bank on the East shore, three quarters of a mile, South-South-East a
quarter of a mile, South-South-West a quarter of a mile,
South-South-East one mile and a quarter, South-East two miles, with a
slack current; South-East by East two miles and a quarter, East a
quarter of a mile, South-South-East a quarter of a mile, South-East by
South four miles and a half, South-East one mile and a half,
South-South-West half a mile, East-North-East half a mile,
East-South-East a quarter of a mile, South-East by South one mile,
South-East by East half a mile, East by South three quarters of a mile,
when the mountains were in full view in this direction, and Eastward.
For the three last days we could only see them at short intervals and
long distances; but till then, they were continually in sight on either
side, from our entrance into the fork.  Those to the left were at no
great distance from us.

For the last two days we had been anxiously looking out for the
carrying-place, but could not discover it, and our only hope was in such
information as we should be able to procure from the natives.  All that
remained for us to do, was to push forwards till the river should be no
longer navigable: it had now, indeed, overflowed its banks, so that it
was eight at night before we could discover a place to encamp.  Having
found plenty of wild parsnips, we gathered the tops, and boiled them
with pemmican for our supper.


_Sunday, 9._--The rain of this morning terminated in a heavy mist at
half past five, when we embarked and steered South-East one mile and a
half, when it veered North-North-East half a mile, South-East three
quarters of a mile, East by South three quarters of a mile,
East-South-East a quarter of a mile, South-South-East a quarter of a
mile, South-East by East one mile, North-East by East half a mile,
South-East by East half a mile, South-East by South three quarters of a
mile, South-East three quarters of a mile, East by South half a mile,
South-East by East half a mile, East-North-East three quarters of a
mile, when it veered to South-South-East half a mile, then back to East
(when a blue mountain, clear of snow, appeared a-head) one mile and a
half; North-East by East half a mile, East by North one mile, when it
veered to South-East half a mile, then on to North-West three quarters
of a mile, and back to North-East by East half a mile, South by West a
quarter of a mile, North-East by East to North-North-East half a mile,
South-South-East a quarter of a mile, and East by North half a mile;
here we perceived a smell of fire; and in a short time heard people in
the woods, as if in a state of great confusion, which was occasioned, as
we afterwards understood, by their discovery of us.  At the same time
this unexpected circumstance produced some little discomposure among
ourselves, as our arms were not in a state of preparation, and we were
as yet unable to ascertain the number of the party.  I considered, that
if there were but few, it would be needless to pursue them, as it would
not be probable that we should overtake them in these thick woods; and
if they were numerous, it would be an act of great imprudence to make
the attempt, at least during their present alarm.  I therefore ordered
my people to strike off to the opposite side, that we might see if any
of them had sufficient courage to remain; but, before we were half over
the river, which in this part is not more than a hundred yards wide, two
men appeared on a rising ground over against us, brandishing their
spears, displaying their bows and arrows, and accompanying their hostile
gestures with loud vociferations.  My interpreter did not hesitate to
assure them, that they might dispel their apprehensions, as we were
white people, who meditated no injury, but were, on the contrary,
desirous of demonstrating every mark of kindness and friendship.  They
did not, however, seem disposed to confide in our declarations, and
actually threatened, if we came over before they were more fully
satisfied of our peaceable intentions, that they would discharge their
arrows at us.  This was a decided kind of conduct which I did not
expect; at the same time I readily complied with their proposition, and
after some time had passed in hearing and answering their questions,
they consented to our landing, though not without betraying very evident
symptoms of fear and distrust.  They, however, laid aside their weapons,
and when I stepped forward and took each of them by the hand, one of
them, but with a very tremulous action, drew his knife from his sleeve,
and presented it to me as a mark of his submission to my will and
pleasure.  On our first hearing the noise of these people in the woods,
we displayed our flag, which was now shewn to them as a token of
friendship.  They examined us, and every thing about us, with a minute
and suspicious attention.  They had heard, indeed, of white men, but
this was the first time that they had ever seen a human being of a
complexion different from their own.  The party had been here but a few
hours; nor had they yet erected their sheds; and, except the two men now
with us, they had all fled, leaving their little property behind them.
To those which had given us such a proof of their confidence, we paid
the most conciliating attentions in our power.  One of them I sent to
recall his people, and the other, for very obvious reasons, we kept with
us.  In the mean time the canoe was unloaded, the necessary baggage
carried up the hill, and the tents pitched.

Here I determined to remain till the Indians became so familiarized to
us, as to give all the intelligence which we imagined might be obtained
from them.  In fact, it had been my intention to land where I might most
probably discover the carrying-place, which was our more immediate
object, and undertake marches of two or three days, in different
directions, in search of another river.  If unsuccessful in this
attempt, it was my purpose to continue my progress up the present river,
as far as it was navigable, and if we did not meet with natives to
instruct us in our further progress, I had determined to return to the
fork, and take the other branch, with the hope of better fortune.

It was about three in the afternoon when we landed, and at five the
whole party of Indians were assembled.  It consisted only of three men,
three women, and seven or eight boys and girls.  With their scratched
legs, bleeding feet, and dishevelled hair, as in the hurry of their
flight they had left their shoes and leggins behind them, they displayed
a most wretched appearance: they were consoled, however, with beads, and
other trifles, which seemed to please them; they had pemmican also given
them to eat, which was not unwelcome, and in our opinion, at least,
superior to their own provision, which consisted entirely of dried fish.

When I thought that they were sufficiently composed, I sent for the men
to my tent, to gain such information respecting the country as I
concluded it was in their power to afford me.  But my expectations were
by no means satisfied: they said that they were not acquainted with any
river to the Westward, but that there was one from whence they were just
arrived, over a carrying-place of eleven days march, which they
represented as being a branch only of the river before us.  Their
iron-work they obtained from the people who inhabit the bank of that
river, and an adjacent lake, in exchange for beaver skins, and dressed
moose skins.  They represented the latter as travelling, during a moon,
to get to the country of other tribes, who live in houses, with whom
they traffic for the same commodities; and that these also extend their
journies in the same manner to the sea coast, or, to use their
expression, the Stinking Lake, where they trade with people like us,
that come there in vessels as big as islands.  They added, that the
people to the Westward, as they have been told, are very numerous.
Those who inhabit the other branch they stated as consisting of about
forty families, while they themselves did not amount to more than a
fourth of that number; and were almost continually compelled to remain
in their strong holds, where they sometimes perished with cold and
hunger, to secure themselves from their enemies, who never failed to
attack them whenever an opportunity presented itself.

This account of the country, from a people who I had every reason to
suppose were well acquainted with every part of it, threatened to
disconcert the project on which my heart was set, and in which my whole
mind was occupied.  It occurred to me, however, that from fear, or other
motives, they might be tardy in their communication; I therefore assured
them that, if they would direct me to the river which I described to
them, I would come in large vessels, like those that their neighbours
had described, to the mouth of it, and bring them arms and ammunition in
exchange for the produce of their country; so that they might be able to
defend themselves against their enemies, and no longer remain in that
abject, distressed, and fugitive state in which they then lived.  I
added also, that in the mean time, if they would, on my return accompany
me below the mountains, to a country which was very abundant in animals,
I would furnish them, and their companions, with every thing they might
want; and make peace between them and the Beaver Indians.  But all these
promises did not appear to advance the object of my inquiries, and they
still persisted in their ignorance of any such river as I had mentioned,
that discharged itself into the sea.

In this state of perplexity and disappointment, various projects
presented themselves to my mind, which were no sooner formed than they
were discovered to be impracticable, and were consequently abandoned.
At one time I thought of leaving the canoe, and every thing it
contained, to go over land, and pursue that chain of connexion by which
these people obtain their iron-work; but a very brief course of
reflection convinced me that it would be impossible for us to carry
provisions for our support through any considerable part of such a
journey, as well as presents, to secure us a kind reception among the
natives, and ammunition for the service of the hunters, and to defend
ourselves against any act of hostility.  At another time my solicitude
for the success of the expedition incited a wish to remain with the
natives, and go to the sea by the way they had described; but the
accomplishment of such a journey, even if no accident should interpose,
would have required a portion of time which it was not in my power to
bestow.  In my present state of information, to proceed further up the
river was considered as a fruitless waste of toilsome exertion; and to
return unsuccessful, after all our labour, sufferings, and dangers, was
an idea too painful to indulge.  Besides, I could not yet abandon the
hope that the Indians might not yet be sufficiently composed and
confident, to disclose their real knowledge of the country freely and
fully to me.  Nor was I altogether without my doubts respecting the
fidelity of my interpreter, who being very much tired of the voyage,
might be induced to withhold those communications which would induce me
to continue it.  I therefore continued my attentions to the natives,
regaled them with such provisions as I had, indulged their children with
a taste of sugar, and determined to suspend my conversation with them
till the following morning.  On my expressing a desire to partake of
their fish, they brought me a few dried trout, well cured, that had been
taken in the river which they lately left.  One of the men also brought
me five beaver skins, as a present.


_Monday, 10._--The solicitude that possessed my mind interrupted my
repose; when the dawn appeared I had already quitted my bed, and was
waiting with impatience for another conference with the natives.  The
sun, however, had risen before they left their leafy bowers, whither
they had retired with their children, having most hospitably resigned
their beds, and the partners of them, to the solicitations of my young
men.

I now repeated my inquiries, but my perplexity was not removed by any
favourable variation in their answers.  About nine, however, one of
them, still remaining at my fire, in conversation with the interpreters,
I understood enough of his language to know that he mentioned something
about a great river, at the same time pointing significantly up that
which was before us.  On my inquiring of the interpreter respecting that
expression, I was informed that he knew of a large river, that runs
towards the mid-day sun, a branch of which flowed near the source of
that which we were now navigating; and that there were only three small
lakes, and as many carrying-places, leading to a small river, which
discharges itself into the great river, but that the latter did not
empty itself into the sea.  The inhabitants, he said, built houses,
lived on islands, and were a numerous and warlike people.  I desired him
to describe the road to the other river, by delineating it with a piece
of coal, on a strip of bark, which he accomplished to my satisfaction.
The opinion that the river did not discharge itself into the sea, I very
confidently imputed to his ignorance of the country.

My hopes were now renewed, and an object presented itself which awakened
my utmost impatience.  To facilitate its attainment, one of the Indians
was induced, by presents, to accompany me as a guide to the first
inhabitants, which we might expect to meet on the small lakes in our
way.  I accordingly resolved to depart with all expedition, and while my
people were making every necessary preparation, I employed myself in
writing the following description of the natives around me:

They are low in stature, not exceeding five feet six or seven inches;
and they are of that meagre appearance which might be expected in a
people whose life is one secession of difficulties, in procuring
subsistence.  Their faces are round, with high cheek bones; and their
eyes, which are small, are of a dark brown colour; the cartilage of
their nose is perforated, but without any ornaments suspended from it;
their hair is of a dingy black, hanging loose and in disorder over their
shoulders, but irregularly cut in the front, so as not to obstruct the
sight; their beards are eradicated, with the exception of a few
straggling hairs, and their complexion is a swarthy yellow.

Their dress consists of robes made of the skins of the heaver, the
ground-hog and the reindeer, dressed in the hair, and of the moose-skin
without it.  All of them are ornamented with a fringe, while some of
them have tassels hanging down the seams; those of the ground-hog are
decorated on the fur side with the tails of the animal, which they do
not separate from them.  Their garments they tie over the shoulders, and
fasten them round the middle with a belt of green skin, which is as
stiff as horn.  Their leggins are long, and, if they were topped with a
waistband, might be called trowsers: they, as well as their shoes, are
made of dressed moose, elk, or rein-deer skin.  The organs of generation
they leave uncovered.

The women differ little in their dress, from the men, except in the
addition of an apron, which is fastened round the waist, and hangs down
to the knees.  They are in general of a more lusty make than the other
sex, and taller in proportion, but infinitely their inferiors in
cleanliness.  A black artificial stripe crosses the face beneath the
eye, from ear to ear, which I first took for scabs, from the
accumulation of dirt on it.  Their hair, which is longer than that of
the men, is divided from the forehead to the crown, and drawn back in
long plaits behind the ears.  They have also a few white beads, which
they get where they procure their iron: they are from a line to an inch
in length, and are worn in their ears, but are not of European
manufacture.  These, with bracelets made of horn and bone, compose all
the ornaments which decorate their persons.  Necklaces of the grisly or
white bear's claws, are worn exclusively by the men.

Their arms consist of bows made of cedar, six feet in length, with a
short iron spike at one end, and serve occasionally as a spear.  Their
arrows are well made, barbed, and pointed with iron, flint, stone, or
bone; they are feathered, and from two or two feet and a half in length.
They have two kinds of spears, but both are double edged, and of well
polished iron; one of them is about twelve inches long, and two wide;
the other about half the width, and two thirds of the length; the shafts
of the first are eight feet in length, and the latter six.  They have
also spears made of bone.  Their knives consist of pieces of iron,
shaped and handled by themselves.  Their axes are something like our
adze, and they use them in the same manner as we employ that instrument.
They were, indeed, furnished with iron in a manner that I could not have
supposed, and plainly proved to me that their communication with those,
who communicate with the inhabitants of the sea coast, cannot be very
difficult, and from their ample provision of iron weapons, the means of
procuring it must be of a more distant origin than I had at first
conjectured.

They have snares made of green skin, which they cut to the size of
sturgeon twine, and twist a certain number of them together; and though
when completed they do not exceed the thickness of a cod-line, their
strength is sufficient to hold a moose-deer; they are from one and a
half to two fathoms in length.  Their nets and fishing-lines are made of
willow-bark and nettles; those made of the latter are finer and smoother
than if made with hempen thread.  Their hooks are small bones, fixed in
pieces of wood split for that purpose, and tied round with fine watape,
which has been particularly described in the former voyage.  Their
kettles are also made of watape, which is so closely woven that they
never leak, and they heat water in them, by putting red-hot stones into
it.  There is one kind of them, made of spruce-bark, which they hang
over the fire, but at such a distance as to receive the heat without
being within reach of the blaze; a very tedious operation.  They have
various dishes of wood and bark; spoons of horn and wood, and buckets;
bags of leather and net-work, and baskets of bark, some of which hold
their fishing-tackle, while others are contrived to be carried on the
back.  They have a brown kind of earth in great abundance, with which
they rub their clothes, not only for ornament but utility, as it
prevents the leather from becoming hard after it has been wetted.  They
have spruce bark in great plenty, with which they make their canoes, an
operation that does not require any great portion of skill or ingenuity,
and is managed in the following manner.--The bark is taken off the
tree the whole length of the intended canoe, which is commonly about
eighteen feet, and is sewed with watape at both ends; two laths are then
laid, and fixed along the edge of the bark which forms the gunwale; in
these are fixed the bars, and against them bear the ribs or timbers,
that are out to the length to which the bark can be stretched; and, to
give additional strength, strips of wood are laid between them: to make
the whole water-tight, gum is abundantly employed.  These vessels carry
from two to five people.  Canoes of a similar construction were used by
the Beaver Indians within these few years, but they now very generally
employ those made of the bark of the birch tree, which are by far more
durable.  Their paddles are about six feet long, and about one foot is
occupied by the blade, which is in the shape of an heart.

Previous to our departure, the natives had caught a couple of trout, of
about six pounds weight, which they brought me, and I paid them with
beads.  They likewise gave me a net, made of nettles, the skin of a
moose-deer, dressed, and a white horn in the shape of a spoon which
resembles the horn of the buffalo of the Copper-Mine-River; but their
description of the animal to which it belongs does not answer to that.
My young men also got two quivers of excellent arrows, a collar of white
bear's claws, of a great length, horn bracelets, and other articles, for
which they received an ample remuneration.

[1] We had been obliged to indulge our hunters with sitting idle in the
canoe, lest their being compelled to share in the labour of navigating
it should disgust and drive them from us.  We, therefore, employed them
as much as possible on shore, as well to procure provisions, as to
lighten the canoe.




CHAPTER V.


JUNE, 1793.

_Monday, 10._--At ten we were ready to embark.  I then took leave of
the Indians, but encouraged them to expect us in two moons, and
expressed an hope that I should find them on the road with any of their
relations whom they might meet.  I also returned the beaver skins to the
man who had presented them to me, desiring him to take care of them till
I came back, when I would purchase them of him.  Our guide expressed
much less concern about the undertaking in which he had engaged, than
his companions, who appeared to be affected with great solicitude for
his safety.

We now pushed off the canoe from the bank, and proceeded East half a
mile, when a river flowed in from the left, about half as large as that
which we were navigating.  We continued the same course three quarters
of a mile, when we missed two of our fowling pieces, which had been
forgotten, and I sent their owners back for them, who were absent on
this errand upwards of an hour.  We now proceeded North-East by East
half a mile, North-East by North three quarters of a mile, when the
current slackened; there was a verdant spot on the left, where, from the
remains of some Indian timber-work, it appeared, that the natives have
frequently encamped.  Our next course was East one mile, and we saw a
ridge of mountains covered with snow to the South-East.  The land on our
right was low and marshy for three or four miles, when it rose into a
range of heights that extended to the mountains.  We proceeded
East-South-East a mile and a half, South-East by East one mile, East by
South three quarters of a mile, South-East by East one mile, East by
South half a mile, North-East by East one mile, South-East half a mile,
East-North-East a mile and a quarter, South-South-East half a mile,
North-North-East a mile and a half: here a river flowed in from the
left, which was about one-fourth part as large as that which received
its tributary waters.  We then continued East by South half a mile, to
the foot of the mountain on the South of the above river.  The course
now veered short, South-West by West three quarters of a mile, East by
South a quarter of a mile, South half a mile, South-East by South half a
mile, South-West a quarter of a mile, East by South a quarter of a mile,
veered to West-North-West a quarter of a mile, South-West one eighth of
a mile, East-South-East one quarter of a mile, East one sixth of a mile,
South-South-West one twelfth of a mile, East-South-East one eighth of a
mile, North-East by East one third of a mile, East by North one twelfth
of a mile, North-East by East one third of a mile, East one sixteenth of
a mile, South-East one twelfth of a mile, North-East by East one twelfth
of a mile, East one eighth of a mile, and East-South-East half a mile,
when we landed at seven o'clock and encamped.  During the greatest part
of the distance we came to-day, the river runs close under the mountains
on the left.


_Tuesday, 11._--The morning was clear and cold.  On my interpreter's
encouraging the guide to dispel all apprehension, to maintain his
fidelity to me, and not to desert in the night, "How is it possible for
me," he replied, "to leave the lodge of the Great Spirit!--When he
tells me that he has no further occasion for me, I will then return to
my children." As we proceeded, however, he soon lost, and with good
reason, his exalted notions of me.