THE

                        Old Sixth Regiment,

                                ITS

                        WAR RECORD, 1861-5,

                                 BY

                        CHARLES K. CADWELL,

                     _Late Sergeant of Co. F_.


                      NEW HAVEN, CONN., 1875.


                             NEW HAVEN:
               TUTTLE, MOREHOUSE & TAYLOR, PRINTERS.
                                1875.




                                 TO

                          THE LOYAL WOMEN,

                               WHOSE

                   HUSBANDS, BROTHERS AND FRIENDS

                 CAST THEIR LOT WITH THE OLD SIXTH

                                 IN

                       _DEFENCE OF THE FLAG_,

         THIS MEMORIAL OF PATRIOTIC SERVICE IS RESPECTFULLY
                             INSCRIBED

                           By the Author.




                           INTRODUCTORY.


The object of this work is to give a true and impartial record of the
old Sixth Regiment during the war. The author collected the facts from
a private diary kept by himself while in the service. Less has been
known of the Sixth by our citizens than most of the other regiments;
perhaps this is due partly to the fact that when we arrived in
Washington Colonel Chatfield instructed officers and men that it was
unmilitary to write letters for the press; he desired that the War
Record should know the record of the Sixth, and not the newspapers
only. Its history is less full on this account; yet none can say that
the record of the Sixth is sullied. In many trying places the regiment
proved itself honorably and gained confidence from its corps and
department commanders.

There may be errors in this work, and if any are inclined to censure,
I trust they will remember that very few histories are without them;
yet they are errors of the head and not of the heart. If what is here
written meets the approval of the old members and the intelligent
readers in general, I shall feel that my labors have been amply
rewarded.




                             CONTENTS.


                             CHAPTER I.

In camp at New Haven.--Fall in for rations.--Uncle Sam’s “Tanyards.”--
Squad drills.--An old man’s blessing.


                            CHAPTER II.

Off for the conflict.--Reception at Philadelphia.--Through Baltimore
at night.--Cattle cars to Washington.--“Soldiers’ Retreat” in
Washington.--Fat pork and muddy coffee.--Visit the Capitol.--Camp at
Meridian Hill.--At Annapolis, Md.--Embark on an Expedition.--Terrible
storm at sea.--Incidents, &c.


                            CHAPTER III.

In Port Royal harbor.--The ball opens.--First naval engagement of the
war.--Forts Walker and Beauregard.--Union fleet bombard the rebels.--
Complete rout of the enemy.--Triumphant victory for the Union.--Great
enthusiasm.--Connecticut lands the first troops.--Terrible scenes on
land.--Rebel pigs and chickens.--Uncle Sam’s rations at a discount.--
Warsaw Sound, Ga.--“Greybacks accumulate.”--“Sketch for special
artist.”--Spotted fever.--Deaths daily.--The old Sixth unfit for
duty.--Ordered to Hilton Head.--Dawfuski Island Camp.--Jones Island on
Savannah river.--Fort Vulcan built of mud.--Yankee ingenuity and
cunning displayed.--High tides, &c.


                            CHAPTER IV.

Capture of Fort Pulaski.--Heavy bombardment.--Back to Dawfuski
Island.--North Edisto Island blackberries help Uncle Sam’s pork to
digest.--Across John’s Island.--Col. Chatfield’s speech, victory or
death.--Tedious rain.--Guerillas cut off our supplies.--Three days
without food.--50 cents for a “hard tack.”--Arrive at Legareville on
the Stono river.--Cook rations.--Across the river to James Island.--
Tom Grimball’s Plantation.--Rebel advance.--Battle of Secessionville.--
Evacuation of James Island.--Go to Beaufort.--Band of the Sixth
mustered out.--Expedition to Mackay’s point.--Battle of Pocotaligo.--
Col. Chatfield and Lieut. Col. Speidel wounded.--Whole command return
to Hilton Head.--The Sixth at Beaufort.--Death of our department
commander Maj. Gen. Mitchell.


                             CHAPTER V.

Off for Florida.--Land at Jacksonville.--Occupy houses instead of
tents.--Skirmish with the enemy.--Streets barricaded to prevent
incursions of the rebel cavalry.--Sermon by Rev. Mr. French.--
Evacuation of Jacksonville by Union troops.--Town fired by the 8th
Maine and a colored regiment.--Back to Beaufort.--Thirty-five hours in
the town.--Embark again--a fizzle.--Back to Hilton Head.--Off again;
land at Folly Island.--Battery building at night.--Speak in whispers.--
Up Folly river.--Capture of the southern portion of Morris Island.--
Brilliant charge of the Sixth.--Capture a rebel flag.--Assault on Fort
Wagner.--Terrible scene at night.--Awful carnage.--Col. Chatfield
twice wounded.--Union force repulsed.--The ranks of the Sixth terribly
shattered.--Ordered to Hilton Head.--Death of Col. Chatfield.


                            CHAPTER VI.

Our new Colonel.--Great dissatisfaction thereby.--Part of the Sixth
re-enlist.--Deserters shot.--Death of Captain Allen.--Up to Virginia
under Butler.--Ascend the James river.--Bermuda Hundred.--Skirmish
with the enemy.--Battle of Chester Station.--Death of Captain
Wilcox.--Advance on Drury’s Bluff.--One of Butler’s “masterly
movements.”--Battle of Drury’s Bluff.--Union forces “change front to
the rear.”--Resignation of our new Colonel.--Appointment of Captain
Rockwell as Colonel of the Sixth.--President Lincoln rides by.--“What
mean those cheers.”--Battle of Strawberry Plains.--Hancock’s
works.--Battle of Deep Run.--In holes around Petersburg.--Discharge of
the non re-enlisted men.--Their reception in New Haven.


                            CHAPTER VII.

Around Petersburg.--Advance toward Richmond.--Attack on Battery
Harrison.--Draft riots in New York.--The Sixth ordered there until
after election.--Back again to Virginia.--Embark on expedition down
the James.--Capture of Fort Fisher.--Advance on Wilmington.--Skirmishing
with the “Johnnies.”--Enemy driven across North East river.--At
Goldsboro, N. C.--Surrender of Lee’s army.--Muster out of the Veteran
Sixth at New Haven.


                             APPENDIX.

Association of the Old Sixth meet in New Haven in May, 1868.--Its
object.--Permanent organization effected.--Choice of officers.--Yearly
reunions, their character, &c.--Pleasant occasions.


                    ROSTER OF THE OLD REGIMENT.

Names of officers.--Residence.--Date of muster.--General remarks.--
Names of enlisted men.--Substitutes and drafted.--Date of muster.--
Residence.--General remarks concerning all.--Unassigned recruits.


                           ROLL OF HONOR.


                      CASUALTIES OF THE SIXTH.




                       PRINCIPAL ENGAGEMENTS.


              Hilton Head, S. C., November 7, 1861.
              Pocotaligo, S. C., October 22, 1862.
              James Island, S. C., June 10, 1862.
              Secessionville, S. C., June 16, 1862.
              Jacksonville, Florida, March 20, 1863.
              Morris Island, S. C., July 10, 1863.
              Fort Wagner, S. C., July 18, 1863.
              Bermuda Hundred, Va., May 6, 1864.
              Chester Station, Va., May 10, 1864.
              Drury’s Bluff, Va., May 16, 1864.
              Strawberry Plains, Va., August 14, 1864.
              Deep Run, Va., August 15, 1864.
              Fort Fisher, N. C., January 14, 1864.




                                THE

                          SIXTH REGIMENT,

                  CONNECTICUT VOLUNTEER INFANTRY.




                             CHAPTER I.


Early Spring in the year 1861, was an eventful one in American
history. Troops were organizing in all the loyal States to go forth
and suppress the unequal war that was waged upon the people of the
North. Deeply was it overshadowing our land and threatening to destroy
our liberties as a nation. The shot against Sumpter’s wall was the key
note of the Rebellion, and its echo was heard in every town and
hamlet, uniting all loyal hearts and inspiring all the people with a
zeal which had hitherto remained dormant--a zeal to avenge the insult
offered to our flag and to vindicate the nation’s honor. Traitors had
been arrogant in our land and had openly defied any power of the
national government to suppress their actions, but the shot from
Charleston directed against a federal fort aroused the people to a
stern sense of duty. The call for brave men was nobly responded to,
and regiment after regiment took their place in line, and in due time
was off for the conflict. The disaster that befell the three months’
troops in the memorable Bull Run campaign, is widely known and needs
no repetition here. Then the call for three years’ men was issued and
again the ranks of the army were rapidly filled. None heeded the call
with greater alacrity than the men who composed the members of the
Sixth Regiment. A finer regiment or a more patriotic one, I venture to
say, never entered the Union army; and that they maintained the honor
of the State of Connecticut and reflected credit on their
organization, subsequent events will prove.

The Sixth was sworn into the State service on the 3d of September, in
camp at Oyster Point, New Haven, and on the 12th of the same month
Uncle Sam made us secure for three years or the war. The ranks of the
Sixth were filled with men who represented almost every avocation in
life. There were to be found professional men, others who had made
science a study, as well as a number who were skilled mechanics in
those higher grades of industry. The merchant left his counting room,
the student his books, the mechanic his workshop, the farmer his plow,
and stood shoulder to shoulder in the ranks for the one grand
object--the suppression of the Rebellion and the restoration of the
old flag. The field officers of the Sixth, with one exception, had
already been baptized with fire, and quite a large number of the rank
and file had seen active service in the three months’ campaign. John
L. Chatfield of Waterbury was commissioned as Colonel; Wm. G. Ely of
Norwich, Lieut. Colonel; John Speidel of Bridgeport, as Major.

The first company that reported on the ground was from Windham
County--Thomas K. Bates of Brooklyn, Conn., as Captain. Three
companies were furnished from New Haven, viz: Company “C,” Capt.
Daniel Klein; Company “F,” Captain Lewis C. Allen, Jr.; Company “K,”
Captain Henry G. Gerrish. Company “B,” Captain Benjamin F. Prouty, was
from Hartford and the adjoining towns. Company “D,” Captain Lorenzo
Meeker, was recruited principally from Stamford and Greenwich.
Waterbury and the towns along the Naugatuck Valley furnished the
members of Company “E,” Captain Edward P. Hudson. Company “G,” Captain
John N. Tracy, was mainly from New Britain. Company “H,” Captain Henry
Biebel, was called a Bridgeport company, although most of the members
were recruited in towns and cities north of New Haven. Company “I,”
Captain Thomas Boudren, was from Bridgeport, yet the adjoining towns
contributed largely to her quota.

The companies, although formed under each letter, were not full when
they reported in camp, yet recruits rapidly arriving soon swelled the
ranks to the maximum number. The camp at Oyster Point was but the
primary school that was to fit us for the more stern duties of the
field, and very little care was bestowed upon our future movements,
nor did we deem it wise to dwell upon the hardships of the soldier’s
life when in the enemy’s country. We had some faint ideas of what
might be, and while we could exclude these thoughts from our minds we
considered it best to do so, knowing full well that trials would come
soon enough. Our duties in camp were not arduous, and we patrolled our
“beat” with _unloaded_ muskets and kept a vigilant watch over the
commissary stores at night, exercising as much care as in guarding the
outposts in an enemy’s land. We would occasionally glance at the
future and try to study its mysteries. There was considerable pleasure
in the camp of the old Sixth, as well as its sorrows, and the time was
well occupied in various ways and the days glided swiftly by. Friends
were not wanting to regale our palates with choice food to supercede
the rations of Uncle Sam, and to ply all manner of questions regarding
our general health and condition. Such questions as “Did we sleep on
feather beds?” and “We surely could not be expected to keep awake all
night on guard?” and “Don’t they furnish butter on bread and milk in
coffee?” All these questions met with a ready response, and we
informed our careful friends that there was nothing like getting used
to these things, and Uncle Sam would not probably see us suffer while
so many _patriots_ wanted a contract to furnish supplies. Our
drilling was not very proficient during the first few days of camp
life, from the fact that the camp was filled every day with the
friends of the regiment, and the soldiers not having their uniforms,
it was rather hard to determine who were enlisted in the service and
who were the visitors. It is nothing detrimental to say that perhaps
we “smelt the battle afar off,” and anticipated a succession of drills
when we were removed from our friends and the pleasant scenes that
surrounded us in New Haven. But after we received our uniforms and
rifles, which was a few days before our departure, it gave a new
impetus. Then the boys began to feel that they were really soldiers.
We would don the army blue, and with a pair of Uncle Sam’s brogans
upon our feet, the boys would respond to the order to “fall in,” with
great alacrity; and then such a tramp with the “tan-yards” upon the
parade ground was a sight amusing to behold; and woe be to that
individual who had corns upon his feet when such a piece of sole
leather happened to light upon them. Under the efficient leadership of
our beloved Colonel, a brief period sufficed to acquaint us with a
soldier’s varied duties. Each soldier received from Uncle Sam the
usual equipment of kitchen utensils, which consisted of tin cup and
plate, together with a knife, fork and spoon, and the men require no
drilling to learn their use. If the order to capture a rebel fort was
responded to with as much speed as the boys obeyed the call to “fall
in for rations,” the cause of the Union would not suffer defeat at the
hands of its defenders.

But all things have an end, and so it was with our pleasant camp at
Oyster Point. After receiving the usual articles necessary for
transportation, we received our marching orders. There was the usual
bustle and excitement incident to breaking up a camp of soldiers, and
each one felt that the time for parting with friends had come.
Friendly greetings were heard on every hand. Many hearty hand-shakes
and “God bless you,” were given with a will, and not a few were bathed
in tears as the last good-bye was said. Many fond parents bade
farewell to sons for the last time on earth. Lovers greeted those
whose ties of affection and sympathy endeared them to each other, and
fondly cherished the hope that they would meet again when the war was
over. Our city fathers were not lacking in their praise at our
soldierly bearing, and extended a prayerful wish for a speedy and
triumphant return to our home and loved ones. One good old man, the
Hon. James Brewster, from whose name Company “F” Was called Brewster
Rifles, appeared in camp to the company he was so endeared to, and
made them a speech, recounting the hardships and perils of a soldier’s
life, and expressing a wish to hear a good report from Company “F.” As
we gazed upon the venerable aspect of this good man, whose counsel and
judgment were entitled to so much respect, we could not but inwardly
resolve that our best efforts should be put forth in defense of the
sacred liberties which had been such a strong bulwark to our nation.
Many were affected to tears during his address, and I doubt not the
memory of that hour made a lasting impression on many hearts present
as he closed with an old man’s blessing.




                            CHAPTER II.


Tuesday, Sept. 17, was ushered in by a warm sun and a genial
atmosphere, which only served to increase our interest in the busy
scenes that were before us, for we were all aware that the old Sixth
would soon be en route for the seat of war. The colonel and staff were
busy issuing orders, captains of companies were instructed to issue no
passes to leave camp, and so far as was practicable all visitors were
excluded from the precincts of the camp proper. The cooks were busy
preparing our rations, and every one seemed to think himself an
important personage around the cook’s tent. As the day wore on the
clouds began to thicken, portending a storm, and as the call was
sounded by the drummers at 2 o’clock to “strike tents,” the rain came
down copiously. We rolled up the wet canvass as expeditiously as
possible, which was quickly loaded on our army wagons, together with
other camp equipage.

We received two days’ rations for our haversacks, consisting of boiled
ham and hard bread, to nourish the inner man, and were soon in line
for our departure, but the usual delays incident to such an occasion
kept us in line about three hours. 5 o’clock came, and with it the
order to “Forward, march.” The band struck up “The gal I left behind
me,” and we marched through the rain and mud to Belle Dock. The rain
did not dampen the ardor of the boys nor decrease the patriotism of
the citizens of the Elm City. Handkerchiefs from fair ones waved us
adieu; men shouted “God bless the boys,” together with the martial
music of the band to increase the enthusiasm, made our departure from
New Haven pleasant to contemplate. Pleasant, from the fact that we
felt that the prayers and best wishes of our good people would go with
us, as incentives to noble principles and holy action. We embarked on
the steamer Elm City and soon stretched ourselves on the several decks
and in the cabin, glad enough for a chance to rest ourselves, for the
rain had drenched us through to the skin. The boat left her moorings
at 8 o’clock, and when we awoke we found ourselves alongside the dock
at Jersey City. For some unknown reason we did not disembark till
about noon. At 2 P. M. we left by rail for the capital of the nation.
Arriving at Philadelphia we were entertained at the Union Refreshment
Rooms with a bountiful collation, which was indeed refreshing to the
inner man, and it also gave evidence of a large stock of loyalty on
the part of the good people of that city. Every regiment passing through
the city were made heartily welcome to their hospitality, and none
will ever forget the hearty cheers and the “God speed” which was heard
on every hand.

Leaving Philadelphia, our next stopping place was at Perryville, where
we arrived at 8 o’clock in the evening. We were delayed here about two
hours, and were then ferried across the river to Havre-de-Grace, when
we again started by rail for Baltimore, arriving there at 10 P. M. No
cheers for the Union soldier startled our ears at this place. No
demonstration of delight at our arrival, but all seemed sullen, and
their actions showed more of a secession spirit than otherwise. We
were ordered to fix bayonets before we crossed the city, for the
memory of the Massachusetts Sixth who had preceded us was not
forgotten, and a repetition of those scenes would not have found us
unprepared. The spilled blood of the Massachusetts Sixth will ever be
a stain upon the records of the Monumental City while this generation
inhabits this mundane sphere.

We crossed the city to the depot where we found cars waiting to
transport us to Washington. We were huddled aboard cars that we
understood were used to transport cattle the day previous, and we had
no reason to disbelieve the report, for the muck and filth covered the
floors to such a depth that anything short of a pair of Uncle Sam’s
“tan-yards” would have been lost sight of in a short time. However,
we accepted the situation, believing that it all made up the three
years of a soldier’s life. We arrived in Washington on the 19th, at 6
o’clock in the morning, very much fatigued by our wearisome ride in
the cattle cars, wishing, longing, hoping, for what the soldier calls
“a good square meal.” We expected Washington would not be behind
Philadelphia in this respect, and after stacking our arms and waiting
patiently for about two hours our ears were startled by that sound so
welcome to every soldier, “Fall in for rations.” They marched us into
a building having a sign over the door reading “Soldiers’ Retreat.”
Visions of cold ham and soft bread appeared unto us, and that
beverage, which always cheers but does not inebriate, we thought we
smelt afar off; but alas, for a soldier’s hopes. What a sight greeted
our eyes as we filed into that building. Three long rows of tables,
running the length of the building, were piled up with chunks of half
boiled pork which looked as if they had been cut from the hog when
just killed, for the bristles were long enough to lift up each piece
by. A quantity of stale and musty bread and some very muddy coffee,
completed our bill of fare. We had not anticipated such a re-treat as
this; however, we felt that it was nothing like getting used to these
things, and we did retreat and got our breakfast at the eating houses.
We had a few hours to see the sights of the city, and improved them
by a visit to the Capitol and House of Representatives, also the
Senate chamber, where some of the boys sat down in the chair which
Jeff. Davis had vacated, just to see how it would seem. Others made
impromptu speeches on the great questions which were agitating our
country.

The camp which was assigned to us was out to Meridian Hill, about four
miles from the capitol, and thither we marched and pitched our tents,
and were quite willing to enjoy a comfortable snooze when the drums
beat the tatoo.

The Sixth was brigaded with the Fourth and Seventh New Hampshire and
the Seventh Connecticut, which arrived the next day, all under command
of Brig. Gen. H. G. Wright.

A member of Co. “B” was taken ill when but a few days in camp, and was
removed to Columbia Hospital, where he died of congestion of the brain
on the 26th of September. This was the first death since our
organization. Death claimed another victim in a member of Co. “F,”
Theodore Gibbons by name. He died on the 7th of October.

The twenty days of our camp life in Washington was one unceasing
drill: morning drills by the sergeants, before breakfast; company
drill after that meal was over; then the brigade drill after dinner,
taken with our other duties, made our time pretty much all occupied.
We began to see in these extra duties the inner life of a soldier, and
our proficiency in drill was manifest from day to day, yet as we heard
of the clash of war and read the accounts of skirmishes, we longed to
be at the front where we might participate in those stirring scenes.
Several times during our camp life here, we were called into line and
extra rounds of cartridges given us, with the orders to hold ourselves
in readiness to move at a moment’s notice, but as often dismissed to
await the next call.

On the 8th day of October we left Washington by rail for Annapolis,
Maryland, and arrived there after a wearisome ride of twelve hours. We
were quartered in the Navy Yard for a few days, which gave us an
opportunity of seeing a few of the relics of the war of 1812. Many
ancient looking swords, old flintlock muskets and wooden canteens were
among the collection. A few days passed and we went outside the town
and pitched our tents near a grove of fine old trees, where we might
have better facilities for drilling, &c. We were inspected several
times by prominent officers of the regular army, which gave evidence
of some movement or other on foot, and a short time elapsed ere it was
noised abroad that we were going on an expedition.

The 19th of October found us all packed up and tramping up the
gang-planks of the steamers to sail on the great expedition, with
sealed orders, under Gen. Sherman. The right wing of our regiment was
assigned to the steamship Marion, the left wing to the steamer
Parkersburg. There were seventeen regiments in all, and thirty-three
steam transports to hold us, besides quite a fleet of gunboats, made
up the entire fleet. Such formidable looking boats presented to our
vision, gave evidence of something else beside a mere excursion. We
knew that hard work and fighting were before us and that only a few
days would elapse ere we should see the rebel soil.

Weighing anchor, we passed down the bay to Hampton Roads, Va., where
we remained several days, waiting like Micawber, for something to turn
up. Finally, the union jack gave the signal for sailing, and glad
enough were we at the prospect of soon being able to step on terra
firma once more. Two days out from Hampton Roads we experienced a
terrible storm at sea, and for several hours the prospects of seeing
anything but a broken wreck and finding a watery grave, were
exceedingly dubious. Wave after wave poured over us. The hatches were
fastened and everything on deck was lashed tight to prevent being
washed away. The red glare of the lightning, with the terrific peals
of thunder, made the scene awfully grand. Now in the trough of the sea
and another moment upon the crest of the waves, with all on board
terribly sea-sick, was a picture not very pleasant to dwell upon. Our
fleet became scattered and two vessels were sunk; others had horses
washed overboard; while another was forced to throw into the deep her
entire armament, which consisted of some improved guns which we
expected would do some very effective service. A merciful Providence
permitted us to outride the storm and once more see the scattered
fleet all together again, save those that went to the bottom. Many a
prayer of thankfulness went up to God for our safe deliverance from
such a storm.

A day or two of pleasant sailing brought us at anchor in the harbor of
Port Royal, South Carolina, with two very formidable looking rebel
batteries on either side of the harbor. Here we saw that our mission
was to reduce these works and gain a foothold on South Carolina soil.
The rebel soldiers gazed at us from their strongholds, and two very
scaly looking gunboats ventured down from their hiding place a short
distance above the batteries, and sent us their compliments in the
shape of a few shells for about the space of half an hour, but with no
damage to our fleet; but as soon as one of Uncle Sam’s boats gave them
a few messengers of war, they were glad enough to change front to the
rear and troubled us no more that day.




                            CHAPTER III.


The 7th of November, 1861, will ever remain in the history of the war
as one in which a grand victory perched upon the banner of the Union;
when treason and rebellion received a blow from which they never fully
recovered. The members of the old Sixth will not soon forget the
events that transpired. Our gunboats were occupied several hours in
getting into position to do the most effective service, and after
forming into a circle, with the grand old frigate Wabash taking the
lead, they sailed around once and then opened fire upon those
strongholds of rebellion. The enemy were evidently expecting something
of the kind, for they returned the fire with great promptness. Fort
Walker, on Hilton Head, seemed determined to drive the Union fleet
away from the harbor, while Fort Beauregard, on Bay Point, which was
opposite, played comparatively a small part, for all her shell fell
short of the mark. As the boats moved nearer and nearer the engagement
became more general, and shot and shell flew like hail through the
air; those of the enemy doing little execution, while our shells seemed
to stir up the sand around and in their batteries at almost every
fire. The troops on the transports watched the engagement with intense
interest, while broadside after broadside were poured into those
doomed works of treason. Orders were signalled to have the troops
prepare, in light marching order, to land at short notice. We were
confident the battle would be short and decisive, as the rebels could
not withstand such terrible odds. As the battle raged, our boats
directed a part of their fire into the woods that skirted the shore on
Hilton Head. What could that be for? was the query; when it was
announced that the rebels were routed and were retreating through the
woods; and such we learned to be a fact, as they could easily be
discerned by the glass, making their escape in that direction. A few
more well-directed shots, and the firing ceased; then we knew the
victory was ours. A boat was lowered and manned by a picked crew of
man-of-wars men, who pulled for the shore with great speed, landed and
made their way into the fort on Hilton Head and raised the glorious
stars and stripes on the rebel flag staff. Words cannot describe the
events that followed in a few brief moments. The battle had been waged
precisely five hours when the victory was announced. Liberty was
triumphant over the despotism of slavery. The different bands on the
steamers struck up the national airs, songs were sung, and cheer after
cheer rent the air from thousands of throats, while the loud huzzas
swept through the fleet like a whirlwind, and not a few prayers arose
to the God of battles for giving us such a signal victory.

Thus was witnessed the first naval engagement of the war. Preparations
were now made to land the troops, as it was feared the rebels would
rally and contest the possession. The Connecticut troops were selected
to land first, and the Sixth, with Lieut. Col. Ely in command, were
put aboard the steamer Winfield Scott, while the Seventh, under Col.
Terry, was in boats in tow of the steamer. The steamer ran as near the
beach as she could, when we got into lighters and jumped into the
swelling surf--a cold bath for us at 10 o’clock at night, with water
up to armpits, our arms upstretched, with our rifles and cartridge
boxes to “keep our powder dry;” but all were in good spirits and
seemed willing to undergo any hardship to save the Union and the
suppression of the infernal Rebellion.

We took possession of the rebel works after we landed, without making
any formal demand therefor, and not until we landed did we know what
dreadful havoc our shells had made; the sight beggars description. The
dead and wounded lay in heaps, and the air resounded with groans and
petitions for help. We built huge fires to dry ourselves, stationed
our pickets and lay upon our arms, not daring to explore the island
very far the first night, for fear of an ambuscade. The night was
spent without sleep, as we were thoroughly drenched through, and we
were glad to hail the morning light. A detachment of three companies
under Lieut. Col. Ely explored the lower part of the island, and met a
few of the enemy who had not succeeded in getting away; had a brisk
skirmish with them, in which they retreated. The detachment brought
into camp two fine brass howitzers, with a valuable pair of horses,
besides seventy other horses, six mules, six wagons, two yoke of oxen,
together with other valuable property of a total value of $50,000; but
no credit was ever given us, not even a quartermaster’s receipt.

The island of Hilton Head was very rich and fertile; the cotton fields
were ripe, waiting for the second picking. The palmetto tree was green
and the air as balmy as June. Sweet potatoes were plenty, to be had
for the digging. Every building near the fort was riddled by our
shells, while the tents were torn into shreds. Our surgeons provided
for the wounded as well as they could with the means at hand. Many of
the dead were literally torn to atoms, and some were half buried where
they fell; guns were dismounted, army wagons smashed, and many fine
horses and mules lay in heaps. During the bombardment, a rebel gunner,
wearing a red shirt, was noticed by our fleet to occupy a very
prominent position on the parapet, and was seen to pat his gun every
time he fired it, and we found one arm with a piece of red flannel
upon it near the gun, which seemed to be all that was left of him; he
was evidently blown to atoms. Those who succeeded in getting away
alive must have beat a hasty retreat, for knapsacks, blankets and
rifles lay in confusion all around, and were found at almost every
step for miles through the woods. The armament of the fort was 22
heavy guns, most of which were rifled and of the most approved
pattern; and two heavy globe-sight rifled cannon, the gift of some
_neutral_ English friends to the Confederate States.

For a short time Uncle Sam’s rations were at a discount, as the
trophies of war in live stock seemed abundant. Pigs were roaming at
will, only to be confiscated by a soldier; chickens and geese were
found in large numbers, and we regaled our palates with sweet
potatoes, sugar cane, roast pig and broiled chickens. The commissary
stores of the rebels were probably larger at this time than during the
latter days of the confederacy. But after a while of sumptuous living,
we were obliged to fall back on our regular salt junk and hard tack.

After the stars and stripes, the State flag of Connecticut was the
first to wave over South Carolina soil, and the Connecticut troops
made the first advance into the interior. 120 head of beef cattle,
numerous porkers, large quantities of chickens and other fowls were
brought in from the adjoining plantations in the days that followed,
but these latter captures had to be turned over to the Quartermaster,
except occasionally some fowl or porker that was slyly appropriated by
a soldier for a “side dish” to accompany the junk and tack. We made
frequent skirmishes over the island, but the foe had departed and the
negroes were the sole occupants of the homes of their masters. The
groves of orange trees at Seabrook’s plantation were very fragrant,
and the ripe fruit was quickly disposed of as contraband of war. We
scouted out to the plantation owned by one Graham, which was about
five miles from Hilton Head. There we found quite a village of
negroes, who seemed pleased to see the “Yankees,” as they termed us;
and on our inquiry as to the whereabouts of their masters, their reply
was, “I dunno, massa; dun gone for true dis time; spect him a right
smart way off.” The plantation of “Squire Pope,” as the negroes called
him, was a lovely place, indeed. The fine old southern mansion was
situated in a large grove of live oak trees, with ample grounds neatly
fenced. Large groves of orange trees, whose fragrance filled the air
and gave evidence of the home of contentment and wealth, but the
occupants had fled and left their household goods to the mercy of the
soldiers. Two spacious libraries were in the house, filled with books.
Heavy plate glass mirrors and fine oil paintings adorned the walls,
which, together with the rich furniture, made the place seem too good
to be destroyed by the ruthless hand of war.

Our forces were busily engaged in unloading the transports of their
cargoes; piles of lumber were brought ashore and three large
storehouses were erected on the island to hold Uncle Sam’s rations;
and everything indicated that Uncle Sam was to hold possession.
Wheelbarrows, pickaxes and shovels were numerous, and we soon learned
their use. A long line of earthworks was thrown up by the troops for
protection from any advance that might be made. While we remained at
Hilton Head we became very proficient with the shovel and pick, and
for a time our rifles became rusty; but the same could not be said of
our shovels.

The early months of winter, 1862-3, the Sixth remained on the island,
perfecting themselves in drill and awaiting orders; and the 20th of
January found us with orders to embark on a secret expedition under
Gen. Wright. We were hurried aboard of the steamer Cosmopolitan, a
boat much too small to accommodate our regiment; but we were informed
that our stay aboard would be of brief duration--perhaps only a day or
two would elapse before we should land. We accepted the situation, as
it all made up the three years of a soldier’s life. A storm set in and
kept the fleet in the harbor for nearly a week; after which we weighed
anchor and dropped down to Warsaw Sound, Ga., with the idea of
avoiding Fort Pulaski and capturing Savannah by the way of an inlet. A
long experiment was made by our gunboats, while the transports with
the troops lay in Warsaw Sound. Commodore Tatnall, of the rebel navy,
with his “mosquito fleet,” as it was named, made several assaults on
our gunboats, but was invariably compelled to withdraw without any
advantage gained. Our condition on shipboard was deplorable; so
cramped were we for room that when we lay on the decks at night one
could not walk among the sleeping forms without stepping on a soldier.
For sixteen days we were fed on salt pork and beef, and no vegetables,
with hard tack that was full of vermin, and water that had been put in
kerosene oil barrels three months before. The water was so thick in
one barrel that the writer saw, it could be lifted up on the finger.
It was so nauseating and foul that when poured into the sea, the water
was discolored by it. We had no water to cleanse our bodies, save what
the sea afforded, and salt water without soap is not very good to
cleanse with. Dirt and filth prevailed to an alarming extent, and
“gray-backs,” as the boys called them, accumulated upon our bodies in
a fearful manner. As one Dutchman expressed it, he had lice so big,
“shust like wheat.” None were exempt from these pests, from the Colonel
down. So alarming was our condition that the whole brigade was ordered
ashore that we might bathe and wash our clothes while the boats were
fumigated. Scarcely had we landed ere the whole beach presented a
ludicrous appearance--a sight of which a “special artist” might
envy--that of a brigade of soldiers stripped to the waist, picking off
these vermin. We remained ashore one day and then returned to our old
quarters on board the ship, and in a short time were as filthy as
ever. Severe sickness in the form of “spotted fever” broke out in the
ranks of the Sixth in consequence, and became so aggravating that
there was an average of four or five deaths daily. Large strong men
were attacked in the morning and before night were dead. It baffled
the skill of our surgeons, who worked with untiring zeal to break up
this dread malady. Death seemed near at hand; and to pass away by a
foul disease contracted by being kept amid such filth was hard to
contemplate. All expressed a desire rather to face all the guns of the
rebel army than to meet death in this manner.

A religious interest sprang up and prayer meetings were held in the
cabins every evening. Many were converted and a large number professed
Christ as their only hope. The Division Surgeon came on board and
pronounced our condition as a very critical one, and said we must be
sent back to Hilton Head to recruit; so back we went, although we would
have preferred to go with the fleet if our quarters had been suitable
to stay in. News of our illness reached the Head before we did, and
when we landed, there were none to bid us welcome; all the soldiers
kept at a safe distance. We pitched our camp on the old parade ground
of the Ninth Maine Regiment, but no soldiers ventured near to greet
us, as is usual on such occasions. One regiment sent us some coffee,
bringing it as far as our camp guard and leaving it for us to take at
our pleasure.

Being once more on mother earth, with plenty of exercise and the
facilities for keeping clean, the regiment rapidly improved in health,
deaths became less frequent, and we felt like ourselves once more. As
soon as practicable we were detailed to work on the fortifications,
and the pick and shovel were not allowed to rust. The 20th of March
again found us under marching orders; this time our destination was
Dawfuskie Island. We embarked in the morning and landed at 10 o’clock
at night; marched through the woods to the end of the island opposite
Fort Pulaski. A drenching rain made our march very wearisome, and we
were glad enough to find a chance for rest a short time before
daybreak.

Dawfuski Island was a beautiful place. The groves of orange and fig
trees were in blossom and their fragrance filled the air. The
pomegranate and persimmon looked fine indeed, and the plantations were
beautified with many choice flowers in full bloom. The Sixth made
several reconnoissances up New River, toward Savannah, and watched the
enemy in that direction. Part of our regiment was selected to occupy
Jones Island, which was on the Savannah River, about midway between
Fort Pulaski and the city. A few companies of the Forty-eighth New
York Regiment had preceded us and were engaged in building a fort to
prevent the enemy from reinforcing Pulaski. We built a corduroy road
across the island by laying several tiers of logs across each other;
and it was with extreme difficulty we could gain a foothold, as the
mud was so soft we would slip and go down knee deep into the mud. None
but Connecticut Yankees would have thought it possible to fortify
themselves in such a place. There was not a tree or shrub on the whole
island; nothing but tall rank sea grass. We pitched our tents in the
mud; banked them up with mud, and it was mud everywhere. At some of
the high tides the entire island was covered with water to the depth
of several inches. The writer has a vivid recollection of being
awakened one night with the water surging into his ears, and we were
all obliged to get up from our bed of sea grass and wait for the tide
to recede, with no more sleep that night. The confederacy and its
leaders did not receive very flattering compliments from the Union
soldiers about this time, or the writer’s ears deceived him.

We managed, however, by excessive labor, to build a fort of mud, with
the assistance of a few bags of sand which we got out of the river
when the tide was low. The hot southern sun baked the mud quite hard
as we piled it up, and by degrees we managed to get a foundation
secure enough to mount nine heavy guns, which we drew across the
island by night. The task was very laborious, and many gave way to
fevers and other diseases, which made extra duty for those who managed
to survive. Day after day we worked in mud and water up to our knees.
The gnats and mosquitos were so thick we tied cloths around our heads
to get a partial relief from the insects. Our water for cooking and
drinking purposes we got from the river; it was brackish and insipid
enough, and many sighed for a cooling draught from the old oaken
buckets of our northern homes.




                            CHAPTER IV.


The batteries on Tybee Island being already very strongly entrenched
(the mortars out of sight of the fort), everything appeared ready for
the battle. The Seventh Connecticut was assigned the duty of serving
at the mortar batteries and other troops were on duty at the rifled
guns. The work before us seemed no easy task, considering the strength
of the enemy. Fort Pulaski’s walls were seven feet thick and mounted
one tier of guns in embrasures and on _en barbette_. It was a huge
five-sided fortress and was said to have been built by a Connecticut
Yankee. Twenty guns, including 10-inch Columbiads, bore upon our
batteries at Tybee, which had a decidedly unpleasant look. Col.
Olmstead, the commander of Pulaski, was once more and for the last
time invited to surrender; but he sternly refused by saying he was put
there to defend the fort and not surrender it. Our batteries opened
the ball at 8 o’clock on the morning of the 10th of April by a signal
gun from battery Halleck. Simultaneously all the guns and mortars
blazed away with such a deafening roar that the very island itself
seemed to shake in its marshy anchorage. From that hour onward till
the surrender, the artillery fire against the solid masonry of
Pulaski’s walls was terrific. The rebels replied vigorously and in a
determined manner. The smoke was so dense that the sun was obscured.
At a quarter to eleven o’clock the rebel flag-staff was shot away and
the rebel rag tumbled down. This was hailed with intense cheers and
seemed to add new zeal to the soldiers who manned our guns. The
distance between the combatants was at least a mile, yet it was very
evident that nearly all our shots were telling. Our solid shot brought
away great piles of masonry and clouds of brick dust filled the air.
All day long an incessant fire was kept up, and at night the mortar
batteries sent their compliments while the others ceased. At daylight
the next morning the battle was resumed with its accustomed vigor, and
in the early part of the forenoon a large breach was made in the
walls. Guns were dismounted and seen to fall, yet the rebs seemed as
tenacious as ever. Our gunners directed their fire toward the magazine
of the fort in such well-directed shots that the rebels, fearing an
explosion, hoisted the “white flag” at two o’clock, April 11th, and
its appearance was greeted with the wildest enthusiasm. Cheer after
cheer rent the air as victory had once more perched on our banners.
The firing ceased, the smoke cleared away, and then we saw plainly
the great destruction our shells had made. The Seventh Connecticut had
the honor of taking possession of the works and was also awarded the
rebel flag.

After the fall of the fort, Col. Chatfield was ordered to dismantle
Fort Vulcan, on Jones Island, the battery of mud upon which we had
worked with so much zeal. But, by some misunderstanding, our gunboats
were drawn off, which left us in rather an unpleasant predicament, had
the rebels chosen to come from Savannah and attack us. But Col.
Chatfield was equal to any emergency, and with his usual foresight and
calm self-possession, he dismounted the 10-inch columbiad in the night
and floated it on a raft over to Pulaski, where it arrived safely the
next day. In its place we mounted a black log with a barrel on one
end. After our evacuation, Johnnie Reb sallied down the river and
captured the “Quaker.” We resumed our pleasant camping ground on
Dawfuski Island, which was quite a pleasing contrast with that on
Jones Island; but the arduous labors imposed upon the Regiment for the
past few weeks began to tell upon the men and patients at the hospital
were numerous.

We remained here drilling, and with our usual camp duties, till the
last week in May, when we were ordered to report at Hilton Head, again
embarking on that dreaded steamer Cosmopolitan, but did not remain on
board very long this time, for, upon reporting to the General, we
sailed for North Edisto Island, and arrived there in the evening of
May 22d. Large quantities of blackberries were ripe in the field, and
we found them very palatable and we thought they helped Uncle Sam’s
pork to digest. The Brigade under Gen. Wright was here reorganized and
composed of the following troops: 6th Conn.; 47th New York; 55th and
97th Penn. Regiments. We here spent the time in brigade drills and the
usual picket duties till the 1st of June, when we crossed over to
John’s Island. We expected our destination would be somewhere in the
vicinity of Charleston, and were not disappointed. After marching
several miles we halted at a large sugar plantation for rest. Col.
Chatfield addressed us on our mission, and assured us we were marching
on to victory or death, as we were going into the hot bed of rebeldom
and undoubtedly would see some hard fighting; but he was confident we
would meet the issue with determined bravery, and he was to “lead us
forward.” This last remark brought forth cheer after cheer for our
gallant Colonel. The members of the Sixth felt justly proud of Col.
Chatfield.

Our march across John’s Island was slow and tedious, as the guerillas
infested us on all sides. Our cavalry scouts were ever on the alert,
but, as the road was new to them the rebs used every advantage against
us. Our wagon trains were cut off and the command was without food for
three days. Men offered 50 cents for a hard-tack. One soldier offered
to eat a dog if it could be found. A body of cavalry moved to the rear
and assisted greatly in dispersing the guerillas, and we were again
rejoiced to see some salt junk. To add to our discomfort, a drenching
rain storm set in which lasted three days, and while we were without
tents or shelter of any kind except a gum blanket. To skirmish the
woods through the briers and underbrush all day and lay on our arms at
night with our clothes wet through and flesh all parboiled, was not
very agreeable. We were not allowed to build a fire on any condition,
as our near approach to the foe might discover our strength. When we
arrived at the little village of Legareville, on the Stono River,
opposite James Island, we found none to oppose us; all had fled. The
poor shanties that composed the village were the only dry wood
available for fires; we concluded we would confiscate enough to dry
our clothing and cook our pork. As we were now within sight of the
Johnnies, no further seclusion seemed necessary, for in a few days at
least, we expected to “get together,” and we knew we should have more
zeal with a good square meal in our stomach and dry clothes upon our
backs. Our chaplain counted eighty-three fires made on the ground,
with an average of five cups to each fire, cooking pork, bacon and
coffee. Col. Chatfield was assigned to the command of our Brigade, and
on the evening of June 8th, he moved across the river to James Island,
which is only about four and a half miles from Charleston. We rested
for the night on Tom Grimball’s plantation. The enemy attacked us the
next night in our front, but were repulsed after a brisk skirmish of
an hour’s duration. The Connecticut battery was here, doing excellent
service under Captain Rockwell, and the gun boats shelled the enemy
over our heads, both of which proved valuable assistants to us. The
Sixth held the advance picket line on the left for several days, and
the rebels annoyed us exceedingly by sudden dashes through the woods
upon our front, but we held our position firmly and repulsed every
sortie made. Their sharpshooters, posted in trees and in places where
they could see our position, very often shot down the picket without
giving us a chance to fire back unless we fired at random. Gen. Wright
remarked to his staff that he could rest quietly while the Sixth
Connecticut held the advance; he was not afraid of the picket line
being deserted, as was the case with a Pennsylvania regiment who ran
into camp in great haste one night, reporting the advance of the whole
force of the Johnnies, when it was found that only a few of them had
ventured near our lines to see what material Uncle Sam’s boys were
made of. Gen. Wright promptly sent them back to their post, with orders
to remain there till properly relieved. The pickets kept up their fire
along the lines, and many were killed and wounded without extending
the line on either side.

The battle of Secessionville was fought the 16th of June. This was a
small village north of Stono river, but was strongly entrenched
outside. With Gen. Lamar’s forces in the rifle-pits, a strong abatis
in front, flanked by creeks and marshy ground and everything in their
favor, the task seemed not an easy one to accomplish. Gen. Benham
started his forces at daylight, and when near enough to do any
service, the command, which consisted of about 7,000 men, wheeled into
line and the attack became general. The enemy poured a most galling
fire into our forces and mowed down our men with fearful loss. The
swampy ground making it impossible to form a line of battle, the
forces were massed together, which impeded its progress as well as
destroyed its efficiency. After several assaults, the forces were
obliged to give up the contest and withdrew in good order, with
nothing gained, but with a great sacrifice of life. The whole
expedition seemed to have been shockingly managed. Ten thousand men
were sent here on a five days’ march with about two days’ rations, and
the plan of the battle reflected no credit upon the person who
conceived it. It was reported in camp that it was a successful
reconnoissance to find the exact position of the enemy, and, as the
troops withdrew in good order, the second attack would prove
victorious. But all soldiers are not deceived by reports from
headquarters. We well knew it was a defeat, with everything that word
implied, and a second attempt would have resulted as disastrously as
the first under the same leadership and plan of attack. Our loss in
killed, wounded and missing footed up to 763. Only two companies of
the Sixth were directly engaged. The other portion of the regiment was
held in reserve. Had the enemy followed up their advantage they might
have compelled us to seek shelter under the banks of the river, but
could have forced us no further, as the gun boats were a strong
defence whenever an opportunity offered itself. The enemy shelled us
pretty severely for several days after this, and we were constantly
under arms, expecting an advance, but none was made.

When Gen. Hunter arrived from the North he ordered an immediate
evacuation of the island. The command moved at midnight across the
island to Battery Point, where we leveled to the ground two of the
enemies’ batteries which they had evacuated for a season, destroyed by
fire a long bridge that spanned a river, and then embarked. The Sixth
and Seventh Conn. went back to Edisto Island with Gen. Wright, while
the remaining forces were sent to other stations. Our stay on Edisto
was a brief one of only two weeks duration, when we were called to
Port Royal. After reporting at the latter place we were sent up to
Beaufort. This little seaport town was once the summer resort for the
chivalry. It contained some very pretty houses, two medium-sized
hotels, several churches and an arsenal; but how desolate in
appearance now,--not a white inhabitant of the town remained to greet
us; all had fled. The negro population welcomed the advance of the
Union troops and gladly hailed the appearance of their deliverers.
Brig. Gen. Brannon commanded the post here. We encamped in a fine
grove of live oak trees that skirted the banks of the river and
considered ourselves fortunate in getting such a pleasant place for
our camp. The greater part of the summer months were inactive in this
command. The forces settled down for the regular camp drill and
discipline. Each regiment took its turn at the ten days’ picket
service, which duty called them out to some fine plantations in the
suburbs of the town. Here we enjoyed the life of the soldier. Our
duties were not arduous and we had opportunity for reading and
writing. The fields were filled with sweet potatoes and corn, together
with the orange and fig trees which abounded near the houses, made our
visits on this picket duty desirable. Our lines skirted the banks of
the rivers and streams, with an occasional raid upon the main land in
search of the Johnnies. These raids sometimes resulted in great
captures, not of the rebs themselves but of their fowls. The Union
soldiers did not want the fowls to lack or suffer hunger, and so
confiscated them that they might not starve. Lieut.-Col. Ely left the
regiment here at Beaufort, having been promoted to be Colonel of the
Eighteenth Connecticut. During the intense heat of the summer many
fevers prevailed and a number sickened and died. Yellow jaundice
prevailed to a great extent. All seemed afflicted with it more or
less, which was about as comfortable to endure as sea-sickness. Capt.
Gerrish, of Company “K,” died on the 19th of August, of typhoid fever,
after an illness of about three weeks; his loss was deeply felt in the
regiment.

It was during our sojourn in Beaufort that orders were issued from
Washington for the discharge of all regimental bands. The members of
the Sixth deeply regretted the loss of their band; it was such a
comfort to hear the strains of music, and we felt that we could march
better, yea, fight better, with the band to enliven the scenes that
surrounded us; but the order was peremptory and home they went,
regretted by all.

In the latter part of October an expedition was conceived by Maj. Gen.
Mitchel, commanding the Department of the South, to proceed inland
with a small force and burn the railroad bridges between Charleston
and Savannah. Scouts had been sent out on several occasions to find
the position of the enemy. A negro lent valuable assistance on one of
these occasions, and the attempt at least seemed practicable. Sergt.
Robert Wilson, of Co. “D,” Sixth Connecticut, had been selected to
pilot the raid, as his knowledge of the position of the enemy had been
carefully gained by his recent daring scouts in their vicinity. Two
brigades of troops under Brig. Gen. Brannan were selected for the
occasion. The first brigade was led by Col. Chatfield, including his
own regiment; the second brigade being led by Gen. Terry. The fleet
consisted of nine gun boats, three transports, one schooner and two
tugs. The Sixth was commanded by Lieut. Col. Speidel, a man noted for
his bravery and his keen judgment and foresight. The fleet sailed on
the afternoon of the 21st of October, through Broad River, twenty
miles from Port Royal, and the next morning at 7 a. m. we landed at a
place called Mackay’s Point, at Boyd’s landing. Here the whole command
rapidly disembarked and pushed forward. The first brigade led the
advance, and the force, in column by companies, kept together as
closely as the state of the road would permit. We passed many recently
deserted plantations, pushing on over corn and cotton fields, through
ditches and swamps for about five miles, when we discovered the enemy
posted on a rising ground beyond a marsh and flanked by thick wood.
They immediately opened upon us with a heavy fire of musketry and
howitzers as we entered a large corn field, and our command quickly
formed in line of battle and “went for them” pretty much the same as
“Bill Nye went for the heathen Chinee.” Haversacks and blankets were
immediately thrown off and we were very soon hotly engaged. The rebs
fled along the road before the second brigade was fairly on the
ground. The first brigade entered the woods under a galling fire of
grape and cannister. Here we found it difficult to proceed, as the
underbrush was so thick we could scarcely stand upright, and all the
while subjected to a storm of bullets without a chance to make an
effective return shot. We were ordered to fall back in the corn field
while the skirmish line moved up the road. We soon cleared the woods
of the enemy and again pushed forward through a deep morass, over
ditches and through such thick briers that the blood oozed from our
hands and faces. The jolly Jack Tars from the gun boats, led by the
Middies, brought up several field pieces by means of drag ropes, and
did very effective service in dislodging the enemy at this point. Here
our regiment suffered severely. Col. Chatfield and Lieut. Col. Speidel
were both struck with cannister shots while bravely leading the men.
The old Sixth, as if to avenge the wrong, became more desperate than
ever and charged upon the Johnnies and drove them across the
Pocotaligo river into the town bearing that name. They immediately
fired the bridge to prevent our crossing, and the structure was
rapidly consumed. The river being too deep to ford, we were obliged to
remain on its banks. Our object was to destroy the bridges over the
Pocotaligo, Salketchi and Coosawatchie rivers, and cut the railroad at
this point, in which we were partially successful.

Col. Barton, of the 48th New York, landed at the mouth of the
Coosawatchie river and proceeded inland to the railroad, where they
encountered a train of cars loaded with rebel soldiers. They fired
upon them, killing the engineer and also the color-bearer of the
“Whippey Swamp Guard,” and captured his flag. The 48th was obliged to
fall back, as the rebels outnumbered them three to one, but made good
their retreat without the loss of a man. The first brigade was engaged
felling trees to bridge the river preparatory to crossing, but the
fire of the enemy was so deadly we were obliged to desist. During the
lull a locomotive whistle was heard in the distance and a train of
cars thundered into the village laden with rebel troops, which was
received with cheers for “South Carolina.” Late in the afternoon our
ammunition was spent and we were obliged to fall back. The Sixth
Connecticut and 47th New Hampshire covered the retreat. Our return to
Mackay’s Point was slow and tedious, as we carried off all our wounded
and gently laid out our dead, covering them as far as we could with
the blankets of the soldier.

The horrors of war were indeed sickening, as the rebels had every
position in their favor and their fire was very destructive. Dead
soldiers and horses lay in the woods as we passed; broken gun
carriages lined the road, and blankets, haversacks and rifles lay
around the ground in large numbers. One sight which the writer
witnessed gave evidence of true heroism. As the man-of-war’s men filed
down the road dragging their guns, one old Jack Tar who had lost his
right leg and from which the blood was still oozing, was strapped upon
his gun, while his comrades were gently cheering him up. As he passed
our regiment he looked up with as cheerful a face as he could command,
and, reaching out his arm, patted his gun as affectionately as one
would a favorite child. Such heroism should not go unrewarded. Many of
our command displayed unflinching courage, and the record of the Sixth
Connecticut at this battle was indeed gratifying to its general
officers.

We had about 4500 troops engaged, composed of the following regiments:
6th Conn.; 4th New Hampshire; 47th and 55th Penn. regiments, in the
first brigade under Col. Chatfield. The 7th Conn., 76th Penn., 3d
Rhode Island, and 3d New Hampshire, composed the second brigade under
Brig. Gen. Terry, besides the Jack Tars from the frigate Wabash. The
total loss to the whole command is not within my knowledge, but the
Sixth suffered a loss of five killed, twenty-nine wounded and three
missing. Orderly sergeant Robert B. Gage, of Co. “I,” who displayed
great bravery on the field, was killed by a rifle ball in the side.

We arrived at Mackay’s Point about eleven o’clock at night, tired and
footsore, and bivouacked on the banks of the river till morning, when
we commenced to embark, which was completed at sunset, as the wounded
were all brought in and tenderly cared for. We returned to our old
camp at Beaufort, where we again settled down to the routine of
drills, etc.

On the 30th of October our corps commander, Maj. Gen. Mitchel, died of
yellow fever after an illness of a few days. The whole command mourned
his loss as a brave and efficient general; one who had endeared
himself to the soldiers by his many good qualities of heart and his
pleasing address. The funeral was attended in St. Helena church at
Beaufort. It was quite an impressive scene. The Forty-seventh
Pennsylvania regiment acted as escort and was followed by the First
Massachusetts cavalry and four pieces of the regular battery, besides
detachments from all the other regiments in the command, the naval
officers, headed by admiral Dupont, officers of the army on horseback,
together with the agents of the government, made up the funeral
cortege.

During the winter months of 1862-3 the Sixth remained at Beaufort,
steadily increasing in drill and guarding the island from attacks from
the main land. While thus comparatively inactive the members cast
about for something to relieve the dull monotony of the season, and it
was resolved to form a society for our mutual improvement. Having
obtained consent of our commander, the society called “The Young Men’s
Literary Association of the Sixth C. V.” sprang into existence. The
officers elected were: President, Timothy H. Eaton, of Co. “A;” Vice
President, Robert McLavy, of Co. “E;” Secretary, James A. Wilson, of
Co. “K;” Treasurer, Charles K. Cadwell, of Co. “F;” Executive
Committee, Clark M. Loomis and Charles M. Morris, of Co. “F.” We held
many interesting debates in the Chapel tent on the leading questions
of the day. As the society increased in membership we found our
quarters much to small, and, by the consent of the commander of the
post, we obtained permission to occupy one of the churches near our
camp for our sole use, which we dedicated Chatfield Hall. This we
fitted up as well as our limited means would allow, and, by the help
of some of our generous officers, we added a small library. The
society rapidly increased in interest, and members were admitted from
other regiments, and many exciting debates, which would have reflected
credit on the floor of Congress, were heard within this place. The
Glee Club of the Sixth, composed of Benjamin Terrell, of Co. “F,”
sergeants Whiteley, Deming and Edward Yates, and corporal Cummings, of
Co. “G,” rendered some fine music on several occasions. Regular
meetings for prayer and conference were also held, and many of these
meetings were largely attended, with gratifying results. Exhibitions
of various kinds were given by the boys, including arts of
ventriloquism, negro minstrelsy, tableaux, &c. Thanksgiving day was
spent in a variety of out-door sports, such as ball-playing, pitching
quoits and running races; and at the close of the day we had a “Mock
dress Parade,” in which privates acted as the general officers, being
dressed as oddly as possible, some with only underclothes on, others
with coats and pants turned inside out and with knapsacks under their
coats. All orders from the “Col.” were obeyed directly opposite to the
command. A large number of visitors were present and were convulsed
with laughter at the proceedings, while the participants maintained as
much decorum as when on a real parade.

New Year’s day, 1863, found us still at Beaufort, with the privilege
of “half holiday.” The day was beautiful and the ushering in of the
new year was pleasantly greeted by all, with many a hope and prayer
that we should soon see the close of the war. A variety of games were
gotten up to make time pass pleasantly, the first of which was a
target practice. The first prize of ten dollars was awarded to a
private in Co. “A,” the second best, a prize of five dollars, was
awarded to a private of Co. “K.” The jumping feats were next in order,
with a large number to compete. The prize of five dollars was awarded
to Joel C. Osborn, of Co. “F.” Following this came the “hop, skip and
jump.” Corporal Cummings, of Co. “G,” jumped, hopped and skipped
thirty-three feet and four inches, and was declared the winner of the
first prize of five dollars. The second best, a prize of two dollars
and a half, was given to a private of Co. “I.”

These exercises closed the pleasures of the forenoon. In the afternoon
a running match was first in order, distance 150 yards; first prize,
of five dollars, awarded to corporal Botts, of Co. “D;” second prize,
two dollars and a half, awarded to private Banty, Co. “D.” The next on
the programme was a target placed in the ground to be bored with an
auger at twenty paces, blindfolded. The prize of five dollars was
awarded to Orrin Lathrop, of Co. “F,” he being the only competitor who
touched the target at all. Next came the wheelbarrow races, distance
100 yards; first prize, five dollars, awarded to private Duprey, of
Co. “A.” Nearly all the competitors went about a hundred yards from
the point in opposite directions. The sack races were the most
laughable of all, as each contestant was completely enveloped in a
sack, which made their progress over the ground very ludicrous to
behold. Catching the greased pig and climbing the greased pole were
other games resorted to and had many contestants. The day closed with
another burlesque dress parade and a short review, which was a decided
improvement on our last one, and caused much pleasure to the
spectators, among whom were Gen. Brannan and staff and a large number
of ladies.

The Sixth spent a great deal of time on the surrounding plantations on
picket duty, at which places we were picketed for ten days at a time.
Each company made certain plantations their headquarters, while every
nook and ravine where the enemy were likely to attack was strongly
guarded. For a time we found rebel chickens and pigs more palatable
than hard tack and pork. The oranges and figs were not left to spoil
upon the trees, and every sweet potato and corn field was visited for
supplies. The rebel pickets at Port Royal Ferry were very
communicative, and several times we exchanged papers with them. They
seemed anxious to “barter” something with a Union soldier whenever an
opportunity presented itself. Their stock in trade consisted chiefly
of tobacco, which they would readily exchange for salt or coffee. They
invariably deprecated the war and wished for its close. Several flags
of truce came at this point for different objects, the bearers of
which were clad in the poorest of homespun clothes and always had the
appearance of half starved creatures; long, lank, hollow-eyed, and
hollow cheeks, with tangled hair and a saffron look in the face
betokened the straits of the confederacy. Well might they wish for the
war to close and “go hum,” as they termed it, when they gazed on the
comparatively well fed and well dressed soldier of the Union army.




                            CHAPTER V.


The Sixth Connecticut Regiment left Beaufort on the evening of the
18th of March, bound down the coast. We passed several places of
interest on our journey, among which were Mayport Mills, Fernandina
and Fort Clinch. Deserted plantations lined the banks of the river and
everything had the appearance of war’s desolation. In trying to cross
the bar and enter St. John’s River we got aground, and after several
ineffectual attempts, we finally succeeded by the aid of a tug-boat,
and our destination, Jacksonville, was reached on the morning of the
20th of March. One U. S. colored regiment were the only troops in the
town. We did not pitch our tents here, but occupied the houses which
had but recently been vacated. We found in many of the houses
everything necessary for housekeeping, even to beds and bedding. So
hastily was the retreat of the chivalry from this place that many
valuable household goods were among the trophies. Large quantities of
eatables were found buried in stone pots, some quaint looking guns and
almost every article needed for house use. Quite a number of families
of rebel proclivities remained in the town, who were either unable to
get away after we took possession, or else were unwilling to lose
their household goods. We barricaded the streets and avenues leading
out of the town by felling trees across the roads to prevent the
incursions of the rebel cavalry which infested the woods back of the
town.

Jacksonville was once a watering place and home for invalids, and many
of our northern people resorted there during the months of winter to
enjoy its salubrious climate. It must have been an inviting retreat in
its palmiest days. Everything here seemed to have been laid out for
comfort and convenience, unlike many places which we have visited. But
alas! how things had changed. Houses that were once the home of wealth
and luxury were now the abodes of the Union soldier. Gardens laid out
with the choicest flowers were trampled under foot by horses of our
cavalry; the stores were closed, the goods removed; and business at a
standstill. A few negroes lurked around the town, who were glad to get
under cover of the Union arms. Co. “F” of the Sixth occupied the fine
old mansion belonging to Col. Pierson of the rebel army, which was
situated on the corner of Market and Duval streets, opposite the
Episcopal Church. There many of the troops resorted and the organ was
in constant use.

The first Sabbath we spent in Jacksonville we attended service and
listened to a very able discourse by the Rev. Mr. French; his subject
was “The sword of the Lord and of Gideon.” The church was densely
crowded with white and black soldiers, navy and army officers and
civilians. In the course of his remarks he alluded to the deserted
city and why the inhabitants had left it, fearing their lives would be
in danger if they remained till the so-called Yankees made their
advent in their midst. He expressed himself quite well pleased with
the conduct of the white troops, and especially the Sixth Connecticut.
He said Gen. Hunter had selected the Sixth above all others to occupy
this place and protect the remaining inhabitants from the lawlessness
of the rebel cavalry. He assured us our position was not an enviable
one, as we were in a bad place and the woods swarmed with rebel
cavalry, waiting only their chance to surprise us; but he (the
speaker) was confident that the enemy would not catch us napping, and
when brought to the foe, would meet them with determined bravery. We
were quite pleased with the speaker’s allusion to our regiment, and he
was personally thanked by many for the exalted opinion he entertained
for us.

The Eighth Maine regiment arrived here from Beaufort a few days after
we took possession. The rebels frequently annoyed us by shelling the
town with a gun which they had fastened to a railroad car, and would
bring it as near the town as they dared on the track, and then shell
us. Our gunboats were not slow to disperse them, however, and they
were soon driven back. On one of these occasions a shell entered a
house (which the writer visited), passing through the bed-room in
which a man and wife were sleeping, and in its course it passed
through a stuffed-seat rocking chair on which lay the man’s coat,
cutting off the skirts and forcing them through the back of the chair.
The window glass were shattered and two looking glasses hanging in the
room were broken, while the occupants of the bed were literally
covered with plaster and splinters. The lady remarked to the writer
that she was not partial to balls of that kind, and told him if he
ever met Gen. Finnegan (the rebel commander), to present her
compliments with the request that fish-balls would be more acceptable
next time.

We found ourselves busy each day in preventing the raids of the enemy,
and several times were called up at night by the pickets being driven
in. Our force was so small that an advance very far would have been
with a great sacrifice of life for us, and our gunboats prevented a
very long stay of the rebel troops in the town. We suffered no loss of
life in our regiment while here; a few were slightly wounded. An
expedition of the negro troops went up the river as far as the town of
Pilatki, where they surprised a small force of rebels and captured 14;
the rest fled in dismay, fearing a large force was at hand. They also
captured some horses and about $3,000 worth of cotton, which they
brought away in safety. While on their way down the river the enemy
fired upon them, wounding Lieut. Col. Billings of the First S. C.
troops, a ball passing through the palms of both his hands and another
through his leg.

On Sunday, the 29th of March, Gen. Hunter ordered the evacuation of
Jacksonville by all the Union troops. The inhabitants begged
permission to accompany the troops, as their lives were in danger as
well as their property, if left at the mercy of the rebel troops.
Their request was partially granted and they flocked in numbers to the
transports with large quantities of household goods, which so
completely blockaded the room that orders were issued to put the goods
on the wharves again. Large numbers of negroes secreted themselves on
board the boats, fearing to be left behind. As we left the town an old
lady appeared on the veranda of her house wringing her hands and
sobbing as if her heart would break, doubtless sad at our departure. A
large number of the houses and stores were set on fire just before we
got on board the steamers, and as we left the wharves the larger part
of the town was in flames and was probably destroyed. This wanton act
of vandalism was charged upon the negro regiment, and they in turn said
the Eighth Maine Regiment was to blame; no doubt both of these
regiments had something to do with its destruction. It was entirely
unnecessary and uncalled for, and the wanton act of burning a town
would not destroy the Rebellion nor reflect any credit upon those
soldiers of the Union who fired it. Justice should overtake all, and
severe punishment meted out to those who so far forget the bounds of
propriety as to disgrace the honored cause in which they are engaged.

We did not arrive at Beaufort as soon as we expected, owing to a heavy
storm of wind and rain which set in, and as our boats were old and so
heavily laden it was not deemed prudent to venture outside in such a
gale. The storm passed by and we reached our destination in safety on
the morning of April 1st. We pitched our tents, expecting to settle
down again; but the soldier has no abiding place in time of war, nor
does he know one day where he will be the next. After thirty-five
hours in Beaufort, we were off again on another “excursion.”

The rumors in camp seemed to indicate that this time the expedition
was to be more formidable than any previous ones, and this was true,
as the sequel will eventually prove. Large numbers of troops were
being put on board steamers at this place and at Hilton Head; gunboats
were active and all was bustle and excitement. The wildest rumors
prevailed as to our destination; some asserted that we were going to
Virginia, while others claimed Charleston as the most probable place
of attack. The Sixth embarked on the steamer Belvidere and steamed
down to Hilton Head, where we lay for one day awaiting orders; in the
mean time troops were embarking and getting ready to sail. When all
seemed ready, we were off for the conflict and came to anchor in Stono
River, a little below the village of Legaresville. Here we found other
troops had preceded us and were also waiting to land. The monitors and
other gunboats were busily engaged up the river shelling the camps of
the enemy. Two shots from the enemy came in rather too close proximity
to our steamer for safety, and we hoisted anchor and dropped a
distance down the river out of range. The gunboats were engaged nearly
every day for a week in the direction of Charleston, while we remained
on board ship awaiting orders. Finally it was rumored that there was
some trouble existing between some of our officers high in command,
and that the whole force was to be withdrawn. The rumor proved
correct. Admiral Dupont and Gen. Hunter disagreeing in the plan of the
battle, it could no longer avail anything and the whole affair proved
a fizzle. In the meantime Gen. Hunter was relieved and Maj. Gen.
Gilmore appointed to command. Gen. Gilmore was well known for his
engineering skill and also his military prowess.

The morning of April 11th, the fleet withdrew to Hilton Head and
reported, while the different regiments were sent to various posts.
The Sixth encamped at Hilton Head, just outside the breastworks, where
we remained till the 18th of April, when we again embarked and sailed
for North Edisto, arriving there the next morning and anchored in the
stream close to the dock, but we did not land till the 26th, when we
were put ashore on Botany Bay Island, which is near the Edisto. We
were immediately ordered out on a scout of about seven miles, after
the Johnnies; but with the exception of passing a deserted cavalry
camp we saw no evidence of the enemy. We returned to the landing and
went on board the steamer, where we passed four more days, when we
finally made a landing on Folly Island. The island was rightly named,
for a man in civil life must indeed be a fool to think he could live
on such a barren place; but a soldier is expected to live anywhere
where he is sent. The island is a long strip of land about
three-quarters of a mile wide at the widest point, and about four
miles long, lying immediately south of Morris Island, from which the
northern point is separated by only a narrow stream called Lighthouse
Inlet. The lower part of the island runs down to a sharp angle and is
covered with a thick growth of pine and palmetto trees, while the
upper part was a low, marshy swamp. With swarms of sand fleas and
mosquitoes for our constant companions, we pitched our camp on the
sand hills; there could be no order or regularity to our company
streets, for some tents were pitched on a hill, while others were in a
valley. Our fatigue duty was quite arduous, as we were obliged to work
nights, and had to maintain the utmost silence, speaking only in
whispers. From the upper or northern portion of the island, where we
built the batteries, we could see the Johnnies on Morris Island very
plain; but they little thought of the doom that was in store for them.
They suspected no serious movement on our part, and did not think we
had more than one field piece on the whole island. When we were
obliged to fell trees we sawed them in two and lowered them gently to
the ground by means of ropes. All the heavy cannon were brought
through the woods and mounted at night, and then masked by covering
them with leaves and dirt. It was with the greatest secrecy that the
work was pushed forward. The enemy saw none of our troops nearer than
the woods except the picket line, and while we seemed idle by day,
hundreds of shovels gleamed at night by willing hands, while battery
after battery rose up, yet nothing was visible to the rebels. Huge
mortars and parrot guns came from Hilton Head, landed at Stono Inlet
and were dragged slowly and tediously to their place under cover of
darkness. Ammunition was taken forward and concealed every night for
over three weeks. The Sixth found its labors very severe. By moonlight
and during heavy thunder showers the work went steadily forward. At
the end of that time, ten large batteries had been completed, mounting
48 heavy guns and within 400 yards of the enemy’s works.

During the latter part of the time they began to suspect something was
going on, for we could see them strengthen their batteries on the
opposite bank. The rebel pickets were very inquisitive and tried to
question us regarding our position, &c. We were on good terms with
each other, and made miniature ships, freighted them with salt and
coffee, and sent them over to the rebs, and in return they sent us
tobacco. They informed us of the death of “Stonewall” Jackson, and
displayed their flags at half mast and fired half hour guns throughout
the day in honor of the deceased. They generally communicated to us
the news of any battle that occurred sooner than we got it through our
own sources. They seemed to relish a joke occasionally. One of them
informed us that Gen. Beauregard had such an exalted opinion of the
“Yankees” on Folly Island that he was coming over to make us a visit
and give us all a “farm six feet by two.”

About the 1st of July large numbers of troops began to arrive at the
island, and “old Folly” literally swarmed with them. The order was
given for us to capture the battery on the end of Morris Island, and
we expected to make a night attack, so we sewed pieces of white cotton
cloth on the left arm, that we might be distinguished from the foe. At
midnight on the 9th, large detachments of troops stepped quietly into
boats and rowed silently up Folly River; not a word was spoken above a
whisper, nor any noise heard, save the splashing of the oars and the
occasional plunge of the alligators from the river bank. At about 3
o’clock the flotilla of eighty large launches had arrived near Morris
Island, and we were ordered to keep close to shore and under cover of
the tall sea grass that lined its banks. Here we waited patiently for
the dawn of day,--a day that was to bring victory to our flag, but
death to many a brave soldier. We could see from our position the
rebel soldier lazily walking his beat on the parapet, while the smoke
from the dim camp fires slowly ascended skyward. Everything indicated
to us that they were not expecting cannon balls for breakfast nor the
advent of the boys in blue. Gen. Strong, who was to lead the attack,
looked every inch a soldier, as he moved among us giving cheering
words to all. At precisely 5 o’clock, the batteries that we had worked
on so faithfully for weeks, were unmasked to the enemy and opened
simultaneously from 48 guns. The astonished rebels soon replied with
great rapidity. As the ball opened, the inhabitants of Secessionville,
on James Island, crowded to the roofs of the houses till they were
black with them, to witness the battle. Our gunboats shelled the
batteries with good effect, and the enemy discovering our position in
the boats, scattered grape and cannister among us with fearful
rapidity. There we lay in the boats for two hours under a heavy fire,
while the rebels divided their compliments among us and the gunners at
our batteries. The batteries did not seem to have the desired effect
of dispersing the enemy, and Gen. Strong was signalled to land his
forces and charge upon their works. The rebels perceiving the signal
and interpreted its meaning, directed a galling fire at the boats. One
boat of the Sixth was struck and a member of Co. “E” lost a leg which
soon caused his death; another was wounded and the boat overturned,
but was soon righted by help from others and the men rescued. We
pulled for the shore, eager to land, and while a detachment of the
Seventh Connecticut landed first on the left of the rifle pits and
were feeling their way. The old Sixth sprang into the water knee deep
and was soon directly in front of their battery; rushing forward with
bayonets fixed and with an honest Union cheer. The rebels depressed
their guns to rake us as we landed, but the shot struck the ground in
front of us and passed over our heads, and the amazed rebels, seeing
our determination, turned to flee just as we gained the first line of
works, but we were too quick for them, and the Sixth captured 125
prisoners and a rebel flag. Private Roper Hounslow, of Co. “D,” saw
the bearer of the flag making for the rear as fast as his legs could
carry him, when he ordered him to halt; but he would not, and he shot
him through the head. The flag was inscribed “Pocotaligo, Oct. 22,
1862.” It had blood stains upon it which were probably spilled at that
place. Col. Chatfield waved the banner aloft, feeling very much elated
to think we had captured the flag that bore this inscription, for he
received a wound at Pocotaligo. Col. Chatfield led his men to the last
range of rifle pits, which was within a rifle shot of Fort Wagner. The
Sixth had the advance all day. Our flags were riddled with shell, and
the staff of the stars and stripes was broken in three different
places. A rebel ramrod was substituted for the broken staff, and our
flags floated from the only house on the island. This house was the
headquarters for the rebel officers, and when we entered it the coffee
was in cups on the table and breakfast nearly ready; but we did not
stop to eat, as we were looking for water; and seeing the coffee,
disposed of it in short meter. Two solid shot from Fort Wagner came
tearing through the house, demolishing the chimney and scattering the
bricks upon the tables in great confusion. We concluded that we might
be demolished if we remained in there long, so went out; the house being
a good target, it was soon riddled with shell from Forts Sumpter and
Wagner.

We remained at the front till about sunset, under a severe fire
continually. Tired and footsore, with hardly anything to eat, and
without sleep for three nights, we were glad when orders came for us
to fall to the rear and another regiment to take our place. Gen.
Strong was active all day and infused spirit into the soldiers by his
commanding aspect. When we landed he was burdened with a pair of long
military boots upon his feet, and as we jumped into the water these
became so full that locomotion was well nigh impossible, so he pulled
them off and threw them away, going in his stockings. The briars over
the sand hills soon wore the bottoms of these off, and having captured
a rebel mule, got astride of him and went forward with a cheer from
the soldiers. Soon after the battle he appeared among the members of
the Sixth, still astride the mule, who looked jaded enough. “Boys,”
said he, “I don’t look like a General, but you look and have acted
like true soldiers,” and immediately rode away, followed by the cheers
of the soldiers.

It was determined to assault Fort Wagner and capture it with the
bayonet. The Seventh Connecticut was to lead the charge, supported by
the Ninth Maine and Seventy-sixth Pennsylvania. Early on the morning
of the 11th, before the lark was awake, this command silently moved
forward, drove in the rebel pickets and with a cheer rushed into the
ditch and up the parapet, but met a very stubborn foe, who poured
grape and cannister into their ranks. The Ninth Maine, instead of
supporting them, wavered, at such a fearful fire, and ran away, while
the Seventy-sixth Pennsylvania stood their ground. But the battle was
against fearful odds, and they were obliged to retire and give up the
contest. The Sixth lay all night in the rifle pits before Wagner, in a
drenching rain, keeping a sharp look out for any surprise. On the
morning of the 18th they came into camp wet and covered with sand,
weary enough to lay up for a rest; but there is no rest for the
soldier in time of war. Scarcely had we brushed off the sand and got a
bite of pork and crackers before we were ordered to join in the
assault on Wagner at dark. Never was an order more cheerfully obeyed,
especially as the word passed around that Col. Chatfield was to lead
us into action, the Colonel declaring his preference “to stand or fall
with the men of the Sixth,” and refusing the honor of commanding our
brigade, which belonged to him as the ranking officer. The gunboats
shelled the rebel fort incessantly, plowing up great heaps of sand
with one shell, and another perhaps would fill up the crevice. The
broadsides from the New Ironsides were terrific, and the five monitors
in line, together with five other gunboats, seemed to pour shell enough
into Wagner to start several first class iron foundries. Shot and
shell crashed above and within it and we wondered if half of them
accomplished their mission. Before night came, hardly a gun boomed
from Wagner, and many seemed to think an easy victory was within
reach. As twilight approached the whole command lay under cover of the
sand hills, waiting for the order to advance. The Fifty-fourth
Massachusetts (colored regiment) were given the post of honor, the
right of the first brigade, which position belonged to the Sixth; but
at the request of Col. Shaw of the Fifty-fourth, who wanted the black
troops to distinguish themselves, Col. Chatfield granted them their
wish. Gen. Strong, who was to lead the charge, then addressed them. He
said, “Men of Massachusetts, I am going to put you in front of the
chivalry of South Carolina, and they will pour iron hail in your
faces; but don’t flinch; defend the flag and uphold the honor of the
State of Massachusetts.” He further told them “the Sixth Connecticut
was immediately behind them, and I know they will not flinch.” They
fell upon one knee in the sand and with their right arm raised, they
swore they would do it.

The command formed silently on the beach; the men seemed impatient to
move as the scene became exciting. “Close column, by companies,” was
the order given, and the first brigade was off for its work. Steadily
forward we moved, while the gunboats still roared away. At a given
signal they ceased their fire and the order passed to charge. The
rebels waited till we were within range and then poured a volley into
our ranks from their guns on the parapet, while the riflemen rattled
their bullets from the small arms. The Fifty-fourth wavered for a
moment, and that moment was fatal to them; they broke and fled. On
pressed the Sixth through the iron hail, picked our way through the
abatis, descended the ditch and climbed up the steep sides of the
fort, and gaining the parapet, was among the rebels. The flash of a
thousand rifles poured into us, followed in quick succession by hand
grenades. Shrapnel, cannister and grape were freely showered into the
ranks, while we leaped down to the casemates and bomb-proofs, driving
the enemy before us in great confusion. They entered their rifle pits
and checked our further advance. The night was so dark it was hard to
distinguish friend from foe, and a signal from the rebels turned the
fire of Fort Sumpter and Battery Gregg upon the angle of the fort
which we held. In vain did we look for help from the second brigade.
Many a brave soldier had sealed his loyalty with his blood, and Gens.
Strong and Seymour, Col. Chatfield and others, were badly wounded and
carried to the rear. We were virtually without any commanding officer
to lead us. To wait for daylight would have been sheer madness, and the
supporting brigade, terrified by the deadly cannonade, instead of
relying upon the bayonet to accomplish the work, stopped and fired.
The rebels saw the mistake and rallied upon the Sixth, which stood
almost alone within their works. The charge was repulsed, but after
remaining for about three hours under such a deadly fire, we escaped
as best we could, with terrible loss. Had the second brigade supported
us in time, no doubt we could have held it. The Fifty-fourth
Massachusetts Regiment rallied soon after they faltered and came up to
the left angle of the fort, where they finally did good service. Here
Col. Shaw met his death. The Sixth Regiment and the Connecticut colors
were the first in the fort that night. The color-bearer, a German
named Gustave DeBouge, was shot through the forehead while carrying
the colors in the assault, and fell dead upon the flag, his life blood
staining them through. Several brave ones who were near seized them,
but they also fell either dead or wounded. Captain Frederick B. Osborn
of Co. “K,” as brave an officer as ever wore shoulder straps, finally
succeeded in pulling them from under the bodies and bearing them off
in triumph. Our flags were much shattered and torn, but both were
saved from the enemy.

In leaving Wagner that night, the ditch we crossed was filled with the
dead and wounded, and we were compelled to step upon their bodies in
making our escape. Many fell wounded upon the beach, and as the salt
water surged over their bodies and in their wounds, their groans and
cries were terrible to hear. Men begged piteously to others more
fortunate, to remove them out of reach of the incoming tide. Our
return to camp was attended with almost as much danger as our advance,
and many brave men who were spared through the terrible ordeal in the
fort, were either killed or wounded in returning to the rear. Every
foot of ground seemed to be covered by the fire of the enemy’s guns.
Batteries Gregg and Wagner, Forts Johnson, Ripley and Sumpter, besides
two gunboats in the harbor, all directed their missiles of death to
further our destruction while retreating; and how so many of us were
spared through such a terrible conflict, can be attributed only to the
goodness of our Heavenly Father. Truly the God of battles was on our
side.

Our loss was quite heavy, considering the force engaged; the Sixth
being exposed to the deadliest fire, their ranks were pretty well
thinned out and the total figures footed up to 141 killed, wounded and
missing. Many of the wounded brought off the field died the next day.
Among the killed was Lieut. Stevens of Co. “I,” a cannister shot
passing through his heart. He was Ass’t Adjutant General on Gen.
Seymour’s staff, a position he filled with great ability. Having made
military matters a study for a number of years his services were
valuable to the government. His body was brought off the field and
buried beneath one of the lone palmettos. A large influx of surgeons
arrived from the North a few days after the battle, many of whom were
mere boys, having hardly attained their majority, without experience,
and many without common sense, came to Morris Island to assist in
caring for the wounded. A slight wound in the limb was sufficient
cause for them to amputate, and many suffered amputation of limbs that
with proper treatment could have been spared to them. The writer saw a
surgeon’s table improvised on a sand bluff, where these “would-be-surgeons”
were using the scalpel knife in severing the arms and legs of the
wounded, and a great pile lay beside them. Many a victim protested
against this outrage, but was told that it was the only thing that
would prolong life. The victims in many cases died soon after the
operation.

Fatigue duty fell unusually hard upon the troops on the island, and
every night found the Sixth in the trenches, building batteries or
hauling heavy guns to the front. Under fire every day and night, the
regiment suffered the loss of many members by wounds and death. While
at the front one day a flag of truce came from Wagner, borne by a
rebel Captain named Tracy. Capt. Tracy of the Sixth met him and found
that he wanted to negotiate for an exchange of prisoners. Gen. Vogdes
was informed and the terms agreed upon. On Friday, July 24, a large
steamer bearing our wounded, came down the harbor and ran alongside of
one of the monitors. It was said she was a blockade runner and had
recently ran the blockade. Upon her decks were Englishmen dressed in
the height of fashion, talking loudly of the superior intellect of the
southern chivalry. The steamer Cosmopolitan, which had recently been
fitted up as a hospital ship, ran alongside and delivered up the rebel
wounded and the rebels gave us 205 Union soldiers. They also reported
that they had amputated the limbs of 25 and that 50 had died on their
hands. We also learned that they were so indignant because our
government employed negro troops, that when they found Col. Shaw’s
body they dug a deep trench and put the body in and then threw 25 dead
negroes top of it. This circumstance we learned to be a fact, the
pickets in our front having reported the same thing to us.

The Sixth Regiment, so shattered in the charge of the 18th and
depleted in numbers, was ordered to Hilton Head to recruit and care
for the large numbers who were wounded. We landed there on the 31st of
July, commanded by Captain Tracy, who was senior Captain in the
regiment and highest officer for duty. While at the Head the news came
to us of the death of Gen. Strong and Col. Chatfield, both having gone
North to recruit their health. The men of the Sixth cherished very
great affection for their beloved Colonel, and were grieved to hear of
his untimely death.

Col. Chatfield was born at Oxford, Conn., in 1826; was the son of
Pulaski and Amanda Chatfield. He was apprenticed to the carpenter
business in Derby, where he served four years at his trade; after
which he worked as a journeyman. In 1855, having moved to Waterbury,
he was associated with a brother in building, and the firm was widely
and favorably known. Always upright, a man of sterling integrity,
prompt and honorable in all his dealings, he possessed the confidence
and esteem of all with whom he came in contact.

Col. Chatfield was born a soldier; he commenced as a private in the
Derby Blues and was active in raising the Waterbury City Guard, and
afterwards became its Captain. His service with the three months
troops was a fine school in which to display his military genius, and
he caught the true military spirit, which he seemed to infuse into his
fellow soldiers. Subsequently, becoming Colonel of the Sixth, he
brought it to a state of discipline second to none in the service. The
early part of the service seemed too much for him, and he remained at
Annapolis, an invalid, while the regiment was sent on the expedition,
but joined it again in January, 1862. At Pocotaligo he received a
cannister shot in his right thigh, but recovered sufficiently to join
us again in April, when for a time he was placed by Gen. Hunter in
command of the forces at Hilton Head. After serving there for some
time, he was relieved at his own request and permitted to join in the
operations on Morris Island. In the charge on Fort Wagner he was
wounded in the leg, and in attempting to drag himself out, was hit a
second time in his right hand, which knocked his sword out of his
grasp. He was carried to the rear by Private Andrew H. Grogan of Co.
“I,” and Chaplain Woodruff procured transportation for him to his
home. He spoke very feelingly in regard to the charge of his regiment,
and inquired if the colors were safe. Being informed that all that was
left of them was brought off the field, his eyes glistened as he
replied, “Thank God for that; I am so glad they are safe; keep them as
long as there is a thread left.” He was sent home on a steamer, but
the journey was exhausting to him and probably hastened his death.

He passed away from his earthly labors August 10, surrounded by his
family. Just before his death a gleam of consciousness was visible,
and looking up he recognized his weeping family, and expressed his
entire willingness and readiness to depart, and died with hardly a
struggle. Had Col. Chatfield lived he would have distinguished
himself, and no doubt risen high in rank; his record a knight might
envy. His noble deeds and eminently Christian character will ever be
fresh in the memory of the members of the old Sixth Regiment.




                            CHAPTER VI.


After the death of Col. Chatfield, Redfield Duryee was appointed
Colonel of the Sixth, rising from Adjutant to that position at a
single step. He had been North on recruiting service for eighteen
months previous to his appointment, but after securing that position
he hastened to join the regiment in the field. The appointment was not
received very pleasantly by the officers of the Sixth, nor by the
privates, who expressed much dissatisfaction at his appointment. Those
who had been with the regiment through thick and thin and had borne
the brunt of the battles, were more justly entitled to promotion to
that position than Redfield Duryee, who had been home for half of his
term of enlistment. But merit is not always justly rewarded, and the
appointment had to be endured, although it was not according to our
taste. Our new colonel enjoined upon the regiment severe drills and
guard duties, while it was tasked severely and laboriously with
fatigue duty every day and often far into the night. We found it
difficult to endure the loss of Col. Chatfield. Few men, living in the
midst of such temptations as army life afforded, could resist so
practically the attractions that led so many good men astray; yet he
stood as a beacon light, and his counsel and judgment were often
sought by those who were his superiors in rank. Had Col. Chatfield
lived, the entire regiment would no doubt have re-enlisted; but as the
command passed into other hands, the number did not exceed 200 who
consented to remain till the close of the war. Lieut. Col. Speidel and
Capt. Leach resigned their commissions and left the regiment in
August, 1863. Ill health was the cause of their resignations.

Col. Speidel never fully recovered from the wound received at
Pocotaligo, and the regiment was loth to part with him, as he endeared
himself to the boys by his soldierly bearing and commanding ways. He
was a brave officer and never flinched on the field, but always
inspired the men with true courage and patriotism.

October 20th, five companies of the Sixth went on provost guard duty,
relieving the Eighth Maine. We occupied the provost building and had
charge of a large number of rebel prisoners, as well as others from
Union regiments, who had been guilty of some crime known to military
law. Among the rebel prisoners was a Captain Monroe whom the Sixth
captured, with others, on Morris Island. He was son of the Mayor of
Charleston, and a most bitter and uncompromising rebel. He evinced no
desire to shake hands over the “bloody chasm,” but, on the contrary,
was bitterly opposed to the Union and to the hireling soldiers
employed by Lincoln. He raved and stormed in the guard house like a
mad bull, and swore he would fight us to the bitter end whenever he
should be exchanged or released. He was taken to some Northern prison
with about 100 other prisoners, a guard from the Sixth accompanying
them.

Volunteering having partially subsided in the State, and as the
government was in need of more troops, drafting commenced in other
States as well as in Connecticut. The Sixth received about 200 men in
October; some were conscripts and others drafted men, as but few
volunteered for the service. Their advent was not hailed with much
pleasure or satisfaction by the old regiment, as they claimed that
“forced” men would not fight and could not be trusted in case of an
emergency. Some were vile roughs and were frequently in the guard
house; while others manifested a disposition to do their duty, and did
make very good soldiers. Three of the substitutes deserted from the
regiment while on picket, but were captured and placed in close
confinement at the provost guard house. While there they succeeded in
getting away twice; the first time they were found in Ossanabaw Sound
and were returned to the post, where they were tried for desertion
before a court martial, of which Capt. Tracy of the Sixth was
president, found guilty and sentenced to be shot to death by musketry.
They were then chained hand and foot to a post inside of the provost
quarters; and, notwithstanding these precautions, together with a
strong guard, they succeeded in getting away again. They took a boat
near the pier and made off; but while in Warsaw sound near the shore,
their boat grounded and they were captured by a picket boat from the
gunboat Patapsco. They were very bold, ingenious men, and their skill
and perseverance might have won them honor if rightly applied. The
culprits were Germans by birth: privates Henry Schumaker, of Co. “C,”
Henry Stark, of Co. “E,” and Gustav Hoofan, of Co. “B.”

In the case of the latter an error was discovered in writing his name,
the name Hoofan having been written Hoffman by the Judge Advocate.
Col. Duryee wishing to be merciful to the full extent consistent with
duty, availed himself of this technical error and protested against
his execution. This protest was allowed, and he was saved from death
and ordered to return to duty with his regiment. The man was more than
pleased at this announcement, but the Judge Advocate, a lieutenant of
the Eighty-fifth Pennsylvania regiment, was severely censured in
general orders for his inexcusable carelessness and fatal error.

The following order was issued to the troops for the execution of the
deserters:

                      GENERAL ORDERS, NO. 7.

                       HEADQUARTERS HILTON HEAD,           }
                        Hilton Head, S. C., April 16, 1864.}

     In obedience to General Orders No. 50, Department of
     the South, Hilton Head, S. C., April 15, 1864, the
     sentence of private Henry Schumaker, of Co. “C,” and
     private Henry Stark, Co. “E,” Sixth regiment
     Connecticut Volunteers, who were tried before a court
     martial assembled at Hilton Head, S. C., March 4, 1864,
     for the crime of desertion, and were sentenced to be
     shot to death with musketry, will be carried into
     execution at this Post on Sunday the 17th day of April,
     1864, at three o’clock P. M., on the field beyond the
     causeway and in the presence of all the troops of this
     command. All fatigue work within the line of the
     entrenchments will be suspended on that day during the
     afternoon, and every officer and man not upon the sick
     list or upon other duty, will be present. The firing
     party will be furnished by the Sixth Connecticut
     Volunteers. Capt. E. S. Babcock, 9th U. S. C. T.,
     Provost Marshal, will make the necessary arrangements
     for the execution. The several regiments and
     detachments comprising the command will report at two
     o’clock P. M. to Lieut. Woodruff, A. A. D. C., who will
     be stationed there to direct them to their positions.

                           By order of Col. REDFIELD DURYEE,

     WALTER FITCH,
       1st Lieut. 6th Conn. Vols., Post Adj.

          Official:
     D. A. WOODRUFF,
       1st Lieut. 6th Conn. Vols., A. A. D. C.

As soon as the time had been fixed for their execution they were
visited by the Provost Marshal, who informed them of their fate and
advised them to prepare for death. They seemed stolid and indifferent
at first, but upon reflection they gave way to their feelings and
desired to have a priest sent to them (they were both Roman
Catholics), and Rev. Mr. Hasson, a Catholic priest who was in the
department, was sent for and ministered to them. It was for a long
time difficult to convince them that their case was hopeless, but Mr.
Hasson’s arguments finally forced conviction, and, after hearing their
confession twice, he performed all the rites of the Church that were
practicable. The prisoners were taken from their cells at about two
o’clock, placed in army wagons and seated on the coffins in which they
were to be buried. The column was formed as follows:

     Capt. E. S. Babcock, Provost Marshal, mounted.
     Capt. J. P. King, Asst. Provost Marshal, mounted.
     Drum Corps in two ranks.
     Firing Party of 24 men detailed from 6th Conn.
     The Prisoners in wagon seated on their coffins.

     Ambulance containing Rev. Mr. Hasson, and Chaplain
     Woodruff, of the 6th Conn.; Rev. Mr. Taylor of the
     Christian Commission; the Surgeon of the Provost guard
     house, and the Surgeon of the 6th Connecticut.

The funeral escort, consisting of a corporal and eight men, marched to
funeral music, with arms reversed. Slowly the procession proceeded to
the appointed place; the square was formed on three sides, and the
victims were driven around once that all might see them and avoid
their fate. They maintained a calm demeanor to all, except as they
passed our regiment they took off their caps several times to their
old comrades. On reaching the end of the square they were assisted to
alight from the wagons, the coffins were placed on the ground, the
culprits sitting down upon them while the Provost Marshal read the
charges, findings and sentence. After a short prayer by the priest
they were blindfolded and their hands tied behind them and made to
kneel upon their coffins, facing the center of the square. The firing
party came up and were halted at six paces distant, when, at a signal
from Capt. Babcock, they fired and the victims fell upon their
coffins. Schumaker was pierced with nine bullets and Stark with eight.
They lay just as they had fallen till the whole command marched past
them on the way to camp, when they were put into the coffins and
buried.

On the 20th of April, Capt. Lewis C. Allen, Jr., died of disease. He
was formerly a member of a militia company in Georgia, and afterwards
removing to New Haven, was drill officer of the New Haven Blues. He
went out as 1st Lieut. in Capt. Root’s company in the Third three
months troops, and later as captain of the “Brewster Rifles,” Co. “F,”
of the Sixth regiment. He participated in all the battles of the
regiment, and was looked upon as a brave and efficient officer by all
the regiment and was much esteemed by his own company for his uniform
courtesy and gentlemanly bearing.

Lieut. Col. Klein, with the re-enlisting veterans of the regiment,
were given a thirty days furlough after re-enlisting; they sailed for
the North and were received in New Haven with demonstrations of
respect, escorted to Music Hall, where Mayor Tyler addressed a welcome
to the returning soldiers, after which they sat down to a banquet
provided for them.

The regiment remained at Hilton Head through the fall and winter
months of ’63 and ’64, engaging in an occasional scout after the
Johnnies, drilling and doing fatigue duty in various ways. If a
battery was to be built or earthworks thrown up, the Sixth was sure to
have a hand in it. Many of our officers having resigned and our ranks
being depleted by disease, we were finally ordered, with our corps, to
join Butler on the James River, and we bade adieu to South Carolina on
the 27th of April, 1864, and sailed for our new scene of labor and
strife. We arrived at Hampton Roads after due time and landed at
Gloucester Point, opposite Yorktown. Here we found large numbers of
troops encamped in very close proximity to each other, and indications
pointed to a general advance along the line. The redoubtable Ben seemed
in his element and was busy from morning till far into the night,
making the necessary preparations for the conflict. Our corps (the
10th), and the 18th corps, under Gen. W. F. Smith, were ordered to
pack up all the surplus clothing belonging to the officers and men,
and the cooks were divested of all their cooking utensils except two
camp kettles. Large quantities of clothes and goods were put in boxes
and barrels and shipped to Norfolk, where they were to be stored; but,
unfortunately, the steamer containing the goods of the Sixth sprung a
leak and sank, the crew barely escaping with their lives. Butler
ordered the command to go as light as possible in regard to clothing
and effects, and the rations were cut down to such extent that we were
to be deprived of many articles that were palatable to a soldier.
Beef, beans and potatoes were excluded from our bill of fare, and
bacon and salt pork were to be more freely used. Half rations of soap
and full rations of whiskey and quinine were among the items which
were considered necessary for our comfort, and lastly, two pairs of
Uncle Sam’s brogans were ordered for each man, fearing, perhaps, that
the sacred mud of Virginia might draw off one pair while experiencing
a march after a gentle fall of dew.

May 4th, the whole command embarked at Gloucester Point and ascended
the James. The infantry, artillery and cavalry numbered about 25,000
men, all told. The gunboats went up the river a day earlier than the
transports. The scenery along the banks of the James was indeed
beautiful; the corn and cotton crops were growing splendidly; large
fields in cultivation met the eye on every hand, and everything
clearly indicated that Johnny Reb did not expect us quite so soon. The
steamers were crowded with the troops, and the bunting streaming from
the masts and rigging was a pleasing sight to all beholders. If the
enemy saw this advance of Butler’s army coming they could not but
dread the results.

The 6th of May the entire force landed at Bermuda Hundred and pushed
inland. The day was extremely warm and the extra pair of brogans that
“Bennie” made us take were soon thrown off, as well as blankets and
knapsacks,--anything to lighten our load. The march through the woods
and fields was strewed with these articles, but none could tell
whether they would ever be needed again, for we wist not what was
before us. We marched about eight miles and halted for the night in a
piece of pine woods, where we threw up a rude entrenchment to cover us
against a sudden attack. The night passed with no general alarm,
although the advance pickets skirmished with the enemy. We were up
betimes in the morning and on the move, passing many swamps and deep
morasses, which made progress slow. A large detachment were felling
trees to make passage for the artillery through the woods and swamps.

On the 9th of May our division moved on to the Petersburg & Richmond
R. R., at Chester station, where we cut the telegraph wires and tore
up the track, burning the ties and poles. Our brigade pried up the
rails as we stood close together, and tumbled them down a steep bank.
Over a half mile of track was thus disposed of at a time. We destroyed
about three miles of the track at this time and guarded the turnpike
and all approaches, while the 18th army corps engaged the rebels near
Richmond, but with little success, except to find their position. The
next day Gen. D. H. Hill’s corps advanced from Richmond and our forces
engaged them all along the line. After a sharp contest which continued
over two hours, the rebels withdrew from the field and we retired a
short distance to the rear. The casualties of the Sixth were one
killed (Capt. Jay P. Wilcox), twenty wounded and four missing.

Captain Wilcox left Waterbury as a private soldier in the Sixth, but
was soon promoted to the rank of corporal and thence passed rapidly to
that of captain. As an officer, Capt. Wilcox gained the honor and
respect of all under his command. Resolute, bold and fearless, he
proved an honor to the cause, and the Union lost one of its noblest
defenders.

On the 14th of May the Sixth was ordered, with the rest of the corps,
to advance to Proctor’s Creek, near Drury’s Bluff, at which place we
arrived after little skirmishing. We halted near the edge of a piece
of woods, expecting to remain but a short time; but Gen. Butler
ordered the Quartermasters to bring up all camp equipage and establish
our camps there before commencing operations still farther in advance.
We knew, however, that we could not advance very much farther except
by bringing on a general engagement, as the enemy were strongly
entrenched a short distance from us, as we could see them working on
their batteries every day. The evening of the 15th the Sixth occupied
the extreme front at the center of the line, on picket. The night
passed with but little firing on either side. Just before daylight,
while a thick fog prevailed, the rebels massed their forces and made a
very determined dash in our front, charging upon us furiously,
shouting with that peculiar yell so characteristic of the Johnnies. We
knew they outnumbered us, and to stand alone as a picket line would be
of no avail; yet we emptied our rifles at them several times and fell
slowly back upon the reserve. They proved too strong for our corps and
it gave way gradually. We did not “retreat,” but “changed front to the
rear,” and contested every foot of ground; but the enemy knowing our
strength, forced us back slowly but surely. The turnpike being the
safest ground to pass over, was besieged by the troops; ambulances
carrying the wounded, negro men and women, rebel prisoners and Union
soldiers filled the roadway, while heads of staff were busy issuing
orders to the different regiments to form here and there to check the
rebel advance. One regiment would file in a piece of woods; another
made a stand in a ravine, while our batteries limbered up to get a
better position and the whole force resisted bravely the attack. We
were forced back about six miles, and, as night came on, the battle
ended.

The loss on our side was much larger than that of the rebels. The
Sixth suffered severely, considering the numbers engaged: seven killed
and fifty-three wounded. Among the wounded were Lieut. Col. Meeker,
Captains Charles H. Nichols and John N. Tracy, Lieutenants Bennett S.
Lewis, Charles J. Buckbee and Norman Provost. Capt. Horatio D. Eaton,
of Hartford, was killed while encouraging his men forward. He served
through the three months campaign and afterwards went out as
lieutenant of the Sixth. He was greatly beloved at home by a large
circle of friends, and possessed the esteem of the regiment. Capt.
Biebel and twenty others were captured by the enemy.

The day after this battle the men of the Sixth who had re-enlisted
came back from their furlough and reported for duty, but found our
position rather warmer than they anticipated,--quite unlike the scenes
they had just left at the North. We threw up entrenchments every
night, working till morning dawned, and the Johnnies were unceasing in
their efforts to dislodge us, many of the men being wounded while at
work. The picket line was relieved always at night, and we were
invariably shelled while going on that duty. After being posted on the
lines things generally quieted down, as the distance between the rebel
and Union pickets was often less than three rods. Conversation was
kept up and exchanges of newspapers frequently took place, as well as
the usual exchange of “terbacker” for coffee.

The old Sixth was again engaged on the 20th of May with the enemy; the
Johnnies fought stubbornly and seemed determined on driving us back.
We held our ground, but made no advance. After about four hours they
were repulsed and fell back. Lieut. Bradley and two privates were
mortally wounded, and died soon after being brought into camp.
Thirty-two of the regiment were wounded and one missing. Thus the
ranks of the Sixth were constantly reduced by these frequent
skirmishes, and duty fell pretty severe upon those who were able to
perform it. Scarcely an hour passed, day or night, without being
shelled by the enemy, and rest seemed out of the question. The pale
faces and haggard looks of the men told too plainly what they endured.
Yet few reproached the cause in which they were engaged. There is very
little poetry and a good deal of hard work in an active campaign.

Col. Redfield Duryee resigned his commission on the 27th of May, as
failing health, it is said, incapacitated him for active service in
the field. The captain of the 1st Connecticut Battery, Alfred P.
Rockwell, was chosen to fill the place. Col. Rockwell was brave and
fearless, and held in esteem by the members of the Sixth.

The 2nd of June the enemy again tried to force our lines and did drive
back some portion of the 3d New Hampshire, but they were repulsed and
the line regained. The artillery duel on both sides waged hot for a
few hours, and it was difficult to determine which would come out best
in the end. One rebel colonel was killed and brought within our lines,
and a lieutenant and twenty-six men deserted to us, being, as they
said, tired of the war. The loss to the Sixth was only three wounded.

Part of the command, including the Sixth, were sent across the
Appomatox River on the 9th of June, to engage the enemy at a certain
point, while the cavalry destroyed a railroad. We came upon the
outposts of the enemy, drove them in, were subjected to a severe
shelling, but with slight loss on our side. The cavalry, it was said,
accomplished its object, and the next day found us back to our old
line of works. One morning the videttes reported that the enemy had
evacuated their line of rifle pits on our front, and the orders were
issued for our corps to advance and make a reconnoissance, which we
did. Finding their line deserted, we pushed forward and skirmished
with them, they falling back all the while evidently to get us into an
ambuscade. We fell back to the line evacuated by the rebels and
awaited results. The sharpshooters annoyed us exceedingly all day,
being posted in the trees, and their clothing was so near the color of
the bark of the trees that it was difficult to discover their
position. The enemy gave us a vigorous shelling early in the
afternoon; and as that nearly always preceded an advance, the whole
line awaited anxiously the result. The Johnnies were soon discovered
slowly approaching through the woods directly in front of the Sixth.
They rushed forward with a yell, but did not find us unprepared to
meet them. The bullets flew lively for a time, and the rebels swayed
backward, but soon rallied and rushed forward in large numbers,
forcing back the Union lines and regaining their rifle pits. Their
numbers must have been very much larger than ours, and they evidently
expected we would take their pits when they fell back, and no doubt
had a plan laid to gobble us all up; but our commander displayed that
wisdom requisite for the occasion. We retired, however, with
considerable loss. The Sixth lost in this engagement 5 killed, 16
wounded and 18 missing. Capt. Nichols was captured by the enemy.

The weather was excessively warm and no exertion was required to
produce perspiration. The thermometer on June 22d rose to 103 degrees
in the shade. We were apprised of the fact that our worthy President,
Abraham Lincoln, was near us, and all that were not engaged on duty
were ordered to appear near the regimental quarters and render a
proper salute. He came on horseback, attended by Gen. Butler and
staff. The troops greeted him pleasantly and gave hearty cheers along
the whole line. The President looked careworn and troubled.
Undoubtedly the trials through which the nation was passing had much
to do with his depression of spirits.

The next day we received some rebel papers which had an article
headed, “What mean those cheers?” In allusion to the cheers which they
distinctly heard, they inferred that we had received some good news of
a recent Union victory; but as no such information had come to them
through their sources, they finally came to the conclusion that it
must be some scheme made known to the troops from the fertile brain of
that “beefy, bloated Massachusetts Yankee,” as they called Gen.
Butler.

Sheridan’s cavalry were at the “White House,” and were ordered to join
Grant at the rear of Petersburg on the 25th of June. Some of our
division were sent over the Appomatox to cover his retreat. The Sixth
Connecticut and Third New Hampshire regiments formed a part of the
force employed for that purpose, which returned to camp after their
mission was accomplished. Sergt. Andrew Grogan, of Co. “I,” who had
been but recently promoted to 2d Lieutenant, went on the picket line
on the evening of June 29, in charge of the pickets of the Sixth. The
rebels fired upon the line, wounding Lieut. Grogan in the thigh. He
was carried to camp and the surgeons found it necessary to amputate
the limb to save his life. The operation was performed successfully
and he fully recovered. Lieut. Grogan was exemplary in his habits and
was a consistent Christian; respected and loved by the regiment, and
it was with sorrow that we were obliged to part with his services. It
will be remembered that Lieut. Grogan bore Col. Chatfield from Fort
Wagner after the Colonel was twice wounded in that memorable assault
on the night of July 18th.

Gen. Butler issued an order calling for volunteers for fatigue duty
upon his famous Dutch Gap Canal, offering eight cents an hour extra
pay and two rations of whisky each day. The work was very laborious,
the enemy keeping a continuous fire upon the working parties, which
together with the excessive heat, rendered the service anything but
desirable; yet many availed themselves of the offer. The pickets were
strengthened and the reserve made secure to prevent any sudden dash
upon the working parties; while our gunboats in the James rendered
effective service in dispersing these advances. The Johnnies were
pretty sure to retire if the gunboats sent their compliments. Some of
the captured rebels affirmed that they could stand any ordinary
shelling, but when our navy sent a whole “blacksmith shop, with forge
and bellows complete,” they thought it was time to “change front to
the rear.”

The report that Gen. A. P. Hill, of the rebel army, was advancing
south of Richmond in the direction of Petersburg, aroused our General
commanding, and Gen. Smith’s corps was ordered on the move. The Sixth
was accordingly ordered to cook up the usual three days rations. We
left the front shortly after midnight on the morning of the 14th of
August, and at about 5 o’clock Sunday morning we crossed the James
River on the pontoons, drove in the advance pickets and rapidly pushed
forward, skirmishing with the enemy at different points. We soon heard
the rebel yell, and the enemy came pouring upon us with all their
fury. Our regiment, divested of knapsacks, immediately charged upon
them and captured two lines of rebel earthworks, driving the enemy
before us at a place called Strawberry Plains, near Malvern Hill. We
skirmished with the enemy all day, and when night came on our division
occupied Hancock’s old works near the hill, and gladly availed
ourselves of a chance to lay down, but not to sleep, as that would
have been a luxury not to be entertained. Owing to the excessive heat
of the day, many fell from the ranks completely exhausted. So severe
had been our campaign in Virginia, in its marches and fatigue duty,
that the Sixth mustered but few men for duty. We were continually on
the move; and often, in our midnight marches, some would fall asleep
while in the ranks, and as soon as the order was given to halt and
rest, the entire regiment would fall down where it stood, and sleep
during the few moments allotted for rest.

The Sixth moved again on the 15th of August and fought the battle
known as Deep Run. We were posted in the woods with Hawley’s brigade,
looking for the position of the enemy; but the woods were so dense
that we could scarcely stand in line. The rebel earthworks were in our
front, but their exact position or strength was unknown to the
brigade. We fixed bayonets and cocked our rifles preparatory to an
advance and charge. Gen. Terry informed us in whispers, as near as he
could, the location of the enemy, and directed us to creep through the
underbrush till we came to a certain tree, and then charge. The word
“forward” was given and the brigade moved through the woods as fast as
the tangled underbrush would permit. The enemy discovered our advance
ere we had proceeded far, and with a loud yell they opened fire from
howitzers and musketry. The latter was terrific, and the bullets
skipped through the leaves of the trees in terrible volleys. In
passing through the woods we came to an opening which was made by the
trees being felled and brush cleared away. About twenty rods in our
front ranged a strong earthwork, behind which the rebels were strongly
posted, and in the front was a huge abatis almost defying any
approach. On went our brigade with a cheer, tumbling through the
abatis and picking our way as best we could amid a furious storm of
bullets; but the desperate rebels held their works till they saw us
clear of the abatis and knew that we were coming for them, when they
turned and fled; but we were too quick for some of them. Springing
upon them in their pits we had a hand to hand combat, till they saw it
was useless to hold out longer and a few surrendered, while the main
body skedaddled through a corn field into a piece of woods. Beyond
this point we did not proceed, as a deep ravine skirted the edge of
the field, and beyond this the enemy were massing their scattered
forces preparatory to regaining what they had lost.

With our force engaged and with the rebel force in front, it was
deemed imprudent to remain on the captured ground and we fell back
slowly, harrassed by the rebel sharpshooters. Once they charged upon
our line, forcing us back with greater speed than we cared to travel
on that hot day; and, although we did not run, we executed “some
pretty tall walking.” A second dash made upon us we repelled with a
few bullets, which prevented any further trouble from them. They
recaptured their lost works and, doubtless, considered themselves the
victors. Our captures amounted to about 200 prisoners and two stands
of colors. The Sixth lost in this action five killed, sixty-nine
wounded and eleven missing. Among the wounded were Captains Bennett S.
Lewis, John Slottlar and Dwight A. Woodruff (severely), and
Lieutenants John Waters, Joseph Miller and George Bellows. Capt.
Woodruff suffered the amputation of his arm and endured severe pain
for a few weeks, till released by death. He entered the army as a
private and was steadily promoted for good conduct. He was brave and
faithful, beloved by the regiment, and his untimely death was
regretted by all. The color guard of the Sixth was worsted in this
engagement, the sergeant with two corporals were wounded, and one was
overcome by the heat. The remaining corporal, Edward S. Downs, seized
the flag and brought it off the field in safety.

The second day after this engagement the rebels, emboldened by the
fact of the Union lines not being advanced, made a simultaneous attack
all along our lines, and drove in our pickets, but were repulsed after
a sharp skirmish, and they were glad enough to retire. The corps fell
back about two miles at night to a former position occupied by us, and
at seven o’clock orders came for us to march again. It had been
raining quite hard, and that Virginia mud was decidedly uncomfortable
to march in. The artillery often got stuck in the mud and the command
was necessarily delayed. After a wearisome march of seven hours we
crossed the Appomatox river at Point of Rocks and resumed our march to
the Weldon R. R. near Ream’s Station, in the rear of Petersburg.

Here we were again posted at the front. The Sixth occupied one side of
the railroad track with the rebels on the other. Tents were out of the
question. When a regiment moves from one place to another and halts
for a season, to use a military term, “we pitch our tents;” but in
this Virginia campaign tents were obsolete, and the term now used was,
“we dug our holes.” Tents served to attract the enemy and draw their
fire, and it was very unsafe to sleep in one even if we could do so;
but in the holes in the ground we felt comparatively secure. It was
rather a ludicrous sight to a casual observer to find an army of men
burrowing in holes in the earth like so many woodchucks, and yet such
was the fact. The whole of Grant’s line, extending from the south of
Petersburg along the line of the Appomatox River down across Bermuda
Hundred to the James, the army, when not engaged, were inside the “rat
holes,” as the boys termed them. Some of these holes held a corporal’s
guard, while others only served for two or three. They were hastily
made, without any regard to architectural proportions, and yet not so
deep but that they could be quickly evacuated.

Shelling from the rebels and from our side was kept up day after day
and night after night for weeks, and when the tired soldier had a few
moments to sleep he quickly availed himself of it, and no amount of
shelling would disturb his slumbers; but let the clear notes of the
bugle sound through the air and he was quickly at his post. We knew
the bugle call meant work; either some advance was threatened, or the
line ordered to move to another quarter. It required but little time
to pack up our household goods, and we were not required to run after
drays to load them, but the clothes we wore were our bedding, and any
hole we found when night overtook us was our bed, with the sky for a
covering and with a consciousness that we were battling for the right,
made sleep attractive to the Union soldier.

Gen. Hawley’s brigade was ordered out on the morning of Sept. 3d to
witness the execution of a soldier of the 7th Connecticut by hanging.
The brigade formed three sides of a hollow square around the gallows
and saw the victim yield up his life at the end of a rope. He had some
real or fancied grudge against a man, and on the battle-field of
Olustee, Fla., he took the opportunity to murder him, thinking, no
doubt, the exciting scenes on the field would cover up his crime; but
he was detected, tried before a drum-head court martial, found guilty
and sentenced to death by hanging, and the day above mentioned the
sentence was carried out. Another scene witnessed by our regiment,
took place soon after, which was the act of drumming a soldier out of
camp for cowardice on the battle field. The soldier was a private of
Co. “I,” of the Sixth, who was convicted of cowardice by refusing to
fight, and skulked to the rear. His head was shaved and the word
“coward,” painted on a board, was put on his back, and he was marched
through the brigade, with the drum corps playing the Rogue’s March.

The Sixth remained in the trenches around Petersburg, indulging in
frequent skirmishing and entrenching themselves, occasionally holding
short confabs with the rebel pickets, getting their views on the war
question, till the 11th of September, 1864, when they were ordered a
short distance to the rear and drawn up in front of Gen. Terry’s
headquarters, where the non-re-enlisted men were mustered out of
service. Their term of three years had expired, and the rebels, as if
to give a parting salute, threw a shell into our midst which exploded,
doing no damage, however, as the word “cover” was given in earnest
this time. It was with pride and not a little satisfaction that the
boys relinquished their trusty rifles, which had been their constant
companions through many a hard fought conflict. Gen. Terry, in a
speech to them, said: “The State of Connecticut might well be proud of
the record of the Sixth.” He thanked us personally for our valor on
the field, and hoped that we would live many years to recite the
marches and battles on the field to the loved ones at home; and
expressed a wish that the conflict would soon terminate, that he might
also enjoy the blessings of civil life. Cheers were given with a will
for our brave commander, and many a silent prayer went up for his
welfare.

“Three days rations” were issued to the boys for the last time, and
they bade an affectionate adieu to the comrades who were to remain.
Many a tear glistened in the eyes of the old soldiers as the last
good-bye was said, and all expressed a wish that the war would soon be
over and they also be permitted to greet their friends at home. The
boys “changed front to the rear,” and took the cars to City Point, and
there embarked on the steamer United States. After a pleasant sail and
the usual delays, we reached New York early on the morning of Sept.
15, landing at the foot of Canal street, North River; marched down
Canal to Broadway, and down Broadway to the Battery, where a bountiful
collation was served to us by the “Sons of Connecticut” residing in
New York. After the repast was finished, they went on board the
steamer Nassau and sailed for New Haven, arriving there at about 7
o’clock in the evening. Here a splendid reception awaited the old
Sixth. Citizens and the military joined as an escort, and amid the
booming of cannon (with blank cartridges) and the fireworks along the
streets, the boys marched to the State House, where they were heartily
welcomed and invited to partake of a rich and tempting repast. Ample
justice was done to the viands, after which the boys separated for the
night. Their final muster out and discharge was consummated on the
17th of September, just three years from the day the regiment left the
State.




                            CHAPTER VII.


The Sixth remained around Petersburg on the line of the railroad after
the non-re-enlisted men had returned home, skirmishing with the enemy,
till the 28th of September, when Butler’s army faced to the right and
crossed the Appomatox and hurried forward toward Richmond. Gen. Grant
had resolved that a further advance toward Richmond in Butler’s front,
while a demonstration from Warren and Hancock would weaken the rebel
forces so that they would retire and give our siege trains an
opportunity to press nearer the doomed city. The 10th corps crossed
the James and pushed forward on the extreme right along Four Mile
Creek, and advanced vigorously up the New Market road, where it met
the rebels and a general engagement ensued all along the lines.
Musketry firing was very rapid and the shells exploded with terrible
force over the heads of the gallant soldiers. The steady tramp soon
became a double quick and the double quick became a run, when the
frightened rebels showed signs of weakness; yet they fought with
desperation worthy a better cause. The 18th corps confronted Fort
Gilmer, where it was for a few moments checked. The 10th corps, under
the gallant Terry, then redoubled its efforts and soon effected a
junction with the 18th corps near Fort Harrison. Then the whole line
advanced with a cheer and the rebels fell back in confusion. The
Sixth, with Terry’s corps, advanced up the Darbytown road until the
head of the column reached a point within three miles of Richmond,
where the spires of the churches and roofs of houses were easily
discernible. The success attending the other parts of the line was not
sufficient to warrant advancing any further just then, and the corps
fell back a short distance, where it entrenched itself.

Fort Harrison was a strong earthwork of great advantage to the rebels.
The position was too valuable to surrender without another trial. The
following day Gen. Lee brought additional reinforcements from
Petersburg to hold their position, but they, like the others, were
unable to stand before the Union fire. The capture of Fort Harrison
was not gained without severe loss to the Connecticut troops. The
Sixth, however, met with comparatively small loss. The 1st of October,
Gen. Hawley’s brigade advanced again toward Richmond and was subjected
to a severe fire upon the Darbytown road, skirmishing with the enemy
along the creeks and swamps, with no chance for a pitched battle. The
next week was full of exposure and privation. The troops had crossed
the James without tents, and many without blankets; and what little
sleep they gained was not very refreshing. They were always compelled
to be under arms, and the utmost vigilance was required, besides being
much of the time under fire; and when not engaged skirmishing, were
hard at work with the pick and shovel, entrenching themselves. Our
rifles, of course, had to be close at hand, to be grasped in an
instant, and very often were we compelled to drop one to seize the
other. Words cannot express the trials and exposures which the Union
troops were called to pass through at different periods of the
campaign. The Virginia campaign was unusually severe. Most of the
time, for seven months, the troops were without tents, and but few had
overcoats. Fatigue parties were at work night and day; lines of works
were thrown up to afford protection from the enemy’s bullets. Whole
acres of land were turned over, and many a tree was felled to make a
clearing by which a sudden advance might be checked. The troops had
little or no chance to cook their rations, and more salt pork was
eaten raw than was ever boiled. A ramrod served the purpose of a
gridiron, while an army shovel proved a good frying pan.

The enemy made a vigorous attack on the 7th of October on Gen. Terry’s
line, and came dashing on as if intent to drive the Union forces into
the James River. The Sixth was the first Connecticut regiment engaged;
some of the regiments fell back under the withering fire. The One
Hundredth New York Regiment especially dishonored their hitherto good
fame by breaking their line and fleeing in confusion, but to the
credit of all the regiments from Connecticut, be it said, they kept an
unbroken front to the foe; and notwithstanding the twice repeated
assaults, the enemy were forced to retire from the field and the
division entrenched themselves still more, and at midnight the old
picket line was re-established. An attack upon the right of the rebel
line was contemplated and the troops again advanced to meet the foe.
Passing out beyond the rude line of earthworks, they came upon
Chapin’s Farm, and from thence they proceeded through the woods,
across a wide ravine and to the plains beyond. The skirmishers opened
fire and cautiously advanced; the enemy’s advance line was pressed
back into their entrenched position; inactive firing was kept up for
several hours while our forees neared those of the enemy. The enemy’s
position was favorable to them, as the dense thicket of scrub oaks and
the tangled underbrush rendered it exceedingly difficult for our
troops to preserve any kind of a line; the forces seemed determined,
however, to go forward, and go forward they did; but the advance
resulted disastrously and the men fell back again, abandoning the
assault.

Col. Rockwell was in command of the Sixth. Lieut. Col. Meeker resigned
and Major Daniel Klein succeeded him. Capt. Hiram L. Grant was
promoted to be Major. Rev. Charles C. Tiffany, formerly pastor of a
church in Derby, was appointed Chaplain. He was said to be a man of
fine scholarly attainments and with his whole heart in the cause.

Capt. Frederick B. Osborn of New Haven was honorably discharged Oct.
25, 1864, as his time of enlistment had expired. The Sixth lost no
officer more loyal than him;--brave and unflinching, he often inspired
courage where courage was lacking, and he asked no soldier to follow
where he dared not himself lead. Through his daring and bravery the
colors of the Sixth were saved in the assault on Fort Wagner. The
first Union flag that waved over Morris Island was borne by him,
fastened to his sword. Before the war he was a marine in the U. S.
service four years, during which time he cruised 21,000 miles,
touching at European cities, and visited the Holy land. He was also on
the frigate Niagara when she laid the Atlantic Cable. His term of
service in the navy having expired, he hastened home to remain only a
few months, for the bombardment of Sumpter again enlisted his loyalty,
and he joined the first company of the first regiment of three months
troops, passed through the memorable Bull Run campaign, and when the
three years troops were called for, he was offered a Captaincy in the Sixth
Regiment, which his modesty prevented him from accepting; but he was
finally induced to accept the position of 1st Lieutenant in Co. “K,”
and by the death of Capt. Gerrish was promoted to the vacancy. He
acquitted himself with great credit in his position as Captain, and
would have honored a field officer’s commission, for he seemed to lead
a charmed life. Where bullets were thickest there he was found,
gallantly leading his men, with comparatively little thought for
himself, so dear was the cause of the old flag to his heart, and he
often won the respect and admiration of those higher in rank, by his
deeds of daring, and unflinching zeal for the cause. Within a year
after his discharge he was accidentally killed on the New York & New
Haven Railroad. A large number of the veterans attended his funeral,
and the casket was draped with the flag he carried on Morris Island.

As early winter set in, the old regiments began the work of
reorganizing. Many left the ranks, discharged after an honorable
service, and new officers were appointed; and, as a lull appeared, the
troops began to provide log huts for themselves to sleep in. As
November came on the peace men of the North began to make threats of
violence against the ballot box, and large frauds were discovered. It
seemed to be their desire to stuff the ballot boxes and call the war
a failure, and to prevent, if possible, anyone from voting war
measures. Gen. Butler was transferred to New York as commander of that
Department, and he was accompanied by a division of troops under Gen.
Jos. R. Hawley. There were two brigades in the division of 3,000 men
each. The Sixth was in the 1st brigade under command of Col. Greeley.
Col. Rockwell, of the Sixth, commanded the 2d brigade. The troops made
a landing on Staten Island for a short time, but most of the time were
kept on board the steamers in the North and East rivers. The men
suffered severely on this transfer from the South to the cool air of
the North. They were kept on board the boats in a crowded state, and
no officer or man allowed to go on shore. Friends of the regiments,
wives, sweethearts, &c., came many miles, some of them, but were not
permitted to see them. After the Presidential election had passed, the
troops immediately returned to their old position on the James. The
Sixth found the log cabins they had made with so much care all
destroyed, and were obliged to build others to protect themselves from
the chilly nights.

In December, Gen. Grant ordered an advance on Fort Fisher at the mouth
of Cape Fear river, N. C., in order to suppress, if possible, the
blockade running which was carried on to a very great extent. Running
into Wilmington and unloading their cargoes, which were thence
transferred through the confederacy, they became a great help to the
rebel commissary. Gen. Butler was dispatched with about 6,500 men,
assisted by Admiral Porter with 73 vessels, carrying about 655 guns.
The fleet was well armed, and the land forces were in good condition
for an assault. The gun boats opened fire and cannonading was
terrific. The forces landed and a feeble assault was made. The troops
pushed their skirmish line within 150 yards of the fort and captured a
little outwork called Flag Pond battery, with sixty-five men. Gen.
Butler conceived the idea that nothing short of a regular siege could
accomplish the result, and therefore withdrew the army and returned to
Hampton Roads. Admiral Porter was dissatisfied with the result. The
President and Gen. Grant both believed that our forces, if led by a
competent commander, could capture the works, and soon another advance
was contemplated, but this time under the gallant Terry. The forces
embarked with the addition of 1500 men and a siege train (which was
not landed), and moved down the James. Gen. Terry was unaware of his
destination till near Fortress Monroe, when Gen. Grant came aboard and
directed him to take Fort Fisher by storm if he thought best; if not,
by siege.

The expedition left Fortress Monroe, Jan. 6, 1865: put into Beaufort,
N. C., on the 8th, and was detained there by bad weather. On the 12th
they arrived off Fort Fisher and landed early in the morning under a
heavy fire from Porter’s fleet. At three o’clock about 8,000 troops,
with marines, had landed, having three days’ rations in their
haversacks and about sixty rounds of ammunition to each man.
Intrenching tools, munitions, &c., were landed in spite of the heavy
surf that rolled upon the beach. Gen. Terry’s first concern was to
throw a strong defensive line across the peninsula whereon Fort Fisher
stands, so as to isolate it from all support and enable him to hold
his ground against any force the rebels might send down from
Wilmington. Some little time was spent in getting the troops in the
right position. The line advanced to within 600 yards of the fort, and
had determined upon an assault the next day (Jan. 14). The iron-clads
began their work of destruction, and so true were their shots that ere
long the gunners in Fort Fisher were driven into their bomb-proofs,
thus silencing their guns. Meanwhile, about 2,000 sailors and marines,
armed with cutlasses, revolvers and guns, had been detailed from the
fleet and landed to take their hand in the meditated assault. They had
worked their way up on the beach by digging ditches for a cover, till
they were within 200 yards of the fort, and lay down anxiously
awaiting the order to charge. This order was given at a quarter past
three. The fleet was, of course, obliged to change the direction of
their fire, so that our forces might not get the shelling which was
intended for the rebels. This gave the enemy a chance again to work
their guns, and, seeing the marines and sailors advancing they poured
grape and shrapnel into their ranks fearfully, while the musketry kept
up a steady fire, mowing them down with great slaughter; and, although
almost annihilated, they pressed on, and some actually gained the
parapet. But the sailors’ assault was signally repulsed and they were
obliged to retire. The brigades leading the assault in the other
directions were more successful, although for a time it seemed almost
impossible to stand up under such a withering fire. The rebels met the
charge with a prolonged yell and a simultaneous fire. The division
under Gen. Ames, consisting of three brigades, rushed forward, and the
fighting was at close quarters. The rebel’s fire told fearfully in the
Union ranks, and men were swept away in winrows. Yet on they pressed,
almost exhausted, when Gen. Terry sent for Abbott’s brigade, with the
old Sixth and Seventh regiments. They pressed the foe in close
quarters, while they (the rebels) relinquished foot by foot their
possession. Gen. Terry sprang to the head of the advancing column,
cheering the troops by his presence, and with redoubled effort the
whole line advanced with a yell and the frightened rebels fell back in
dismay, while the Union forces invested the Fort, and victory was ours.
The Union cheers were by no means faint at this achievement which had
crowned their arms, and Gen. Terry became the hero of the hour.

The capture of the stronghold was not effected without severe loss to
our forces. The gallant sailors and marines suffered most, as their
advance up the beach was opposed with the deadliest fire. The loss of
the Sixth was small, considering the part they took in the engagement.
The rebels immediately surrendered to Gen. Terry, numbering, all told,
2,083 men, 169 heavy guns, besides about 2,000 small arms, with
considerable ammunition and other stores. The Union loss in this
battle figured up to 110 killed and 536 wounded. A sad calamity
happened the next morning in the Fort. While some of the troops were
inspecting the chief magazine, it was supposed that some loose powder
lay on the floor which was ignited by the shoes of the soldiers coming
in contact. A tremendous explosion followed, in which 200 of our
troops were instantly killed and about 100 more were wounded. This sad
event cast a gloom over the victorious army, as those brave men who
had stood in the fore-front of many a hard fought battle, and just as
victory had once more crowned their efforts, to be thus suddenly
hurried into eternity was indeed sickening.

By the capture of Fort Fisher the navy also captured five blockade
runners which were unable to get away. Part of the enemy retreated
across Cape Fear river to Smithfield, but, fearing an advance of the
Union forces, they blew up their magazines, deserted their works and
fled toward Wilmington. The army of the Union did not rest at this
point, but immediately advanced to press the retreating rebels. The
Sixth pushed rapidly forward, skirmishing with the rear guard, and on
the 22d of February our forces entered Wilmington in triumph, and
drove the rebels in confusion through the city. They fled in the
greatest haste, scattering their blankets and knapsacks on the way,
but were so closely pursued by the Sixth and other regiments that they
had no chance to form for battle till near the outskirts of the city,
where they determined to make one more stand. Although they were
stubborn, they were finally forced to yield and made their escape
across North East river.

The Sixth remained in the city of Wilmington one night, when they were
ordered across Cape Fear river to Smithville, where their stay was
also brief; they soon returned to Wilmington again, where Captain
Buckbee of the Sixth was detailed as A. A. C. M., and remained there
some time. The Sixth only remained in Wilmington for a short time and
was thence transferred to Goldsboro, N. C., where they spent the
summer months engaged in patrol and picket duties. The regiment was
here when the news came of the surrender of Lee’s army, and great
rejoicing was indulged in by the men at the prospect of the
termination of the war. The Sixth was ordered to Raleigh for muster
out, and from thence went to Petersburg and took cars for City Point,
Va., where they embarked for home, after nearly four years of active
service.

Lieut. Col. Daniel Klein arrived in New Haven with the old Sixth on
the 28th of July, 1865, where they had an enthusiastic reception
tendered them by the citizens and military. Ex-Mayor Morris Tyler
addressed a welcome to the returned soldiers, which was briefly
responded to by Lieut. Col. Klein. The final muster-out did not occur
till the 21st of August, when the men were paid off and dismissed.

Thus was ended the organization of the Sixth, a regiment who
volunteered early in the war and remained till the close. All through
the war for the Union the upholders of the National Cause were more or
less exposed to extraordinary hardships and sufferings because of the
many densely wooded and sparsely peopled regions over which they
generally marched and fought. All soldiers were more or less
acquainted with the marshy spots of ground that served for a bed at
night after a hard day’s battle or march, and but few arose in the
morning without pain racking some part of the body from the effects of
such exposure, and yet a large share survived the conflict and
returned home to their friends.

One of the most cheering thoughts experienced by the soldier in the
field was the fact that his friends at home cherished and loved him,
and proved their affection by their prayers and sympathy; and the
letter sent from home containing perhaps but a few words traced by the
hand of affection, and the simple wish expressed for his safe return,
mingled with the “God bless and keep you,” did more to encourage the
soldier to endure the hardships and privations than all the promotions
that could be offered. He could work better, struggle harder, and
fight with a purer zeal, if he could but realize that the prayers of
affection, sympathy and love went up to the great Commander of the
universe for his safety. The members of the Sixth enjoyed the
confidence of all the corps and division commanders under whose
leadership they were chanced to be placed, and in many difficult and
trying places the old regiment was called upon to aid the enterprise.
They always strove to acquit themselves like men, and true soldiers of
the Union, never allowing a victory, however great, to elate us too
much, knowing full well the great sacrifice of life it ofttimes cost
to gain it; nor would we allow a defeat, however disastrous, to shake
our faith in the righteousness of the cause in which we were engaged;
but, humbly trusting in Divine Providence to lead the army to battle
for the cause of liberty and equality to all in our country.

We would not forget those who went forth at the Nation’s call, eager
to do battle for the right and to shield their loved ones against an
invasion of the foe. We would speak with reverence of those who did
not return with us from the field; heroes are they, leaders on field
and staff, leaders in line and rank, they offered up their lives for
the country’s good. They sealed their patriotism with their blood;
many of them unknown to fame, fell amid the strife, not with their
names emblazoned high as great commanders of the corps, yet they fill
honored and patriotic graves, and the surviving members of the Sixth
cherish their memory. The dead of the Sixth sleep in Washington, as
well as in the sandy soil of the Carolinas. The palmetto groves and
the jungles of Georgia, together with the river banks of Florida and
the soil of Virginia hold the ashes of those who will ever be sacred
to our memory. They have passed from our sight; their mission has been
accomplished, and many long years will elapse ere we can forget our
departed heroes. We would offer a prayer for the widow and the
fatherless, that He would temper the winds to the shorn lamb, and that
His infinite goodness may be round and about them in all their heart
sorrows and afflictions, and that they may be united again in that
better world when the Master shall call.




                             APPENDIX.


The members of the Sixth always entertained and cherished a feeling of
deep friendship for one another, and when we were discharged it seemed
like breaking up a household, so closely were our sympathies united;
and it was resolved to organize an association, at no distant day, to
perpetuate and keep alive those friendly interests which united us so
closely during the dark days of the war. Therefore, pursuant to a
call, the members of the Sixth assembled at the old State House in New
Haven, on the 16th of May, 1868. The meeting was called to order by
Brigadier General Alfred P. Rockwell, who stated that the object of
our assembling together was to keep alive and fondly cherish the
varied memories of the service, to perpetuate the friendly relations
established in the field, and also to preserve a record of the
regiment. By a vote of the members present the following were
appointed to draft the articles of the Association:

     Brig. Gen. ALFRED P. ROCKWELL, New Haven.
     Lieut. RUDOLPH KOST, Bridgeport.
     Sergeant ANDREW PAUL, Waterbury.
        ”  GEORGE A. STAPLES, Bridgeport.
     Com. Sergt. FRED. E. CALLENDER, New Britain.

The committee reported that the organization should be called the
“Association of the Sixth Regiment of Connecticut Volunteers,” and the
membership to consist of all honorably discharged soldiers who had
served with the Sixth. The officers of the association were to consist
of a President, ten Vice Presidents (one from each company), a
secretary, who should also be Treasurer, and a Regimental Historian.
The President, Secretary and three Vice Presidents shall constitute
the executive committee for the transaction of business. The ballot
was taken, and the choice of officers for one year resulted as follows:

     For Pres., Sergt. GEO. A. STAPLES, Bridgeport.
     For Sec. and Treas., AUGUSTUS F. BULL, New Haven.
     For Historian, CHARLES K. CADWELL,         ”

The Vice Presidents were chosen, one from each company, and the
association voted that the Annual Reunion be held on the second
Wednesday of September in each year, and the first Annual to be held
on Sept. 9, 1868, at Bridgeport, Conn. After the usual hand-shaking and
congratulations, the association adjourned.

The association met in Bridgeport, according to agreement, and enjoyed
the hospitality of the soldiers’ friends, and at this our first annual
the soldiers were extremely gratified to find so much interest taken
in these Reunions. Many who were unable to be present wrote us
encouraging letters, and we voted that these reunions should be
maintained. On motion it was voted that the regiment contribute
towards a proposed monument for our lamented Col. Chatfield, that the
regiment should give its pledge for $500, and that a collection be
taken at each of our reunions for this object. Edwin L. Cook, of
Waterbury, was elected treasurer of the monument fund.

The second Annual of the regiment was held in Stamford, Conn. On
arriving at the depot we were met by delegates of the resident members
and took carriages to Shippan Point, where we sat down to an
old-fashioned clam bake.

The third Annual was held again at Bridgeport, where the loyal people
of that patriotic town again welcomed the old Sixth, and provided an
abundant repast.

The fourth Annual was held in New Britain, and a splendid reception
awaited us. A large part of the houses were festooned with flags;
business was generally suspended; the regiment was welcomed by the Mayor
and invited to partake of the hospitalities of the city. Our faithful
Secretary came about 200 miles to attend this reunion; and, as
business engagements pressed upon him he felt obliged to tender his
resignation. A hearty vote of thanks was given him for his services,
and his resignation reluctantly accepted. Wm. F. Smith, of New Haven,
was the unanimous choice for the vacancy, and was duly elected.

Our fifth Annual was held in Waterbury, Conn., the home of Col.
Chatfield. Here, also, the regiment met with a grand reception. At the
depot the Chatfield and Sedgwick Guards met and escorted us to
Chatfield Armory, where our business meeting was held, after which the
regiment sat down to a bountiful dinner in the City Hall. In the
afternoon the regiment marched to Riverside Cemetery, with the guards
and the Masonic fraternity, where the base of the monument of Col.
Chatfield was laid, under the auspices of Clark Commandery, K. T.

The sixth Annual was held in New Haven, Conn. The visiting comrades
were met at the depot and escorted to G. A. R. Hall, where the
business meeting was held, and then after a short march we proceeded
to Loomis’ Hall, where the comrades were made welcome to the viands
before them. A large and beautiful flag was here shown to the
regiment, which had been purchased with funds raised for that purpose
at our last Reunion.

The seventh Annual was held at Bridgeport, Conn., and the members
proceeded to Sharpshooter’s Park, East Bridgeport, where they were
finely entertained by the resident members and the citizens. It is the
intention to hold these Reunions every year as long as the members
live, and to extend a cordial welcome to all friends of the old Sixth
to meet with us, have a hearty hand-shake, revive old friendships, and
perpetuate those fraternal feelings that so closely united us on the
field.




                               ROSTER
                               OF THE
                          SIXTH REGIMENT,

                  Connecticut Volunteer Infantry.


                           ABBREVIATIONS.

                      Wd.,           Wounded.
                      M. O.,    Mustered Out.
                      Res.,         Resigned.
                      Re-en.,    Re-enlisted.
                      Disch.,     Discharged.
                      Tr.,       Transferred.
                      Dis.,         Disabled.
                      Vet.,          Veteran.
                      Pro.,         Promoted.




                               ROSTER

                               OF THE

           SIXTH REGIMENT CONNECTICUT VOLUNTEER INFANTRY.

                            FIELD AND STAFF.
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-------------------------
                       |             |  Date of  |
         Rank.         | Residence.  |  Muster.  |       REMARKS.
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-------------------------
                       |             |           |
      _Colonel._       |             |           |
  John L. Chatfield,   |Waterbury,   | Sept. 13, |Died Aug. 9, 1863, of
                       |             |   1861    | wounds rec’d at Morris
                       |             |           | Is., S. C.
                       |             |           |
   _Lieut. Colonel._   |             |           |
  William G. Ely,      |Norwich,     |     ”     |Promoted Colonel 18th
                       |             |           | C. V., July 24, 1863.
                       |             |           |
      _Major._         |             |           |
  John Speidel,        |Bridgeport,  |           |Prom. Lt. Col.;
                       |             |           | wounded Oct. 22, 1862;
                       |             |     ”     | resigned July 20, 1863,
                       |             |           | to accept appointment
                       |             |           | in Inv. Corps.
                       |             |           |
     _Adjutant._       |             |           |
  Redfield Duryee,     |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Promoted Colonel;
                       |             |           | resigned May 29, 1864.
                       |             |           |
    _Quartermaster._   |             |           |
  Isaac V. B. Williams,|Norwich,     |     ”     |Resigned May 11, 1863.
                       |             |           |
     _Surgeon._        |             |           |
  Fred. M. L. Dibble,  |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
    _1st Assistant     |             |           |
       Surgeon._       |             |           |
  Edward Bulkley, Jr., |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
    _2nd Assistant     |             |           |
       Surgeon._       |             |           |
  Robert E. Ensign,    |Windsor,     |     ”     |Resigned Jan. 3, 1862.
                       |             |           |
     _Chaplain._       |             |           |
  Curtis T. Woodruff,  |Naugatuck,   |     ”     |Resigned April 18, 1864.
                       |             |           |
    _Musicians._       |             |           |
  John Fyfe,           |New Britain, |     ”     |Mustered out Nov. 25,
                       |             |           | 1862.
  Sidney F. Hicks,     |             |           |Re-enlisted Vt. Jan. 4,
                       |New Britain, |     ”     | ’64; Pro. 1st Lt.;
                       |             |           | mustered out Aug. 21;
                       |             |           | New Haven, Conn.

                    OFFICERS APPOINTED SINCE FIRST MUSTER.

      _Colonel._       |             |           |
  Alfred P. Rockwell,  |Norwich,     | June 11,  |Mustered out Feb. 9,
                       |             |   1864,   | 1865; term expired.
                       |             |           |
     _2d Assistant     |             |           |
       Surgeon._       |             |           |
  Samuel McClellan,    |New Haven,   | July 27,  |Discharged Jan. 16,
                       |             |   1862,   | 1863.
                       |             |           |
     _2d Assistant     |             |           |
       Surgeon._       |             |           |
  Myron W. Robinson,   |Hebron,      | April 11, |Pro. Surgeon; must. out
                       |             |   1863,   | Aug. 21, ’65; New Haven,
                       |             |           | Ct.
                       |             |           |
     _1st Assistant    |             |           |
       Surgeon._       |             |           |
  Henry A. Hoyt,       |New Haven,   | Mar. 23,  |Mustered out Aug. 21,
                       |             |   1865,   | 1865; New Haven, Conn.
                       |             |           |
      _Chaplain._      |             |           |
  Charles C. Tiffany,  |Derby,       | Sept. 22, |Discharged May 8, 1865.
                       |             |   1864,   |




                               REGIMENTAL BAND.
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+---------------------------
                       |             |  Date of  |
          Rank.        |  Residence. |  Muster.  |         REMARKS.
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+---------------------------
     _Band Master._    |             |
  John P. King,        |Hartford,    | Sept. 13, |Wounded Oct. 22, ’62;
                       |             |   1861,   | Pro. Capt.; dis. June 7,
                       |             |           | 1864.
                       |             |           |
   _Prin. Musicians._  |             |           |
  John Bryon,          |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  John Davis,          |Springfield, |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  Peter C. Fisher,     |Hartford,    |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  Henry R. Jacobs,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged dis. Dec. 19,
                       |             |           |  1861, Hilton Head, S. C.
  Wm. W. Osborn,       |Hartford,    |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  Carl Reginer,        |Wallingford, |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  Lewis E. Eldridge,   |Southington, |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  Henry Greatorex,     |Derby,       |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  Charles N. Jacocks,  |New Haven,   |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  Fred. A. King,       |Hartford,    |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  John Mackay,         |Meriden,     |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  Charles G. Sutliff,  |Southington, |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  Edwin H. Abbott,     |             |     ”     |Died August 2, 1862,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Dennis Blaksley,     |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  John Carey,          |Hartford,    |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  William Churchill,   |Southington, |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  Andrew W. Fox,       |Hartford,    |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  Valentine Fromm,     |             |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  Frank H. Hunt,       |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  John W. Hinman,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  Charles Leishman,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  Chauncey J. Pickett, |New Haven,   |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.
  John S. Rodgers,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Mustered out of service
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1862.




                               INFANTRY COMPANY “A.”

  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
                       |             | Date of   |
          Rank.        | Residence.  |  Muster.  |         REMARKS.
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
                       |             |           |
       _Captain._      |             |           |
  Thomas K. Bates,     |Brookline,   | Sept. 3,  |Resigned Nov. 4, 1861.
                       |             |    1861   |
                       |             |           |
    _1st Lieutenant._  |             |           |
  Arnold Leach,        |Putnam,      |     ”     |Pro. Capt., res. Aug. 26,
                       |             |           | ’63, to accept ap. in
                       |             |           | Inv. C’ps.
                       |             |           |
    _2d Lieutenant._   |             |           |
  Horatio Blanchard,   |Killingly,   |     ”     |Promoted 1st Lieutenant;
                       |             |           | resigned March 1, 1862.
                       |             |           |
    _Sergeants._       |             |           |
  M. I. Turtellotte,   |Putnam,      |     ”     |Promoted 2d Lieutenant;
                       |             |           | died Nov. 20, 1864.
  Delbert Hoar,        |Killingly,   |     ”     |Killed at Fort Wagner,
                       |             |           | S. C., July 18, 1863.
  Henry J. Fisher,     |Putnam,      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Israel B. Winslow,   |      ”      |     ”     |Re-enlist. Vet. Dec. 24,
                       |             |           | ’63; disch. dis.
                       |             |           | Nov. 5, 1864.
  Clovis E. Hammond,   |Killingly,   |     ”     |Promoted 1st Lieut.; died
                       |             |           | June 27, 1864, of wounds.
                       |             |           |
    _Corporals._       |             |           |
  Timothy H. Eaton,    |Stafford,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Thomas L. Paine,     |Putnam,      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Hiram L. Grant,      |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vt.; pr. Maj.; must.
                       |             |           | out Aug. 21, ’65, N. Haven.
  George Bellows,      |      ”      |     ”     |Pro. 2d Lieut.; wound. Aug.
                       |             |           | ’64; must. out Nov. 11, ’64.
  Andrew J. Neff,      |Brookline,   |     ”     |Re-enlist. Vet. Dec. 24,
                       |             |           | 1863; killed Sept. 12, 1864.
  Wm. S. Perry,        |Putnam,      |     ”     |Wound. July 18, 1863; disc.
                       |             |           | Sept. 12, ’64; term expired.
  George Herrick,      |Canterbury,  |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Sept. 30, New York.
  Henry J. Bemis,      |Worcester,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’64; w’d
                       |             |           | Aug. 16, ’63;
                       |             |           | m. o. Aug. 21,’65.
                       |             |           |
      _Musicians._     |             |           |
  Albert Kenyon,       |Plainfield,  |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63: m.
                       |             |           | out Aug. 14, ’65, at N. Y.
  Luther Warren,       |Putnam,      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63: m.
                       |             |           | out Aug. 21, ’65, at N. Y.
                       |             |           |
        _Wagoner._     |             |           |
  Job Wilbur,          |Killingly,   |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | March 1, 1862.
                       |             |           |
        _Privates._    |             |           |
  Adams, Amasa B.,     |Killingly,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vt. Dec. 24; must. out
                       |             |           | Aug. 23, 1864, N. Haven.
  Babson, Elisha J.,   |Pomfret,     |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps
                       |             |           | March 15, 1864.
  Baker, George H.,    |Thompson,    |     ”     |Died Feb. 28, 1862, at Warsaw
                       |             |           | Island, Ga.
  Bartlett, Halsey,    |Killingly,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; killed at Bermuda
                       |             |           | Hundred, Jan. 17, 1864.
  Bates, George W.,    |Thompson,    |     ”     |Discharged; enlisted U. S. A.
                       |             |           | Nov. 4, 1862.
  Bosworth, A. H.,     |Putnam,      |     ”     |W’d June 6, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 2, 1864; term expired.
  Bosworth, D. H.,     |Thompson,    |     ”     |Died Feb. 16, 1862, at Warsaw
                       |             |           | Island, Ga.
  Buck, William H.,    |Putnam,      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Bussey, Frank H.,    |Killingly,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | w’d, disch., dis.,
                       |             |           | Sept. 3, ’65.
  Bussey, George A.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged; enlisted U. S. A.
                       |             |           | Nov. 3, 1862.
  Bryson, David J.,    |Putnam,      |     ”     |Died July 10, 1863, at Folly
                       |             |           | Island, S. C.
  Carpenter, Jer. W.,  |  ”          |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Chase, Geo. W. Jr.,  |Killingly,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | m. o. Aug. 1, 1865, N. Haven.
  Chaffee, Henry D.,   |Putnam,      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Chapman, Ed. M.,     |Brookline,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24. ’63;
                       |             |           | wounded; died Dec. 21, ’64.
  Collins, John A.,    |Pomfret,     |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; Trans. Inv.
                       |             |           | Corps, March 15, 1864.
  Cook, Albert C.,     |Putnam,      |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 16, 1862.
  Crandall, Chas. H.,  |  ”          |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | m. o. Aug. 21, ’65, New Haven.
  Crandall, Darius H., |Killingly,   |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; re-en.
                       |             |           | Dec. 24, ’64;
                       |             |           | m. o. Aug. 21, ’65.
  Dillon, Patrick,     |Plainfield,  |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | Pro. 1st Lt.;
                       |             |           | m. o. Aug. 21, ’65.
  Dunn, James,         |Killingly,   |     ”     |Missing, Fort Wagner,
                       |             |           | July 18, 1863.
  Duprey, George,      |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; deserted
                       |             |           | Feb. 27, 1864.
  Durrall, Daniel,     |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged; enlisted U. S. A.
                       |             |           | Jan. 17, 1863.
  Ferris, Moses,       |Thompson,    |     ”     |Transferred Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | March 15, 1864.
  Fisher, Albert,      |Putnam,      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Forkey, Lewis,       |Brookline,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Fuller, John H.,     |Westport,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 2, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Gallup, Andrew,      |Putnam,      |     ”     |Re-en. Vt. Dec. 24, ’63; wd.
                       |             |           | May 16, ’64; m. o.
                       |             |           | Aug. 21, ’65.
  Gould, Byron W.,     |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. July 18, ’63; re-en. Vt.
                       |             |           | Dec. 24, ’64; m. o.
                       |             |           | Aug. 21, ’65.
  Grant, Waterman D.,  |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Granger, George W.,  |Thompson,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, ’64;
                       |             |           | m. o. Aug. 21, ’65, N. Haven.
  Hall, Charles H.,    |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 21, 1862.
  Hall, Henry C.,      |Putnam,      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Heath, Benjamin F.,  |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | wd., disch., dis., May, 1865.
  Hill, Charles T.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Died March 20, 1864,
                       |             |           | Annapolis, Md.
  Holt, James,         |Thompson,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | m. o. Aug. 21, ’65, N. Haven.
  Hutchings, Chas. S., |Canton,      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | deserted Nov. 11, 1864.
  Johnson, Henry W.,   |Putnam,      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’64;
                       |             |           | m. o. Aug. 21, ’65, N. Haven.
  Keene, James,        |Pomfret,     |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’64;
                       |             |           | deserted May 23, 1865.
  Kelly, Michael,      |Killingly,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’64;
                       |             |           | disch., dis., June 17, 1865.
  Lawrence, Alfred,    |Woodstock,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’64;
                       |             |           | died Nov. 4, ’64, Ft. Monroe.
  Laurence, Joseph C., |      ”      |     ”     |Died Dec. 9, 1861, Hilton
                       |             |           | Head, S. C.
  Laurence, Samuel,    |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged; enlisted U. S. A.
                       |             |           | Jan. 11, 1863.
  Lawson, John F.,     |Putnam,      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Lewin, Hiram J.,     |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | m. o. Aug. 21, 1865.
  Lynch, Michael,      |Killingly,   |     ”     |Wd. July, ’63; re-en. Vt.
                       |             |           | Dec. 24, ’63; m. o.
                       |             |           | Aug. 21, ’65.
  McArthur, John,      |Putnam,      |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | May 4, 1863, Beaufort, S. C.
  McChine, Hugh,       |Plainfield,  |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | March 15, 1864.
  McChine, Hugh Jr.,   |      ”      |     ”     |Died of wounds July 28, 1863,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  McCormick, James,    |Pomfret,     |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  McFarland, Henry,    |Woodstock,   |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Nov. 7, 1862.
  Millard, Theron,     |Hartford,    |     ”     |Died Sept. 7, 1862.
  Morse, Frank E.,     |Putnam,      |     ”     |Wd. July 18, ’63; missing
                       |             |           | Aug. 16, ’64, Deep Run, Va.
  Mycue, James,        |Plainfield,  |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Nelson Niles,        |Killingly,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Paine, Daney W.,     |Putnam,      |     ”     |Wd. May 14, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864; term expired.
  Penry, Calvin,       |Killingly,   |     ”     |Re-enlist. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | wounded Aug. 21, 1865.
  Penstrell, Rudolph,  |Woodstock,   |     ”     |Discharged; enlisted U. S. A.
                       |             |           | Jan. 17, 1863.
  Perry, Edward,       |Killingly,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Reynold, John,       |Plainfield,  |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1864,
                       |             |           | deserted March 21, 1865.
  Rice, Henry,         |Killingly,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1864,
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Rice, George,        |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Rice, John S.,       |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Robinson, Andrew J., |Thompson,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Robinson, Heman,     |    ”   ”    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Sibley, John F.,     |Putnam,      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Shortsleeves, Louis, |Killingly,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Sherbeone, M. H.,    |Putnam,      |     ”     |Missing in action,
                       |             |           | July 18, 1863.
  Slatterly, Robert,   |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Wearthrell, Edward,  |Pomfret,     |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Nov. 9, 1862.
  Weatherell, Wolcott, |Killingly,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | wd. May, ’64; died Feb., ’65.
  Weaver, William A.,  |Putnam,      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | deserted Nov. 7, 1864.
  Wheeler, William H., |Killingly,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Witthey, Delos R.,   |      ”      |     ”     |Disch., disab., Dec. 14, 1861,
                       |             |           | Washington, D. C.


                      RECRUITS FOR INFANTRY COMPANY “A.”

  *Aldrich, Albert H., |Willington,  | Sept. 11, |Wd. May 20, 1864; discharged,
                       |             |    ’63,   | disability, June 3, 1865.
  *Andrews, Ira A.,    |New Britain, | Sept. 4,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  Alden, Gardner,      |Putnam,      | Feb. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Avery, Hanford,      |Wilton,      | Feb. 25,  |Wd. May 20, 1864; disch.,
                       |             |    ’64,   | disability, March 21, 1865.
  Arnold, Shevelore,   |New Canaan,  | Feb. 27,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Abbott, Edward A.,   |Stamford,    | Mar. 16,  |Died Nov. 11, 1864,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Fortress Monroe, Va.
  *Allison, William,   |East Haven,  | Nov. 10,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Bignall, John,       |Ballowsville,| Mar. 26,  |Transferred to Invalid
                       |             |    ’62,   | Corps, March 15, 1864.
  *Barret, Marclien P.,|Norwalk,     | Oct. 5,   |Mustered out April 5, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Hartford, Conn.
  *Barton, Andrew P.,  |New Canaan,  | Sept. 12, |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |    ’63,   | June 30, 1865, New Haven.
  Bishop, Charles,     |Bethel,      | Oct. 19,  |Wd. Aug. 14, 1864; disch.,
                       |             |    ’63    | disability, June 30, 1865.
  *Brown, Henry W.,    |Norwalk,     | Sept. 12, |Discharged disability,
                       |             |    ’63    | April 17, 1865, New Haven.
  *Brown, William,     |Stamford,    | Oct. 15,  |Deserted Aug. 15, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63    |
  *Brown, Jonas,       |Bethel,      | Oct. 19,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63    | New Haven.
  *Belden, Chas.,      |Norwalk,     | Oct. 9,   |Mustered out June 9, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63    | McDougal Hospital.
  *Bardeen, Seth,      |      ”      | Oct. 7,   |Wounded June 17, 1764;
                       |             |    ’63    | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Bruce, John,         |Goshen,      | Dec. 24,  |Wound. Aug. 16, 1864;
                       |             |    ’63,   | disch. disability,
                       |             |           | June 14, 1865.
  Baker, Samuel,       |Portland,    | Mar. 17,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Brown, William,     |Hartford,    | Nov. 10,  |Mustered out Aug. 12, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New York.
  *Callahan, John,     |Norwalk,     | Oct. 16,  |Died of wounds Nov. 21, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Hampton, Va.
  *Carragan, Henry,    |Vernon,      | Sept. 11, |Died April 25, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Wilmington, N. C.
  *Carter, Henry L.,   |Clinton,     | Sept. 5,  |Deserted June 15, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Clark, William,     |Norwalk,     | Oct. 8,   |Died Aug. 25, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Andersonville, Ga.
  *Cummings, Wm. H.,   |      ”      | Oct. 6,   |Deserted Oct. 26, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Cox, George,        |New Haven,   | Nov. 11,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven; absent.
  *Collins, William,   |So. Windsor, | Nov. 14,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64    | New Haven; absent.
  *Cornell, Robert H.  |Tolland,     | Nov. 12,  |Mustered out June 16, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Wilmington, N. C.
  *Collins, Edward,    |New Haven,   | Nov. 14,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Collins, Dennis,    |Bridgeport,  | Nov. 10,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Clifford, Richards, |     ”       | Nov. 10,  |Mustered out June 3, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New York.
  *Cotter, William,    |New Haven,   | Nov. 10,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Davis, Oliver,      |Naugatuck,   | Aug. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Davis, Royal L.,    |Vernon,      | Sept. 11, |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Davy, William,      |Norwalk,     | Oct. 7,   |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Day, Ebon,          |East Haddam, | Sept. 5,  |Mustered out May 18, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  DeForest, Myron,     |Norwalk,     | Oct. 13,  |Wound. Aug. 16, 1864; m. o.
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865, N. Haven.
  Demsey, James,       |Marlborough, | Jan. 7,   |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Donnelly, Michael,  |Winchester,  | Nov. 10,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Dillon, Paul,       |New Haven,   | Nov. 10,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Elmers, Harry,      |East Haven,  | Nov. 10,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Farrell, Wm.,       |N. Milford,  | Nov. 12,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Granberry, Stephen,  |Stamford,    | Feb. 25,  |Mustered out Aug. 12, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New York.
  Heath, Samuel,       |Thompson,    | Feb. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven; absent.
  Hull, Wilson L.,     |Fairfield,   | Feb. 25,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Hull, John,          |Stamford,    | Feb. 25,  |Mustered out June 26, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Goldsborough, N. C.
  Hawley, James C.,    |Portland,    | Mar. 17,  |Mustered out June 5, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | City Point, Va.
  *Harvey, George,     |Bridgewater, | Nov. 12,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Kelley, Emerson,    |Hartford,    | July 30,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Kelley, Arthur,     |Bridgeport,  | Nov. 11,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Long, James,        |Eastford,    | Nov. 11,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Mechen, Thomas,      |Preston,     | Feb. 12,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *McGowan, James,     |Norwalk,     | Nov. 10,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  O’Brien, Michael,    |Plainfield,  | Feb. 19,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven. absent.
  Owens, Patrick,      |Brookline,   | March 7,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Palmer, David C.,    |Stamford,    | Feb. 19,  |Died April 27, 1864,
                       |             |    ’62,   | Baltimore, Md.
  Seymour, Am. B.,     |Bridgeport,  | Aug. 21,  |Died Oct. 28, 1864,
                       |             |    ’62,   | Salisbury, N. C.
  Shaw, Joseph L.,     |Somers,      | Mar. 10,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Sullivan, Thomas,   |Bethany,     | Nov. 14,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------

                       NOTE--* Substitutes and Drafted.




                            INFANTRY COMPANY “B.”

  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
         Rank.         |  Residence. |  Date of  |        REMARKS.
                       |             |  Muster.  |
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
                       |             |           |
       _Captain._      |             |           |
  Benj. F. Prouty,     |Hartford,    | Sept. 12, |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |    ’61,   | Dec. 31, 1863.
                       |             |           |
    _1st Lieutenant._  |             |           |
  Horatio D. Eaton,    |     ”       |     ”     |Pro. Capt.; killed at
                       |             |           | Drury’s Bluff, Va.,
                       |             |           | May 16, 1864.
                       |             |           |
    _2nd Lieutenant._  |             |           |
  Andrew Marshall,     |     ”       |     ”     |Pro. 1st Lieut.; mustered
                       |             |           | out Aug. 1, 1865.
                       |             |           |
      _Sergeants._     |             |           |
  Gustavus S. Dana,    |     ”       |     ”     |Res.; appointed Capt.
                       |             |           | Sig. Corps, U. S. A.,
                       |             |           | Jan. 17, ’64.
  Nath’l R. Middleton, |     ”       |     ”     |Re-enlist. Vet. Feb. 4, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Henry B. Newton,     |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 20, 1861.
  Henry S. Brown,      |     ”       |     ”     |Pro. 2nd Lieut. Co. E.;
                       |             |           | resigned March 1, 1864.
  Walter A. Fox,       |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
     _Corporals._      |             |           |
  Albert L. Brown,     |     ”       |     ”     |Re-enlist. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, ’65.
  Cardella E. Brown,   |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  George Thomas,       |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | Jan. 14, 1863, N. Y.
  Isaac E. Bishop,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Daniel H. Veader,    |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Oct. 2, 1862,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  James H. Olcutt,     |Hartford,    |     ”     |Discharged disabled
                       |             |           | Sept. 24, 1863,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Noah C. Hamlin,      |Windsor,     |     ”     |Discharged enlisted in
                       |             |           | U. S. A. Feb. 25, 1863.
  Moses W. Jewett,     |Hartford,    |     ”     |Discharged enlisted in
                       |             |           | U. S. A. Feb. 22, 1863.
                       |             |           |
        _Musician._    |             |           |
  Geo. A. Fenton,      |Windsor,     |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
       _Wagoner._      |             |           |
  John M. Thompson,    |Naugatuck,   |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Aug. 15, 1862.
                       |             |           |
       _Privates._     |             |           |
  Ames, Chas. G.,      |Hartford,    |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | July 6, 1863, Beaufort, S. C.
  Andrus, Jacob,       |E. Windsor   |     ”     |Discharged, enlisted in
                       |             |           | U. S. A. Nov. 1, 1862.
  Atwater, Franklin,   |Barkhamstead,|     ”     |Died Aug. 19, 1863, of w’ds
                       |             |           | rec’d at Fort Wagner, S. C.
  Babcock, Anson E.,   |Salisbury,   |     ”     |Died Sept. 26, 1861,
                       |             |           | Washington, D. C.
  Bally, Chas. S.,     |New London,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Beecher, Wilmot,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | March 9, 1862.
  Bishop, John B.,     |Avon,        |     ”     |Re-enlist. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Bradley, Andrew,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 20, 1861.
  Bryan, Wm. O.,       |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | New Haven; term expired.
  Buckland, Soloman,   |Windsor Lo’ks,|    ”     |Wounded May 10, 1864;
                       |             |           | dis. Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Chambault, James,    |Hartford,    |     ”     |Re-enlist. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Clark, John,         |New Haven,   |     ”     |Wound. July 25, 1863; re-enl.
                       |             |           | Vet.; killed Jan. 16, ’65.
  Connelly, Martin,    |Windsor Lo’ks,|    ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 4, 1862.
  Dawley, James,       |Providence,  |     ”     |Died May 5, 1862,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Dennis, George,      |Huntington,  |     ”     |Re-enlist. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | wd.; must. out Aug. 21, ’65.
  Dyson, William,      |Winchester,  |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Oct. 4, 1862.
  Edwards, James A.,  |So. Had., Mass.,|   ”     |Re-en. Vet.; wd. June 17,
                       |             |           | 1864; must. out
                       |             |           | Aug. 21, ’65.
  Finney, John,        |Hartford,    |     ”     |Deserted March 29, 1863.
  Fox, Albert H.,      |  ”          |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | wd.; must. out
                       |             |           | Aug. 21, 1865.
  Fox, Harrison W.,    |  ”          |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Frisbey, Henry D.,   |Lisbon,      |     ”     |Died July 1, 1862, at
                       |             |           | James’ Island, S. C.
  Gilbert, Levi C.,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Prom. 2nd Lieut. Co. “F;”
                       |             |           | resigned Apr. 18, 1863.
  Glazier, Thos. T.,   |Woodbury,    |     ”     |Re-enlist. Vet. Jan. 4, 1864;
                       |             |           | died Oct. 16, 1864.
  Graham, John L.,     |Milford,     |     ”     |Re-enlist. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Harrison, Wm. H.,    |Middletown,  |     ”     |Re-enlist. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | wd.; must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Hawley, James D.,    |Guilford,    |     ”     |Re-enlist. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Hawley, William,     |Plymouth,    |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Jan. 4, 1862.
  Healy, Patrick,      |Windsor Lo’ks,|    ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Nov. 3, 1862.
  Holt, Moses P.,      |Windsor,     |     ”     |Missing in Action,
                       |             |           | July 18, 1863.
  Irwin, Thomas,       |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Lucas, George A.,    |So. Windsor, |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Sept. 2, 1865.
  Lane, Asahel L.,     |Bristol,     |     ”     |Discharged July 16, 1863,
                       |             |           | Morris Island, S. C.
  Lathrop, Fred. O.    |E. Hartford, |     ”     |Discharged disabil.,
                       |             |           | July 16, 1863, Morris
                       |             |           | Island, S. C.
  Little, John,        |Portland,    |     ”     |Discharged disabil.,
                       |             |           | May 5, 1862.
  Loughary, Edward,    |Farmington,  |     ”     |Wd. Oct. ’62; re-en.
                       |             |           | Vet.; tr. V. R. C;
                       |             |           | m. o. Sept. 9, ’65.
  McKinney, James,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Killed at Pocotaligo,
                       |             |           | S. C., Oct. 22, 1862.
  McNamara, Patrick,   |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; re-en.
                       |             |           | Vet.; must. out
                       |             |           | Aug. 21, ’65.
  McDonald, Thos.,     |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Murphy, William,     |Hartford,    |     ”     |Discharged enlisted in
                       |             |           | U. S. A. Nov. 1, 1862.
  Nellis, Edward A.,   |Clayton, N. Y.|    ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | wound.; dis. July 4, 1865.
  Nichols, John,       |Hartford,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Norton, Jonathan F., |      ”      |     ”     |Re-enlist. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | discharged Aug. 21, 1865.
  Phelan, John,        |New York,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Potter, Willard,     |Lisbon,      |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; dis.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Riggs, Clark,        |Sherman,     |     ”     |Re-enlist. Vet. Jan. 4, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Rodgers, Edmond,     |Burlington,  |     ”     |Killed at Morris Island,
                       |             |           | S. C., July 18, 1863.
  Roper, Stephen,      |Bristol,     |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Rowland, Geo. C.,    |Windsor,     |     ”     |Discharged enlisted
                       |             |           | U. S. A. Nov. 1, 1862.
  Sewell, Edward,      |New York,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Sisson, John E.,     |Montville,   |     ”     |Discharged enlisted in
                       |             |           | U. S. A. Nov. 1, 1862.
  Spears, John,        |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | March 9, 1862.
  Squires, Phineas L., |Guilford,    |     ”     |Wound. July 18, 1863;
                       |             |           | dis. disabled,
                       |             |           | March 30, 1864.
  Stedman, Amos F.,    |Utica, N. Y.,|     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Sullivan, William,   |New Britain, |     ”     |Wound. July 18, 1863;
                       |             |           | dis. Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term exp.
  Taylor, Matthew,     |Lyme,        |     ”     |Discharged; enlisted
                       |             |           | U. S. A. Nov. 3, 1862.
  Terry, Wm. B.,       |Hartford,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | died of wounds
                       |             |           | Nov. 1, ’64.
  Vaille, John R.,     |Cornwall,    |     ”     |Died July 5, 1862, at
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Webb, Thomas J.,     |  ”          |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 12, 1865.
  Weeks, Alphonso,     |Pomfret,     |     ”     |Died Feb. 3, 1862,
                       |             |           | Warsaw Sound, Ga.
  Woods, William,     |Provid’ce, R. I.,|  ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | wd.; must. out
                       |             |           | Aug. 21, ’65.
  Work, Albert S.,     |Ashford,     |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | wd.; must. out
                       |             |           | Aug. 21, ’65.
  Wright, James,       |Stamford,    |     ”     |Discharged; enlisted
                       |             |           | U. S. A. Feb. 22, 1863.
  Young, John A.,      |Eastford,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | wd.; must. out
                       |             |           | June 12, ’65.
  Young, Thomas M.,    |  ”          |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | wd.; must. out
                       |             |           | Aug. 21, 1865.


                      RECRUITS FOR INFANTRY COMPANY “B.”

  *Ames, Richard L.,   |Hebron,      | Sept. 22, |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  Ames, Chas. G.,      |Glastonbury, | Aug. 31,  |Mustered out June 26, 1865,
                       |             |   ’64,    | Rolla, N. C.
  Brown, George,       |Stamford,    | Jan. 29,  |Discharged June 2, 1865.
                       |             |   ’62,    |
  *Bachtolt, Charles,  |Danbury,     | Oct. 20,  |Deserted June 26, 1864.
                       |             |   ’63,    |
  *Bemus, Henry,       |Durham,      | Aug. 29,  |Died June 13, 1864, Richmond,
                       |             |   ’63,    | Va.
  *Boyle, Richard,     |Ridgefield,  | Oct. 20,  |Transferred to U. S. N.
                       |             |   ’63,    | May 16, 1864.
  *Brown, Joseph,      |Bethel,      | Oct. 21,  |Discharged Sept. 16, 1864.
                       |             |   ’63,    |
  *Burns, John,        |Ridgefield,  | Oct. 20,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  *Davis, Sylvester,   |New Haven,   | Jul. 25,  |Wound. June 17, 1864; disch.
                       |             |   ’63,    | disab. April 13, 1865.
  *Diener, Carl,       |Stamford,    | Oct. 20,  |Wound. June 6, 1864; must.
                       |             |   ’63,    | out Aug. 21, ’65, N. Haven.
  *Dorman, Owen,       |Litchfield,  | Jul. 31,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  Ehrsal, William,     |Bridgeport,  | Jan. 23,  |Wound. Aug. 16, 1864;
                       |             |   ’62,    | discharged Feb. 14, 1865.
  *Fowler, Chas. C,    |Bristol,     | Aug. 21,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  *Foster, John,       |Redding,     | Oct. 28,  |Deserted June 9, 1864.
                       |             |   ’63,    |
  Fox, Horace P.,      |Hartford,    | Feb. 19,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’64,    | New Haven.
  Glenn, John,         |Bridgeport,  | Feb. 15,  |Wound. May 16, 1864; disch.
                       |             |   ’63,    | disab. Feb. 16, 1865;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Gallagher, Phillip,  |Danbury,     | Oct. 20,  |Deserted Oct. 16, 1864.
                       |             |   ’63,    |
  *Gould, Cornelius B.,|Washington,  | Aug. 22,  |Discharged Nov. 5, 1864.
                       |             |   ’63,    |
  Hanford, George,     |Stamford,    | Jan. 29,  |Wound. May 16, 1864; dis.
                       |             |   ’62,    | Feb. 14, 1865; term expired.
  *Hoofan, Gustave,    |Danbury,     | Oct. 20,  |Deserted Nov. 11, 1864.
                       |             |   ’63,    |
  *Huntley, Chas. F.,  |Ashford,     | Aug. 21,  |Mustered out June 29, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | York, Pa.
  Huff, William,       |Danbury,     | Oct. 24,  |Deserted Nov. 7, 1864.
                       |             |   ’63,    |
  *Ingalls, Dexter W., |Stratford,   | Jan. 30,  |Died of wounds June 23, 1864,
                       |             |   ’62,    | New Haven.
  *Ives, Hugh N.,      |New Haven,   | Jul. 28,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
                       |             |   ’63,    |
  Jones, Ira D.,       |Stamford,    | Jan. 30,  |Died of wounds July 29, 1863,
                       |             |   ’62,    | Beaufort, S. C.
  Knapp, Simeon S.,    |Bridgeport,  | Jan. 23,  |Discharged Feb. 14, 1865;
                       |             |   ’62,    | term expired.
  *Keegan, Michael,    |Suffield,    | Aug. 19,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  *Kenworthy, Mark,    |New Haven,   | Aug.. 8,  |Discharged Jan. 22, 1864, by
                       |             |   ’63,    | order War Department.
  Lawler, John,        |Stamford,    | Jan. 29,  |Deserted Feb. 20, 1863.
                       |             |   ’62,    |
  *Leonard, Francis J.,|Stafford,    | Sept. 11, |Discharged June 20, 1865, by
                       |             |   ’63,    | order War Department.
  McBrine, James,      |Derby,       | Jan. 28,  |Wound. July 18, ’63;
                       |             |   ’63,    | trans. Vet. Res. Corps,
                       |             |           | Jan. 5, ’65.
  Moore, Charles E.    |Middletown,  | Feb. 20,  |Discharged Feb. 2, 1865;
                       |             |   ’62,    | term expired.
  *Maher, Dennis,      |Ridgefield,  | Oct. 21,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  *McDonald, John,     |Bethel,      | Oct. 19,  |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |   ’63,    | Feb. 17, 1865.
  McNamee, Edwin B.    |Danbury,     | Oct. 19,  |Deserted June 16, 1864.
                       |             |   ’63,    |
  *Mitchel, Abner W.,  |Washington,  | Aug. 22,  |Died Aug. 20, 1864, of wounds
                       |             |   ’63,    | received in action.
  *Monroe, John,       |Plainfield,  | Aug. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 9, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New York.
  *McDonald, James,    |Vernon,      | Dec. 5,   |Deserted Jan. 28, 1865.
                       |             |   ’64,    |
  Oakes, William C,    |Stamford,    | Feb. 19,  |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |   ’63,    | Nov. 9, 1864.
  Oakes, William,      |      ”      | Jan. 19,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865;
                       |             |   ’64,    | New Haven.
  Pender, John W.,     |      ”      | Feb. 24,  |Discharged Feb. 2, 1868;
                       |             |   ’62,    | term expired.
  *Porter, Samuel,     |Woodstock,   | Aug. 28,  |Wd. May 16, ’64; must. out
                       |             |   ’63,    | Aug. 21, ’65, New Haven.
  *Ray, William,       |Danbury,     | Oct. 20,  |Deserted Nov. 7, 1864.
                       |             |   ’63,    |
  *Robinson, John,     |Portland,    | Dec.. 2,  |Deserted Jan. 28, 1865.
                       |             |   ’64,    |
  Smith, Geo. G.,      |Stamford,    | Feb. 27,  |Discharged Feb. 27, 1865;
                       |             |   ’62,    | term expired.
  Smith, Theopolis F., |      ”      | Feb. 25,  |Discharged Feb. 2, 1865;
                       |             |   ’62,    | term expired.
  Still, Francis,      |      ”      | Feb. 11,  |Transferred to U. S. Signal
                       |             |   ’62,    | Corps, Oct. 13, 1863.
  *Sage, Elisha F.,    |New Haven,   | Sept. 5,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  *Sheppard, Corydon,  |      ”      | Sept. 5,  |Wound. May 20, 1864; must.
                       |             |   ’63,    | out Aug. 9, 1865, N. Y.
  *Sheppard, Hall,     |Newtown,     | Aug. 29,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  *Smith, John,        |Sherman,     | Oct. 21,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  *Smith, James,       |Danbury,     | Oct. 21,  |Deserted June 26, 1864.
                       |             |   ’63,    |
  Wentworth, Henry P., |Hartford,    | Feb. 19,  |Wd. June 7, ’64; must. out
                       |             |   ’64,    | Aug. 21, ’65, New Haven.
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------

                       NOTE--* Substitutes and Drafted.




                            INFANTRY COMPANY “C.”

  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
         Rank.         | Residence.  |  Date of  |           REMARKS.
                       |             |  Muster.  |
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
                       |             |           |
       _Captain._      |             |           |
  Daniel Klein.        |New Haven,   | Sept. 6,  |Promoted to Lieut. Col.;
                       |             |    ’61,   |  must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
                       |             |           |
  _1st Lieutenant._    |             |           |
  Robert Hoppel        |New Haven,   |     ”     |Resigned March 10, 1862.
                       |             |           |
  _2nd Lieutenant._    |             |           |
  Moritz Pfaff.        |New Haven,   |     ”     |Honorably discharged
                       |             |           | Sept. 22, 1863.
                       |             |           |
     _Sergeants._      |             |           |
  John King,           |New Haven,   |     ”     |Prom. 2d Lieut.; m. o.
                       |             |           | March 4, 1865 as
                       |             |           | Sergt. Major.
  Joseph Miller,       |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; wd.; prom. Capt.;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 9, ’65.
  Otto Frenzel,        |Hartford,    |     ”     |Died May 24, 1864, at
                       |             |           | Andersonville, Ga.
  William Leruscher,   |Norwich,     |     ”     |Wound. July 18, 1863;
                       |             |           | dis. Sept. 12, 1864.
  Fred. Striby, Jr.,   |New Haven,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; prom. Capt.;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
                       |             |           |
     _Corporals._      |             |           |
  Gustav DeBouge,      |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Killed July 18, 1863, at
                       |             |           | Morris Island, S. C.
  John Rattlesdorfer,  |New Haven,   |     ”     |Wound. May 10, 1864;
                       |             |           | discharged Sept. 11, 1864.
  George Ittell,       |Norwich,     |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; deserted
                       |             |           | Feb. 27, 1864.
  Julius Post,         |New Haven,   |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1863.
  Adam Young,          |Norwich,     |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  August Goersch,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Andrew Winter,       |      ”      |     ”     |Wound. July 18, 1863; dis.
                       |             |           | disab. Feb. 16, 1864.
  Chas. Kirsten.       |      ”      |     ”     |Died July 21, 1863 of wounds
                       |             |           | rec’d at Fort Wagner.
                       |             |           |
     _Musicians._      |             |           |
  Edward Kann,         |Orange,      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Lewis Daffett.       |Norwich,     |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 5, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
     _Wagoner._        |             |           |
  Martin A. Brown.     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
     _Privates._       |             |           |
  Andre, Ernst,        |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged; enlisted U. S. A.
                       |             |           | Feb. 22, 1863.
  Blau, Anthony,       |Norwich,     |     ”     |Wound. July, 1863; discharged
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864.
  Brandt, Charles,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged disab.
                       |             |           | Feb. 7, 1863, Beaufort, S. C.
  Behrens, Fred.,      |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Behrens, Henry,      |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Nov. 23, 1863,
                       |             |           | New Haven.
  Beer, Joseph,        |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. May 7, 1864; died
                       |             |           | Feb. 4, 1865, N. Y.
  Beyer, Martin,       |      ”      |     ”     |Died Aug. 26, 1862,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Brehm, Michael,      |Wallingford, |     ”     |Wd. Aug. 17, 1864; discharged
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864.
  Blenel, Valentine,   |New Haven,   |     ”     |Killed July 18, 1863, Morris
                       |             |           | Island, S. C.
  Diegar, Babtist,     |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1865;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Daniker, John,       |      ”      |     ”     |Wound. July 18, 1863;
                       |             |           | discharged Sept. 11, 1864.
  Ehmer, Ferdenand,    |Norwich,     |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Ernst, Jacob,        |New Haven,   |     ”     |Wound. May 16, 1864;
                       |             |           | discharged Sept. 11, 1864.
  Feldar, Anthony,     |      ”      |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | Jan. 15, 1864.
  Frey, Andrew,        |Hamden,      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 21, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Forster, Fred.,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Wound. May 10, 1864;
                       |             |           | discharged Sept. 11, 1864.
  Frig, Gustave,       |Hamden,      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Fritsche, Gustave,   |New Haven,   |     ”     |Wd. July 18, ’63; killed
                       |             |           | Aug. 16, ’64,
                       |             |           | Spring Hill, Va.
  Fuchs, Peter J.,     |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Graver, Albert,      |Hartford,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Jan. 4, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Ginder, Balthaser,   |New Haven,   |     ”     |Died April 2, 1864,
                       |             |           | Annapolis, Md.
  Gruman, Henry,       |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Gates, Joseph,       |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 21, 1861.
  Glissman, William,   |      ”      |     ”     |Killed July 18, 1863,
                       |             |           | Morris Island, S. C.
  Heese, Augustus,     |      ”      |     ”     |Wounded July 18, 1863;
                       |             |           | died Feb. 14, 1865.
  Hohnbaun, Edward,    |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 5, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Hartung, Fred.,      |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. Oct. 22, ’62; disch.
                       |             |           | disab. May 11, ’63.
                       |             |           | Beauf’t, S. C.
  Hilderbrandt, Gotlieb|Simsbury,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; wd.; prom.
                       |             |           | 1st Lieut.; resign.
                       |             |           | Sept. 5, ’64.
  Haller, George,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Oct. 19, 1863,
                       |             |           | by order of Gen. Hallock.
  Henninger, George,   |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Killed June 17, 1864,
                       |             |           | Bermuda Hundred, Va.
  Hausman, Godfrey,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged; enlisted U. S. A.
                       |             |           | Nov. 3, 1862.
  Hahl, John,          |      ”      |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | March 15, 1864.
  Haas, Jacob,         |Meriden,     |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1863.
  Haller, Martin,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Died Aug. 29, 1863, of wounds
                       |             |           | rec’d at Fort Wagner.
  Hauserman, Michael,  |      ”      |     ”     |Died June 5, 1862, Hilton
                       |             |           | Head, S. C.
  Hausman, Rudolph,    |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 21, 1861.
  Jost, Phillip,       |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Jan. 4, 1864;
                       |             |           | dis. disab. July 18, 1865.
  Johnson, Wm. H.,     |      ”      | Oct.  2,  |Pro. 2d Lt. Co. “K;” died of
                       |             |   ’61,    | wds, Feb. 22, ’63, Beauf’t.
  Kreitling, Albert,   |Waterbury,   | Sept. 6,  |Died Nov. 30, 1861,
                       |             |   ’61,    | Hilton Head.
  Knoblauch, Emil,     |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. July 18, ’63; Re-en. Vet.
                       |             |           | Dec. 21; m. o. Aug. 21, ’65.
  Keim, George,        |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Kung, George,        |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; must. out
                       |             |           | Aug. 21, 1865.
  Kapmeyer, John,      |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Lomberti, Chas.      |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Died Aug. 19, 1863, of wounds
                       |             |           | rec’d at Fort Wagner.
  Lauffer, Jacob,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 21, 1863;
                       |             |           | wound. dis. disab.
                       |             |           | Jan. 2, ’65.
  Lutz, Michael,       |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | July 27, 1862.
  Lemen, Theodore,     |Norwich,     |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Meyer, Adolph L.,    |  ”          |     ”     |Deserted Sept. 15, 1861.
  Meisser, Charles,    |  ”          |     ”     |Killed July 18, 1863,
                       |             |           | Morris Island, S. C.
  Meyer, John,         |New Haven,   |     ”     |Wd. July 18, ’63; Re-en. Vet.
                       |             |           | Jan. 2, ’64; m. o.
                       |             |           | Aug. 21, ’65.
  Meyer, Martin,       |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. July 18, ’63; Re-en. Vet.
                       |             |           | Jan. 2, ’64; m. o.
                       |             |           | Aug. 21, ’65.
  Necker, Joseph,      |      ”      |     ”     |Wound. June 17, ’64; died
                       |             |           | Aug. 10, ’64, New Haven.
  Quieser, Anthony,    |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 21, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Rothaar, Chris.,     |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Ruph, Henry,         |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept.  7, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Ringwald, Jacob,     |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Selzer, Adam,        |Hartford,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Scholdach, Augustus, |New Haven,   |     ”     |Died Feb. 27, 1864,
                       |             |           | Richmond, Va.
  Schmidt, Aug. E.,    |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged disab.
                       |             |           | Sept. 3, 1863, Hilton Head.
  Schmidt, Fred.,      |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Striby, Fred.,       |      ”      |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | Sept. 1. 1863.
  Schmeisser, Frank A.,|      ”      |     ”     |Drummed out of Service,
                       |             |           | Nov. 21, 1862.
  Schœnwether, Gus.,   |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Schenk, George,      |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Standt, George,      |Norwich,     |     ”     |Deserted June 12, 1863.
  Stinel, Herman,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Killed July 18, 1863, at Fort
                       |             |           | Wagner, S. C.
  Schemp, John,        |Hartford,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Schmidt, Jno. W.,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Schmuder, John,      |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 21, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Schneder, Jacob,     |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 7, 1862.
  Shleicher, Jos.,     |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Stark, Michael,      |Southington, |     ”     |Wd. July 18,’63; killed
                       |             |           | June 17, ’64 at Ber. Hun.,
                       |             |           | Va.
  Spoehal, Rudolph,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Wd. May 20, 1864; discharged
                       |             |           | May 29, 1865.
  Schwartz, Simeon,    |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Sill, William,       |Hartford,    |     ”     |Died June 9, 1864; Richmond,
                       |             |           | Va.
  Tarrasoviez, Stephen,|New Haven,   |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1863.
  Volkman, Ferd.,      |Norwich,     |     ”     |Died Oct. 21, 1862, Beaufort,
                       |             |           | S. C.
  White, Frank,        |      ”      |     ”     |Killed July 18, 1863,
                       |             |           | Fort Wagner, S. C.
  Wieprecht, Felix,    |Hartford,    |     ”     |Wound. July 18, 1863;
                       |             |           | discharged Sept. 12, 1864.
  Wieser, Matthias,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Wound. July 18, 1863;
                       |             |           | discharged Sept. 12, 1864.
  Williams, Peter.     |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.


                      RECRUITS FOR INFANTRY COMPANY “C.”

  *Abel, George,       |Norwalk,     | Oct.  7,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  *Adams, William,     |Danbury,     | Feb.  9,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  *Beick, Detlef,      |East Haddam, | Sept. 5,  |Wound. May 20, ’64; died
                       |             |   ’63,    | Apr. 3, ’65, Wilmington,
                       |             |           | N. C.
  *Belchmer, Christ.,  |Danbury,     | Oct. 22,  |Killed May 20, 1864,
                       |             |   ’63,    | Drury’s Bluff, Va.
  *Bode, Henry,        |East Haddam, | Sept. 5,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  *Brady, James,       |Hartford,    | Nov. 10,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’64,    | New Haven.
  *Baron, Charles,     |Danbury,     | Feb. 20,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’65,    | New Haven.
  *Carr, Henry,        |Bridgewater, | Nov. 12,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’64,    | New Haven.
  *Deming, Edward,     |Voluntown,   | July 21,  |Wound. disch. disab. March 15,
                       |             |   ’63,    | 1865, David’s Island.
  *Dufour, Francois,   |Redding,     | Nov.  2,  |Deserted Nov. 7, 1864.
                       |             |   ’63,    |
  *Dorsing, Charles,   |New Haven,   | Mch. 15,  |Died Aug. 18, 1865,
                       |             |   ’65,    | New Haven.
  *Fisher, August,     |Norwalk,     | Oct.  6,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  Frazier, Henry,      |Eastford,    | Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’64,    | New Haven.
  Galvin, James,       |Middletown,  | Sept. 27, |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’64,    | New York.
  *Gallagher, James G.,|Windsor,     | Nov. 10,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’64,    | New Haven.
  *Grandipau, Jules,   |New Haven,   | Mch. 10,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’65,    | New Haven.
  Hanson, Peter,       |Hartford,    | Jan. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’64,    | New Haven.
  Hampe, Henry Otto,   |  ”          | Feb. 29,  |Mustered out June 26, 1865,
                       |             |   ’64,    | Goldsboro, N. C.
  Juergens, Theodore,  |Ridgefield,  | Oct. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 16, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  *Kapft, Frederick,   |Stamford,    | Oct. 12,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  *Lauffer, Rudolph,   |Danbury,     | Oct. 22,  |Died Jan. 2, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | Salisbury, N. C.
  *Lenoir, Eugene,     |New Haven,   | Mch. 10,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’65,    | New Haven.
  *Meyer, Henry,       |Norwalk,     | Oct.  5,  |Deserted Nov. 9, 1864.
                       |             |   ’63,    |
  *Mohr, William,      |Danbury,     | Oct. 22,  |Discharged disab. May 22,
                       |             |   ’63,    | 1865, New Haven.
  *Mulle, Augustus,    |  ”          | Aug. 22,  |Mustered out June 20, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | Smithville, N. C.
  Muller, Charles,     |  ”          | Aug.  1,  |Deserted Nov. 7, 1864.
                       |             |   ’63,    |
  Meyer, Charles,      |Hartford,    | Jan. 17,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’65,    | New Haven.
  *Mertius, John,      |New Canaan,  | June 20,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’65,    | New Haven.
  *Miller, Charles,    |Bridgeport,  | Feb.  3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’63,    | New Haven.
  *Payne, Chas. W., Jr.,|New London, | July 16,  |Wound. May 16, ’64; must. out
                       |             |   ’63,    | Aug. 21, ’65, N. Haven.
  *Palmer, John,       |Danbury,     | Jan. 11,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’65,    | New Haven.
  *Ringe, Henry,       |Southington, | Sept. 21, |Killed May 16, 1864,
                       |             |   ’63,    | Drury’s Bluff, Va.
  *Ruff, Anthony,      |Ridgefield,  | Oct. 22,  |Wd. Aug. 16, 1864; must. out
                       |             |   ’63,    | Aug. 21, 1865, N. Haven.
  *Rice, John,         |Bridgeport,  | Feb.  3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’65,    | New Haven.
  *Reneis, Jacob,      |Woodbury,    | Feb.  7,  |Mustered out July 20, 1865,
                       |             |   ’65,    | Goldsboro, N. C.
  *Ruors, Christian,   |Waterbury,   | Feb. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’65,    | New Haven.
  *Richardson, James,  |Montville,   | Dec   3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’64,    | New Haven.
  *Schumaker Henry,    |Norwalk,     | Oct.  7,  |Shot for desertion
                       |             |   ’63,    | April 17, 1864, Hilton Head.
  *Searing, Peter,     |Hartford,    | Sept. 4,  |Wound. Aug. 16, 1864; disch.
                       |             |   ’63,    | disab. June 10, 1865.
  *Salbach, Frank,     |Norwalk,     | Oct.  9,  |Deserted Nov. 7, 1864.
                       |             |   ’63,    |
  *Smith, Charles,     |Woodstock,   | Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’64,    | New Haven.
  *Stockwell, John,    |Bridgeport,  | Feb.  3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’65,    | New Haven.
  *Schkilzger, Louis,  |Hartford,    | Feb. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’65,    | New Haven.
  *Sonnewald, Aug. E., |Milford,     | Dec. 20,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |   ’64,    | New Haven.
  *Vogel, George,      |Danbury,     | Oct. 22,  |Missing May 16, 1864,
                       |             |   ’63,    | Drury’s Bluff, Va.
  *Wooster, Luman,     |Middletown,  | Jan.  4,  |Mustered out Aug. 14, 1865,
                       |             |   ’65,    | New York City.
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------

                       NOTE--* Substitutes and Drafted.




                            INFANTRY COMPANY “D.”

  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
         Rank.         | Residence.  |   Date of |           REMARKS.
                       |             |   Muster. |
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
                       |             |           |
      _Captain._       |             |           |
  Lorenzo Meeker,      |Stamford,    |  Sept. 5, |Pro. Lieut. Col.; wd. May 16,
                       |             |    1861,  | 1864; res. Sept. 13, 1864.
                       |             |           |
   _1st Lieutenant._   |             |           |
  Chas. H. Nichols,    |Stamford,    |     ”     |Pro. Captain; wd. May 16,
                       |             |           | 1864; disch. Jan. 4, 1865.
                       |             |           |
   _2d Lieutenant._    |             |           |
  John Stottlar,       |Stamford,    |     ”     |Pro. Capt. Co. B.; wd.
                       |             |           | Aug. 16, 1863;
                       |             |           | m. o. Dec. 2, ’65.
                       |             |           |
      _Sergeants._     |             |           |
  Wm. H. Meeker,       |Stamford,    |     ”     |Pro. 2d Lieut.; resigned
                       |             |           | Feb. 10, 1863.
  Martin Stottlar,     |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; pro. 1st
                       |             |           | Lieut.; res. March 17, 1864.
  Norman Provost,      |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; wd.; pro. 1st
                       |             |           | Lieut.; disch. Sept. 29,
                       |             |           | 1864.
  John Vandervault,    |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Giles Carey,         |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | Feb. 15, 1863, Fort Trumbull.
                       |             |           |
      _Corporals._     |             |           |
  Robert Wilson,       |Stamford,    |     ”     |Wd. Oct. 22, 1862; trans. to
                       |             |           | Invalid Corps, Sept. 30, ’63.
  Wm. H. Bailey,       |Greenwich,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Thomas Scriber,      |Stamford,    |     ”     |Wd. May 15, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Oct. 12, ’65; term expired.
  Wm. H. Hyde,         |Greenwich,   |     ”     |Promoted 1st Lieut. S. C.
                       |             |           | Vols., Nov. 14, 1862.
  George W. Finch,     |Stamford,    |     ”     |Wd. May 20, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 6, 1864; term expired.
  George W. Youngs,    |Stamford,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Wm. H. Inness,       |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged disability, Jan. 7,
                       |             |           | 1863, Beaufort, S. C.
  Edward J. Bing,      |Stamford,    |     ”     |Died April 3, 1862, Hilton
                       |             |           | Head, S. C.
                       |             |           |
     _Musicians._      |             |           |
  George Lord,         |Stamford,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Chas. H. Lockwood,   |      ”      |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | July 1, 1863.
                       |             |           |
      _Wagoner._       |             |           |
  Frederick Bates,     |Stamford,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Jan. 4, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
                       |             |           |
      _Privates._      |             |           |
  Anderson, Geo. W.,   |Stamford,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out May 13, 1865.
  Anderson, Joel L.,   |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. May 20, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | disab. June 28, 1864.
  Arrents, Edwards,    |      ”      |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1863.
  Bing, Charles,       |Greenwich,   |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Feb. 9, 1863, New York.
  Botts, John M.,      |Stamford,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; wd.; pro. 1st
                       |             |           | Lieut.; must. out Aug. 21,
                       |             |           | ’65.
  Bouton, Seth S.,     |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Dec. 23, 1863;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Bouton, Wm. L.,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Wd. May 16, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 6, 1864; term expired.
  Bohan, John,         |Stamford,    |     ”     |Discharged disab. May 24,
                       |             |           | 1863, Hilton Head.
  Bryson, Frank,       |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; died of wds.
                       |             |           | May 19, ’64, Point Lookout.
  Buckley, Edmund,     |Greenwich,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Buckley, Thomas,     |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | Aug. 10, 1864.
  Burns, Dennis,       |Stamford,    |     ”     |Wd. Oct. 22, 1862; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 12, 1864; term expired.
  Clark, John S.,      |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | missing Aug. 16, 1864.
  Clark, John,         |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Coyne, Wm. H.,       |      ”      |     ”     |Re-in. Vet. deserted
                       |             |           | April 16, 1864.
  Craw, Thomas,        |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Re-in. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Crocker, Albert W.,  |Stamford,    |     ”     |Wd. Oct. 22, 1862; re-en.
                       |             |           | Vet.; must. out Aug. 21, ’65.
  Dixon, Alonzo,       |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Drew, John,          |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | deserted Nov. 9, 1864.
  Finch, David,        |      ”      |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1863.
  Finch, Chas. E.,     |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | discharged Aug. 21, 1865.
  Freeman, Daniel,     |      ”      |     ”     |Died July 12, 1862, Hilton
                       |             |           | Head, S. C.
  Grady, John,         |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 22, 1864; term expired.
  Hasseman, J. F.,     |Greenwich,   |     ”     |Wd. Oct. 22, 1862; re-en.
                       |             |           | Vet.; deserted Oct. 27, 1864.
  Hobby, Horace,       |Stamford,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Hounsloy, Roper,     |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Hoyt, George,        |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Hoyt, Henry W.,      |      ”      |     ”     |Died Oct. 30, 1862, of wounds
                       |             |           | rec’d at Pocotaligo.
  Hoyt, John L.,       |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged; enlisted in
                       |             |           | U. S. A., Nov. 6, 1862.
  Hyde, Albert A.,     |Greenwich,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Jan. 4, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Jones, James,        |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 23, 1863;
                       |             |           | deserted Nov. 9, 1864.
  Jones, Joseph,       |New Canaan,  |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. died of wounds
                       |             |           | June 9, 1864.
  June, Chas. H.,      |Greenwich,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Kent, Geo. W.,       |Stamford,    |     ”     |Discharged disab. April 22,
                       |             |           | 1863, Beaufort, S. C.
  Lockwood, Ebgert,    |Greenwich,   |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864; term expired.
  Lockwood, Jas. L.,   |Stamford,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | missing June 17, 1864.
  Lower, Lewis,        |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Lowa, William,       |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. and missing July 18, 1863,
                       |             |           | Fort Wagner.
  McDonald, Robert,    |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  McGee, James,        |Greenwich,   |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; Re-en.
                       |             |           | Vet.; must. out Aug. 21, ’65.
  Miles, John,         |Stamford,    |     ”     |Died March 30, 1864,
                       |             |           | Richmond, Va.
  Morgan, Michael,     |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. July 25, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864; term expired.
  Morehouse, Wm. A.,   |      ”      |     ”     |Killed at Morris Island,
                       |             |           | July 18, 1863.
  Northrop, Silas,     |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  O’Brien, Frank,      |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | deserted April 19, 1865.
  Pratt, Wm. S.,       |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | wd.; must. out Aug. 21, ’65.
  Picker, Thomas,      |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged March 20, 1865;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Picker, Patsy,       |      ”      |     ”     |Died Oct. 5, 1863; Hilton
                       |             |           | Head, S. C.
  Potts, James A.,     |Chester,     |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | died Dec. 4, ’64,
                       |             |           | on transport.
  Pratt, Edgar L.,     |Stamford,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Jan. 4, 1864;
                       |             |           | wd.; must. out Aug. 21, ’65.
  Provost, Andrew,     |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. Oct. 22, 1862; disch.
                       |             |           | disab. March 28, ’63, N. Y.
  Provost, Chas. E.,   |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | died Feb. 23, ’65,
                       |             |           | An’polis, Md.
  Reynolds, Wm. H.,   |N. Castler, N. Y.|  ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | wd.; must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Schofield, Henry,    |Stamford,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63; wd.;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Schofield, Smith,    |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. May 16, 1864; disch.;
                       |             |           | Sept. 4, 1864; term expired.
  Searles, Edward,     |Chester,     |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; wd.; trans. Vet.
                       |             |           | R. C.; disch. Jan. 9, 1865.
  Searles, George E.,  |Stamford,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out July 5, 1865.
  Seely, Edward M.,    |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; missing
                       |             |           | June 17, 1864.
  Seely, John,         |New Canaan,  |     ”     |Died Aug. 10, 1862,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Sniffen, Irving L.,  |Greenwich,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Snyder, Oscar E.,    |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out June 8, 1865.
  Sherwood, Wm. H.,    |      ”      |     ”     |Wound. Oct. 22, 1862; disch.
                       |             |           | disab. Feb. 18, 1863.
  Sparks, John S.,     |Stamford,    |     ”     |Disch. disab. April 22, 1863,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Shattel, Geo. C.,    |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | killed Sept. 22, 1864.
  Thorn, Marenus W.,   |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | deserted Feb. 27, 1863.
  Tonar, Barney,       |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out. Aug. 21, 1865.
  Tœpher, Jos. A.,    |W’msburg, L. I.,|   ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | wd.;
                       |             |           | must. out. Aug. 21, 1865.
  Vernal, Oliver W.,   |Stamford,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | wd.;
                       |             |           | must. out. Aug. 21, 1865.
  Walters, Chas. C.,   |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | wd.;
                       |             |           | must. out. Aug. 21, 1865.
  Walters, Edward H.,  |      ”      |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | March 15, 1864.
  Ward, John D.,       |Suffield,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | missing Aug. 16, 1864.
  Weed, Chas. H.,      |Stamford,    |     ”     |Wd. Oct. 22, ’62; Re-en.
                       |             |           | Vet.; wd, ’64;
                       |             |           | tr. V. R. Corps.
  Youngs, John R.,     |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | May 24, 1863, Hilton Head.


                      RECRUITS FOR INFANTRY COMPANY “D.”

  *Akins, James,       |New Milford, | Nov. 14,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Berry, Henry C.,    |Danbury,     | Oct. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Brigham, Chas.,     |New Milford, | Aug. 12,  |Deserted Nov. 9, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Bougue, Rich. M.,   |Norwich,     | Jul. 13,  |Died Feb. 23, 1865.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Bradley, Geo. M.,   |Plymouth,    | Aug.. 3,  |Mustered out June 1, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Hartford, Conn.
  *Bradly, James,      |Danbury,     | Oct. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Brooks, Rienzi J.,  |Brookfield,  | Oct. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Bruce, James,       |Danbury,     | Oct. 22,  |Deserted, Aug. 1, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  Bush, Harry,         |Stamford,    | Feb. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Hartford, Conn.
  *Brennan, Peter,     |Ellington,   | Nov. 15,  |Deserted Feb. 6, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Brown, Chas.,       |Guilford,    | Nov. 14,  |Mustered out Aug. 12, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New York City.
  *Brown, Wm.,         |New Haven,   | Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Bruce, Robert,      |     ”       | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Burke, Michael,     |Plymouth,    | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Burns, Wm.,         |Middletown,  | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Cunningham, Jas.,    |Stamford,    | Dec. 31,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Cassaday, Wm.,      |Danbury,     | Nov. 15,  |Deserted June 13, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Clark, James,       |New Haven,   | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Clark, John,        |     ”       | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Collins, James,     |Danbury,     | Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Degeneres, Chas.,   |Ridgefield,  | Oct. 22,  |Deserted Nov. 7, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Duffy, Henry,       |Danbury,     | Oct. 22,  |Deserted Nov. 17, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  Dinger, Isaac,       |Stamford,    | Feb. 20,  |Wd. May 16, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’64,   | Aug. 8, 1865, Washington.
  *Duck, George,       |Meriden,     | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Dies, George,       |Trumbull,    | Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Dietz, Gehard,      |Bloomfield,  | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Duberle, Peter,     |Montville,   | Nov. 16,  |Deserted March 2, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Edwards, Henry,     |Windham,     | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Ellis, William,     |Washington,  | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Fox, Patrick,        |Bridgeport,  | Nov.  6,  |Wd. May 14, ’64; died Nov. 6,
                       |             |    ’62,   | ’64, Andersonville, Ga.
  *Foula, Prosper,     |Danbury,     | Aug. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Farrel, Michael,    |New Haven,   | Nov. 15,  |Deserted May 30, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Fitzgerald, Jno. A.,|Durham,      | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Fitzgerald, Jno.,   |Guilford,    | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Flanaghan, John,    |New Haven,   | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Goodman, John,       |Bridgeport,  | Dec. 19,  |Wd. June 17, 1864; mustered
                       |             |    ’64,   | out June 30, 1865.
  Gilbert, Chas.,      |Ridgefield,  | Oct. 22,  |Deserted Oct. 27, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Goodhardt, Jno. H., |Greenwich,   | Dec. 30,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Gardiner, Wm.,      |East Haven,  | Nov. 16,  |Deserted Dec. 15, 1864.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Gillispie, Jas. L., |Ellington,   | Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Granger, Wm.,       |Meriden,     | Nov. 16,  |Deserted Jan. 13, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  Haight, John J.,     |Stamford,    | Dec.. 9,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  Harting, Ed. M.,     |New Canaan,  | Feb. 19,  |Killed Aug. 16, 1864,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Deep Run, Va.
  Halpin, William,     |Stamford,    | Sept. 6,  |Mustered out June 26, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Goldsboro, N. C.
  *Haggarty, Wm.,      |New Haven,   | Nov. 14,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Harris, Jas.,       |Enfield,     | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Hesel, John,        |New Haven,   | Nov. 14,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64    | New Haven.
  *Hogan, Andrew,      |N. Stonington,| Nov. 15, |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Harris, Bernard J., |Ellington,   | Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Jerman, Jas. H.,     |Bridgeport,  | Sept. 8,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’62,   | New Haven.
  *Jones, David,       |Danbury,     | Oct. 23,  |Discharged June 8, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | by order War Department.
  *Jones, George,      |East Granby, | Nov. 15,  |Deserted Feb. 6, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Jackson, Thos.,     |Vernon,      | Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Johnson, John,      |New Haven,   | Nov. 16,  |Deserted May 22, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Johnson, Wm.,       |Watertown,   | Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Keller, August,     |Danbury,     | Oct. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Kennedy, John,      |     ”       | Oct. 22,  |Wd. May 20, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’64,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  *King, Joseph,       |     ”       | Oct. 22,  |Deserted April 28, 1864.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *John Kelley,        |Clinton,     | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Laurence, Alfred,   |Brookfield,  | Oct. 22,  |Wd. Aug. 16, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865, N. Haven.
  Le Broeg, Samuel,    |Danbury,     | Oct. 22,  |Died of wds. Jan. 3, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Hampton Hospital.
  *Les, Joit,          |Ridgefield,  | Oct. 22,  |Wd. May 10. 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865. N. Haven.
  *May, William,       |Danbury,     | Oct. 30,  |Deserted April 10, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  Palmer, Isaac,       |Greenwich,   | Jan. 27,  |Mustered out June 23, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Hartford.
  Palmer, Walter,      |     ”       | Jan. 27,  |Mustered out June 2, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Fort Monroe, Va.
  Raymond, Jos. E.,    |     ”       | Feb. 23,  |Died March 5, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Wilmington, N. C.
  *Reynolds, Carlton,  |     ”       | Jan. 28,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Stone, John H.,      |Bridgeport,  | Dec. 19,  |Discharged; enlisted U. S. A.
                       |             |    ’62,   | Feb. 22, 1863.
  Searles, Clarence E.,|Stamford,    | Feb. 16,  |Wd. Aug. 16, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’64,   | June 14, 1865, Hartford.
  Townsend, Orlando,   |     ”       | Feb.. 2,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Timpson, Benj. S.,   |     ”       | Feb. 20,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Taylor, Nehemiah,    |     ”       | Feb. 23,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Waterbury, Samuel,   |     ”       | Jan.. 2,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------

                       NOTE--* Substitutes and Drafted.




                            INFANTRY COMPANY “E.”

  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
         Rank.         | Residence.  |   Date of |           REMARKS.
                       |             |   Muster. |
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
                       |             |           |
       _Captain._      |             |           |
  Edward P. Hudson,    |Waterbury,   | Sept. 4,  |Wd. July 18, 1863;
                       |             |   1861,   | resigned Feb. 19, 1864.
                       |             |           |
    _1st Lieutenant._  |             |           |
  Wm. H. H. Wooster,   |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Resigned March 23, 1862.
                       |             |           |
    _2nd Lieutenant._  |             |           |
  Ed. H. Hotchkiss,    |Prospect,    |     ”     |Promoted 1st Lieut.;
                       |             |           | resigned Dec. 16, 1862.
                       |             |           |
     _Sergeants._      |             |           |
  James A. Blake,      |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | missing May 16, 1864.
  Edwin L. Cook,       |     ”       |     ”     |Transferred Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1863.
  Harvey L. Mathews,   |Prospect,    |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Feb. 14, 1862.
  Julius Saxe,         |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Orrin N. Robbins,    |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
     _Corporals._      |             |           |
  John W. Hill,        |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | July 30, 1862.
  Ralph G. Robbins,    |     ”       |     ”     |Died Sept. 2, 1862.
  Henry P. Dalley,     |Prospect,    |     ”     |Wd. Aug. 22, 1864;
                       |             |           | discharged Sept. 12, 1864.
  Frank Howard,        |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Discharged Oct. 14 1863;
                       |             |           | enlisted U. S. A.
  Wm. D. Wooding,      |Cheshire,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Wm. Berkley,         |Prospect,    |     ”     |Wd. July 18, ’63; re-en. Vt.
                       |             |           | Feb. 6, ’64;
                       |             |           | m. o. Aug. 21, ’65.
  Cor. J. Rollason,    |Naugatuck,   |     ”     |Disch. dis. April 22, ’63,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Frank King,          |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
      _Musicians._     |             |           |
  Wm. H. Cushman,      |New Britain, |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | March 6, 1863, Beaufort.
  Oliver D. Peck,      |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
      _Wagoner._       |             |           |
  Fred. Boldgett,      |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
      _Privates._      |             |           |
  Abbot, John,         |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | trans. V. R. C. Dec. 22,
                       |             |           | 1864; must. out Aug. 9,
                       |             |           | 1865, Washington, D. C.
  Bagarly, Thomas,     |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Baldwin, Luzern,     |Naugatuck,   |     ”     |Wd. Aug. 16, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 12, 1864.
  Barnes, Seth J.,     |Farmington,  |     ”     |Died Jan. 1, 1862,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Barton, George A.,   |Cheshire,    |     ”     |Died Feb. 11, 1862,
                       |             |           | Warsaw Island, Ga.
  Bell, Edward,        |Woodbury,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Barden, Nathan W.,   |W. Norfolk,  |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Brown, Chas. S.,     |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Trans. to Signal Corps,
                       |             |           | U. S. A. Oct. 13, 1863.
  Brown, John D.,      |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Feb. 6, 1863, New York.
  Bunnel, Joseph,      |Woodbury,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | died of wds. Oct. 7, 1864.
  Campfield, George,   |Winchester,  |     ”     |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1864,
                       |             |           | New Haven.
  Carey, Thomas,       |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Wd.; Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24,
                       |             |           | 1863; must. out Aug. 21, ’65.
  Chandler, John W.,   |Prospect,    |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Feb. 14, 1863,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Clark, James,        |     ”       |     ”     |Deserted Sept. 5, 1861.
  Cobbe, George W.,    |Norfolk,     |     ”     |Died Oct. 23, 1862,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Colton, Joseph,      |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Pro. Quartermaster May 11,
                       |             |           | 1863; res. Sept. 13, 1864.
  Cook, Henry A.,      |Naugatuck,   |     ”     |Died Oct. 24, 1862,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Doolittle, Lyman,    |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Discharged disab.
                       |             |           | Sept. 8, 1862.
  Dugal, Wm. H.,       |Naugatuck,   |     ”     |Wd. July 18, ’63; disch. dis.
                       |             |           | Nov. 16, ’63, Ft. Schuyler.
  Downer, Edwin L.,    |Norfolk,     |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Downer, Wm. J.,      |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged disab.
                       |             |           | March 9, 1862.
  Dunn, Michael,       |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Durand, Theo. G.,    |Prospect,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Fahey, John,         |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Fenn, Gaius,         |Plymouth,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 3, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Flanagan, Francis,   |Naugatuck,   |     ”     |Discharged Dec. 1, 1863,
                       |             |           | by order Sec. of War.
  Flanagan, John,      |Cheshire,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vt. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | wound.; m. o. Aug. 21, 1865.
  Gardner, Porter L.,  |Prospect,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vt. Feb. 4, 1863; wd.;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Gilbert, James H.,   |Bethlem,     |     ”     |Died Nov. 29, 1861,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Gough, James,        |Hartford,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Harrison, Wm.,       |Enfield,     |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Horton, Edward W.,   |Naugatuck,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Hotchkiss, Evans B., |Prospect,    |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | March 12, 1862.
  Jeffre, John E.,     |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Discharged by order War
                       |             |           | Department, Sept. 7, 1863.
  Johnson, Thomas,  |Centerv’le, R. I.,|   ”     |Killed July 10, 1863, at
                       |             |           | Morris Island, S. C.
  Lalley, Michael,     |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | July 24, 1862.
  Laughlin, Hugh,      |     ”       |     ”     |Wd. July 18, ’63; re-en. Vt.
                       |             |           | Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | kill. Oct. 7, ’64.
  Lewin, Joseph W.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Long, Frank,        |Baltimore, Md.,|    ”     |Discharged March 17, 1865;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Losaw, Wm. H.,       |Winchester,  |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 23, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Main, John,          |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  McLavy, Robert,      |Farmington,  |     ”     |Prom. 1st Lieut. 4th S. C.
                       |             |           | Vols. Sept. 5, 1863.
  Miner, Harris W.,    |Orange,      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Morris, Peter,       |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Deserted May 15, 1863.
  Morrow, John E.,     |Cheshire,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Moulthrop, Horace,   |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | died of wds. Oct. 22, 1864.
  McIntire, Eugene,    |Watertown,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 25, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Nelson, Horatio,     |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Transferred to Signal Corps,
                       |             |           | U. S. A. Feb. 29, 1864.
  O’Connor, Thomas,    |     ”       |     ”     |Died Jan. 13, 1863,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Paul, Andrew A.,     |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Peck, Abbott,        |Milford,     |     ”     |Wd. Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Peck, John W.,       |Norfolk,     |     ”     |Died Feb. 9, 1862,
                       |             |           | Warsaw Sound, Ga.
  Peters, Wm.,         |Norwich,     |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | July 5, 1863,
                       |             |           | Folly Is., S. C.
  Phalen, Timothy,     |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Drowned, June 8, 1862.
  Rigney, Wm.,         |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Royce, Chas. B.,     |Prospect,    |     ”     |Wd. July 10, ’63; killed
                       |             |           |June 1, ’64, Bermuda Hun., Va.
  Rueck, Carl,         |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Russel, Sam. S.,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged July 5, 1863,
                       |             |           | Folly Island, S. C.
  Ryan, Thomas,        |Boston, Mass.,|    ”     |Deserted Sept. 18, 1861.
  Sage, Elisha,       |N. Marlbo., Ms.|    ”     |Died June 20, 1862.
  Sanford, Aaron C.,   |Plymouth,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vt. Dec. 24, ’63; wd.
                       |             |           | Aug. 16, ’64; disch. dis.
                       |             |           | April 27, 1865.
  Sandford, Spencer S.,|Prospect,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | missing Oct. 1, 1864.
  Sawyer, James,       |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Scott, Albert M.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Wd.; Re-en. Vet. Dec 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug 21, ’65.
  Shannon, Edward,     |     ”       |     ”     |Wd.; Re-en. Vet. Dec 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | deserted Nov. 7, 1864.
  Smith, George S.,    |Prospect,    |     ”     |Wd.; Re-en. Vet. Dec 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | died July 10, 1865.
  Smith, George H.,    |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863;
                       |             |           | discharged Sept. 11, 1864.
  Stebbins, Chas. E.,  |New Haven,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vt. Dec. 24, ’63; died
                       |             |           | of wds. Oct. 1, ’64, Ft. Mon.
  Stebbins, George, W.,|     ”       |     ”     |Wd. July 10, ’63; re-en. Vt.
                       |             |           | Jan. 4, ’64;
                       |             |           | m. o. Sept. 2, ’65.
  Swan, Wm. W.,        |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Talmadge, Fred. A.,  |Prospect,    |     ”     |Died Dec. 18, 1861,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Talmadge, John,      |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Talmadge, Steph. A., |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Welch, George,       |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Welch, Richard,      |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  West, John,          |Enfield,     |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Wilcox, Jay P.,      |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Pro. Capt. Co. “B;” killed
                       |             |           | May 10, ’64,
                       |             |           | Chester Sta., Va.
  Woods, John,         |     ”       |     ”     |Killed May 15, 1864,
                       |             |           | Drury’s Bluff, Va.

                   _Officer Appointed since First Muster._

    _1st Lieutenant._  |             |           |
  Eugene Atwater,      |Plymouth,    |  Dec. 2,  |Promoted Capt.; must. out
                       |             |    ’64,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.


                      RECRUITS FOR INFANTRY COMPANY “E.”

  Arapke, John H.,     |Bethel,      |  Jan. 5,  |Wd. May 16, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’64,   | Nov. 8, 1865, Wash., D. C.
  Anderson, Walter,    |Naugatuck,   |  Mch. 8,  |Pro. 1st Lieut. Co. A.;
                       |             |    ’64,   | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  *Baker, Abraham,     |East Haddam, | Sept. 5,  |Deserted Nov. 7, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  Brady, Michael,      |Waterbury,   | Mch. 11,  |Wounded May 14, 1864;
                       |             |    ’64,   | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Begley, Thomas,      |N. Hartford, |  Dec. 1,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Brennan, John,      |Guilford,    | Nov. 16,  |Deserted Dec. 7, 1864.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  Clough, Ira E.,      |Waterbury,   | Feb. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Dillane, Thos.,      |     ”       | Nov. 29,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’62,   | New Haven.
  Doling, Patrick,     |Naugatuck,   |  Dec. 7,  |Killed Aug. 16, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Deep Run, Va.
  Dalton, Patrick,     |Waterbury,   |  Feb. 2,  |Wd. May 20, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’64,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  Dunn, Michael,       |Salisbury,   |  Mch. 9,  |Must. out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Dunn, James,        |Bloomfield,  | Nov. 17,  |Must. out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *DeMars, Wm.,        |Ellington,   | Nov. 17,  |Deserted December 18, 1864.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Dunn, Patrick,      |Waterford,   | Nov. 12,  |Deserted December 9, 1864.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  Ferris, DeForest W., |Stamford,    | Mch. 11,  |Promoted 2d Lieut. Co. G;
                       |             |           | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Finnern, Larrey,     |Wethersfield,| Nov. 11,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Golden, Jas. B.,    |Mansfield,   |  Oct. 9,  |Deserted Nov. 9, 1864.
                       |             |           |
  Hale, James,         |Bridgeport,  |  Feb. 5,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Higgins, Daniel,     |Waterbury,   | Feb. 25,  |Wounded May 10, 1864;
                       |             |    ’64,   | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  *Hudson, George,     |Farmington,  | Nov. 18,  |Deserted Dec. 9, 1864.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  Jones, Elijah,       |Waterbury,   |  July 7,  |Deserted Nov. 11, 1864.
                       |             |           |
  Jackson, Chas.,      |Roxbury,     | Nov. 17,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Hartford, Conn.
  Kreige, Chas. H.,    |Stamford,    | Jan. 29.  |Discharged March 17, 1865,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  *King, John,         |East Windsor,| Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *King, James F.,     |Stratford,   | Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Kempel, Louis,      |Orange,      | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Lynch, John,         |Waterbury,   | Jan. 23,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Langdale, Joseph,    |     ”       | Feb. 29,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Lapoint, Joseph,     |N. Milford,  | Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865;
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Lewis, Henry,       |Prospect,    | Nov. 14,  |Mustered out Aug. 14, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New York.
  *Lines, Daniel,      |Roxbury,     | Nov. 15,  |Wounded Jan. 12, 1865;
                       |             |    ’64,   | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  *Leonard, John,      |Winchester,  | Nov. 16,  |Deserted Dec. 18, 1864.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  Matthews, Daniel,    |Bristol,     |  April 1, |Killed Oct. 22, 1862,
                       |             |    ’62,   | Pocotaligo, S. C.
  *Murray, Henry,      |Danbury,     | Oct. 22,  |Deserted Nov. 9, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *McDonnoe, Henry,    |Bridgeport,  | Nov. 16,  |Deserted Feb. 1, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Miller, Chas.,      |New Haven,   | Nov. 14,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Montey, Francisco,  |     ”       | Nov. 14,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Murphy, Michael,    |Bristol,     | Nov. 17,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *McCarty, Michael,   |Huntington,  | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *McGinnis, Michael,  |New Haven,   | Nov. 15,  |Deserted March 2, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *McMahon, James,     |Huntington,  | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *McDonnell, Thos.,   |Bloomfield,  | Nov. 17,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *McCann, James,      |Bridgeport,  | Nov. 15,  |Deserted Jan. 4, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Miller, James,      |Woodstock,   | Nov. 10,  |Deserted Dec. 12, 1864.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Newbold, James,     |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 3,  |Mustered out Oct. 16, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Hartford.
  *Norris, Chas. C.,   |     ”       | Sept. 12, |Deserted Nov. 11, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *O’Brien, Michael,   |Waterbury,   | Aug. 22,  |Killed Oct. 7, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | before Richmond, Va.
  *O’Gara, James,      |     ”       | Aug. 22,  |Deserted Nov. 7, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *O’Donnell, Simon,   |     ”       |  Mch. 9,  |Mustered out June 10, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Hartford.
  *Parker, Chas.,      |Wilton,      | Aug. 22,  |Deserted Nov. 9, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Pritchard, Wm.,     |Ridgefield,  | Oct. 22,  |Wd. Aug. 16, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 16, 1865, Cincinnati.
  *Quigley, Thomas,    |Stratford,   | Nov. 17,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Regan, Patrick,     |Ridgefield,  | Oct. 22,  |Deserted Aug. 24, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  Reilly, Christopher, |Coventry,    | Jan. 15,  |Mustered out July 8, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Fort Monroe, Va.
  *Riley, John,        |Hartford,    | Nov. 16,  |Deserted Jan. 13, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Sanches, Martin,    |Bethel,      | Oct. 22,  |Died Sept. 23, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Andersonville, Ga.
  *Serrahan, Wm.,      |Danbury,     | Oct. 22,  |Discharged Nov. 19, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | order War Department.
  *Smith, Wm.,         |     ”       | Oct. 22,  |Deserted Aug. 16, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Stark, Henry,       |     ”       | Oct. 20,  |Shot for desertion
                       |             |    ’63,   | April 17, 1864, Hilton Head.
  Stanley, Henry,      |     ”       | Oct. 20,  |Deserted May 10, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Stevens, James B.,  |Enfield,     | Aug. 20,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *St. Clair, John W., |Danbury,     | Oct. 20,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  Smith, Elmer E.,     |Farmington,  | Nov. 25,  |Discharged disability,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Feb. 18, 1865,
                       |             |           | Wilmington, N. C.
  Smith, Saml. S.,     |     ”       | Dec. 23,  |Died from wounds,
                       |             |    ’63,   | May 25, 1865.
  Stebbins, James,     |New Haven,   | Feb. 18,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Sullivan, John O.,   |Waterbury,   | Feb. 25,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Sears, John,         |     ”       |  Mch. 9,  |Discharged disability,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Jan. 8, 1865.
  Schrupp, Henry,      |Hartford,    |  Mch. 2,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |           | New Haven.
  *Smith, Thomas,      |Bridgeport,  | Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Stevens, George,    |N. Milford,  | Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Sullivan, John,     |Bloomfield,  | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Thompson, Jas.,     |Woodstock,   | Nov. 14,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Niely, John,        |Ridgefield,  | Oct. 21,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Wall, Edward,       |Danbury,     | Oct. 20,  |Wd. Aug. 16, ’64; disch.
                       |             |    ’63,   | Dec. 29, ’64,
                       |             |           | by order War Dept.
  *Walling, James,     |Torrington,  | Aug. 22,  |Missing June 17, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Ward, Henry O.,     |Hartford,    | July 31,  |Mustered out June 29, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Fort Monroe, Va.
  *Williams, Miles,    |New Haven,   |  Feb. 9,  |Mustered out June 19, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Hartford.
  Wooster, Wm. H. H.,  |Waterbury,   | Feb. 22,  |Prom. Q. Master; must. out
                       |             |    ’64,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  Williams, Geo.,      |Bethlem,     | Feb. 27,  |Died of wounds June 21, 1864,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Hampton, Va.
  *Wilson, James,      |East Haven,  | Nov. 14,  |Deserted Jan. 13, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Wallace, James,     |Woodstock,   |  Nov. 5,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Wallace, Michael,   |Bloomfield,  | Nov. 17,  |Mustered out May 24, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New York.
  *Zimball, Geo.,      |Danbury,     | Oct. 20,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------

                       NOTE--* Substitutes and Drafted.




                            INFANTRY COMPANY “F.”

  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
         Rank.         | Residence.  |  Date of  |           REMARKS.
                       |             |  Muster.  |
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
                       |             |           |
      _Captain._       |             |           |
  Lewis C. Allen, Jr., |New Haven,   | Sept. 7,  |Died April 20, 1864,
                       |             |    1861,  | Hilton Head.
                       |             |           |
   _1st Lieutenant._   |             |           |
  Samuel C. Peck, Jr., |New Haven,   |     ”     |Prom. Capt. Co. “A;”
                       |             |           | resigned June 29, 1864.
                       |             |           |
   _2nd Lieutenant._   |             |           |
  Henry Stoddard,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Resigned March 10, 1862.
                       |             |           |
                       |             |           |
     _Sergeants._      |             |           |
  Henry F. Stanley,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Pro. 1st Lieut. Co. “H;” pro.
                       |             |           | Adj.; m. o. Nov. 23, ’64.
  Woodbury F. Staley,  |      ”      |     ”     |Wd.; Re-en. Vt.;
                       |             |           | Pro. 2d Lieut. Co. “I;”
                       |             |           | d. Aug. 18, ’64.
  Wm. T. Bradley,      |Madison,     |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; pro. 1st Lt.
                       |             |           | Co. “E;” d. May 20, ’64, wds.
  Geo. W. Cadwell,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged, disabil. April 24,
                       |             |           | 1863, Beaufort, S. C.
  Geo. E. Davis,       |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; must. out
                       |             |           | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
                       |             |           |
    _Corporals._       |             |           |
  Lucius P. French,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 28, 1862.
  Wm. F. Smith,        |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Wm. F. Lego,         |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Benj. C. Terrell,    |      ”      |     ”     |Mustered out May 20, 1865,
                       |             |           | Hartford, Conn.
  Geo. S. Barnes,      |      ”      |     ”     |Died of wounds June 22, 1864.
  John F. Driscoll,    |      ”      |     ”     |Died of wounds July 18, 1863.
  Harry W. Davis,      |      ”      |     ”     |Wd., re-en. Vet.,
                       |             |           | Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Charles W. Fisher,   |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
     _Musicians._      |             |           |
  John M. Bishop,      |Madison,     |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | March 27, 1863,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Lyman F. Squire,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
                       |             |           |
     _Wagoner._        |             |           |
  Peter Powell,        |New Haven,   |     ”     |Disch. disability July 15,
                       |             |           | 1863, Folly Island, S. C.
                       |             |           |
     _Privates._       |             |           |
  Andrews, Theo. R.,   |New Haven,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Baldwin, Bruce,      |Woodbridge,  |     ”     |Died Nov. 11, 1862, of wounds
                       |             |           | received at Pocotaligo.
  Baldwin, Chas. G.,   |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Nov. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Baldwin, Wm. H.,     |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 21, 1861,
                       |             |           | Port Royal, S. C.
  Barnes, Charles H.,  |      ”      |     ”     |Disch. May 30. 1863, to accept
                       |             |           | promot. in 2d S. C. Vols.
  Barnes, Luzern S.,   |North Haven, |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Bassett, Mark,       |Milford,     |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863; wd.,
                       |             |           | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Bassett, Marcus,     |Wallingford, |     ”     |Discharged, enlisted U. S. A.,
                       |             |           | Dec. 2, 1862.
  Benham, Charles H.,  |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Benham, George W.,   |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. May 10, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  Bevins, John,        |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must., out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Bodge, George,       |Seymour,     |     ”     |Killed at Morris Island,
                       |             |           | S. C., July 18, 1863.
  Booth, Legrand E.,   |Southbury,   |     ”     |Mustered out May 16, 1865,
                       |             |           | Hartford.
  Brockett, George,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Minor, taken from Co. by
                       |             |           | parents Sept. 16, 1861.
  Brown, Anor W.,      |      ”      |     ”     |Disch. disability
                       |             |           | Feb. 9, 1863, New York.
  Buckbee, Chas. J.,   |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet., wd., pro. Capt.;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Butler, Jesse,       |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet., killed June 17,
                       |             |           | 1864, Bermuda Hundred.
  Cadwell, Chas. K.,   |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Cadwell, Andrew J.,  |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Carr, James E.,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Chapman, Chas. B.,   |New London,  |     ”     |Discharged, disability
                       |             |           | March 11, 1862.
  Colt, Charles,       |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Coombs, John,        |Woodbridge,  |     ”     |Transferred to U. S. Signal
                       |             |           | Corps, Feb. 29, 1863.
  Cox, Wm. H.,         |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged, enlisted U. S. A.
                       |             |           | Jan. 16, 1863.
  Cracklan, Samuel,    |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, enlisted U. S. A.
                       |             |           | Feb. 19, 1863.
  Downs, Edward S.,    |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Davis, Luther,       |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Died Aug. 14, 1862,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Davis, Sereno,       |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Dillon, Charles,     |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, enlisted U. S. A.
                       |             |           | Nov. 3, 1862.
  Dorman, Horace,      |      ”      |     ”     |Died Feb. 18, 1862,
                       |             |           | Warsaw Island, Ga.
  Dougal, Chas. H.,    |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Douglass, Frank A.,  |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, disability
                       |             |           | Sept. 27, 1862.
  Downs, Albert Z.,    |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Eaton, William,      |      ”      |     ”     |Died Andersonville Prison,
                       |             |           | Ga., Dec. 30, 1864.
  Ford, Wm. C.,        |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | March 11, 1862.
  Gibbons, Theodore,   |Woodbridge,  |     ”     |Died Oct. 7, 1861,
                       |             |           | Washington, D. C.
  Gray, Charles L.,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Hayward, Nahum L.,   |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; died June 2,
                       |             |           | 1864, Fort Monroe, Va.
  Hill, Chas. W.,      |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; Dec. 24, 1863,
                       |             |           | wd.; must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Hill, Warren F.,     |      ”      |     ”     |Died Aug. 2, 1862,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Holbrook, Hubert S., |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. Oct. 22, 1862; m. out
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  Howarth, Alfred,     |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Dec. 28, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Howard, Benj. F.,    |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | July 15, 1863,
                       |             |           | Folly Island, S. C.
  Hurd, Alonzo C.,     |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Lathrop, Orrin C.,   |New Milford, |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Lee, Chas. C.,       |New Haven,   |     ”     |Wd. May 18, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 23, 1864, term expired.
  Leroy, Alexander,    |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Jan. 19, 1863.
  Loomis, Clark M.,    |      ”      |     ”     |Aptd. Regt. Artificer; disch.
                       |             |           | Dec. 20, 1864, by disability.
  Meers, Frank B.,     |Naugatuck,   |     ”     |Taken from Co. by habeas
                       |             |           | corpus, Sept. 15, 1861.
  McBride, Wm. T.,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  McCarthy, Edwin H.,  |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, enlisted in
                       |             |           | U. S. A., Jan. 16, 1863.
  McCue, James P.,     |      ”      |     ”     |Wd. Aug. 16, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  McKenzie, Patrick,   |      ”      |     ”     |Died Aug. 21, 1862,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Miller, William,     |Haddam,      |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | July 15, 1863,
                       |             |           | Folly Island, S. C.
  Milner, William,     |New York,    |     ”     |Killed, Fort Wagner,
                       |             |           | July 18, 1863.
  Monson, Whitney C.,  |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Morris, Chas. M.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Morris, Wm. G.,      |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Morris, Wm. M.,      |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | March 11, 1862.
  Osborn, Joel C.,     |     ”       |     ”     |Wounded July 18, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | disability Feb. 26, 1864.
  Phillips, Theodore,  |     ”       |     ”     |Wd., died May 27, ’64, of
                       |             |           | wounds rec’d at
                       |             |           | Chester Station.
  Pierce, Samuel J.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Disch. disability, May 6,
                       |             |           | 1862, Dawfuskie Island, S. C.
  Pierpont, Edwin L.,  |     ”       |     ”     |Wounded July 18, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | disability Dec. 11, 1863.
  Pierson, George W.,  |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1863,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Plumb, John W.,      |     ”       |     ”     |Wd. May 16, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 8, 1864, term expired.
  Polar, Anthon,       |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, enlisted
                       |             |           | U. S. A., Nov. 1, 1862.
  Perry, George A.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet., Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Riley, James H.,     |Meriden,     |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | May 20, 1863, Beaufort, S. C.
  Sheppard, Samuel B., |New Haven,   |     ”     |Pro. 2d Ass’t Surgeon 7th
                       |             |           | Conn. Vols., April 20, 1864.
  Smith, James,        |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | March 11, 1862.
  Sperry, Alfred N.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | March 3, 1863, New York.
  Sperry, Edwin W.,    |Woodbridge,  |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Sturges, Chas. E.,   |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Summerville, Philip, |     ”       |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  Wallace, James,      |Waterbury,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Waters, Henry W.,    |Oxford,      |     ”     |Died July 10, 1862,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Wheatley, James,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  White, John,         |     ”       |     ”     |Deserted Sept. 9, 1861.
                       |             |           |
  Winton, Eugene,      |Woodbury,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Williams, John,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Died Feb. 8 1862,
                       |             |           | Warsaw Sound, Ga.
  Willison, Josiah L., |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet., Jan. 4, 1864;
                       |             |           | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Wilson, Sereno D.,   |Woodbridge,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Woodin, Guy,         |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet., March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.


                         RECRUITS FOR INFANTRY COMPANY “F.”

  Bouton, Samuel,      |N. Canaan,   |  Mch. 9,  |Mustered out May 19, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Norfolk, Va.
  Collins, Edwin L.,   |Meriden,     | Mch. 17,  |Died of wounds Oct. 16, 1864,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Point of Rocks, Va.
  *Dobson, John,       |Danbury,     | Oct. 17,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Donnelly, Patrick,  |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 7,  |Deserted Nov. 11, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Drewer, Charles,    |Stamford,    | Oct. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Dunn, Peter F.,     |Bethel,      | Oct. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  Dennison, Henry,     |New Haven,   | Feb. 15,  |Mustered out May 18, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Elwood, Fred.,      |Newtown,     | Aug. 29,  |Transferred to Veteran
                       |             |    ’63,   | Reserve Corps, Jan. 1, 1865.
  *Evas, Michael,      |Bridgeport,  | Jan. 25,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’65,   | New Haven.
  *Farwell, Wm, W.,    |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 8,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Farrall, Michael,   |     ”       |  Oct. 6,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Ferris, Wm. H.,     |     ”       | Sept. 12, |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Fields, John,       |     ”       |  Oct. 9,  |Deserted March 6, 1865.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  Fisher, Wm.,         |     ”       |  Oct. 8,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Fitzgerald, Patrick,|     ”       |  Oct. 8,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Fitzpatrick, John,  |Bridgeport,  | Feb. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Foley, John,        |     ”       | Jan. 28,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Gariephy, John,     |     ”       | Oct. 19,  |Deserted Nov. 8, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Grimston, Arthur,   |Hebron,      | Oct. 13,  |Died Nov. 22, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Salisbury, N. C.
  *Griswold, Lev. J.,  |Farmington,  | Oct. 15,  |Died of wounds May 16, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Hall, Henry E.,     |Mansfield,   | Sept. 22, |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  Hall, Rudolph,       |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 6,  |Wd. Aug. 15, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  *Hambling, Smith,    |Bethel,      | Oct. 17,  |Deserted Nov. 7, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Hendricks, John,    |Waterbury,   | Aug. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Hills, George A.,   |Saybrook,    | Sept. 5,  |Mustered out June 24, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Fort Monroe, Va.
  *Holmes, Benjamin,   |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 7,  |Promoted 2d Lieut.;
                       |             |    ’63,   | deserted Nov. 7, 1864.
  *Holton, John,       |Bristol,     | Oct. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Hoovey, Joseph,     |Stamford,    | Oct. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  Huber, Jean,         |Haddam,      | Sept. 5,  |Wd. Aug. 16, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  Hunter, John,        |Stamford,    | Oct. 14,  |Mustered out June 11, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Hartford.
  *Harris, George,     |E. Hartford, |  Feb. 7,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’65,   | New Haven.
  Lispenard, Roland,   |New Haven,   |  Mch. 3,  |Deserted July 28, 1865.
                       |             |    ’65,   |
  *Maxey, Thomas,      |Trumbull,    | Feb. 13,  |Wd. Oct. 17, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’65,   | June 26, 1865, Fort Monroe.
  *Murphy Matthew,     |N. Canaan,   | Dec. 30,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |     ’64,  | New Haven.
  *Miller, William,    |Brookfield,  | Jan. 26,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’65,   | New Haven.
  *O’Brien, John,      |New Haven,   | Jan. 27,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’65,   | New Haven.
  *Robinson, Lorenzo,  |Meriden,     |  Aug. 8,  |Mustered out Aug. 17, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New York.
  Thompson, John,      |Sharon,      |  Mch. 9,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Wagner, Thomas,     |Danbury,     | Oct. 23,  |Discharged June 8, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Hilton Head, S. C.
  *Yanson, Geo. W.,    |Clinton,     | Sept. 5,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------

                     NOTE--* Substitutes and Drafted.




                            INFANTRY COMPANY “G.”

  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
         Rank.         | Residence.  |  Date of  |           REMARKS.
                       |             |  Muster.  |
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
                       |             |           |
        _Captain._     |             |           |
  John N. Tracy        |New Britain, | Sept. 4,  |Wd. May 16, 1864; disch.
                       |             |   1861,   | Sept. 11, 1864; term expired.
                       |             |           |
    _1st Lieutenant._  |             |           |
  Wm. H. Stowe,        |New Haven,   |     ”     |Resigned Nov. 10, 1863.
                       |             |           |
    _2nd Lieutenant._  |             |           |
  Wm. H. Kinlock,      |New Britain, |     ”     |Resigned March 14, 1862.
                       |             |           |
      _Sergeants._     |             |           |
  William Burrett,     |New Britain, |     ”     |Prom. 2d Lieut.;
                       |             |           | resigned Oct. 9, 1862.
  James Whiteley,      |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Mch. 7, ’64; pro.
                       |             |           | 2d Lt.; m. o. Aug. 21, ’65.
  Henry Kolbe,         |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Nov. 11, 1862.
  Matthew McMahon,     |     ”       |     ”     |Wd.; Re-en. Vet. Jan. 4, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21,1865.
  Orrin C. Yale,       |Farmington,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
      _Corporals._     |             |           |
  John P. Connell,     |New Britain, |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; pro. 2d Lieut.
                       |             |           | May 31, 1864; wd.; pro. Capt.
                       |             |           | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Wm. Kenyon,          |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out May 10, 1865.
  Chas. C. Callender,  |     ”       |     ”     |Mustered out Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Julius O. Deming,    |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Joseph J. Ruff,      |             |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Henry Allen,         |Berlin,      |     ”     |Killed at Pocotaligo, S. C,
                       |             |           | Oct. 22, 1862.
  Ernest Gussman,      |New Britain, |     ”     |Discharged by order War
                       |             |           | Department, May 25, 1864.
  Wm. Horsfall,        |     ”       |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
                       |             |           |
      _Musicians._     |             |           |
  Willard J. Parsons,  |New Britain, |     ”     |Taken from Co. by habeas
                       |             |           | corpus, Sept. 15, 1861.
  Henry Gussman,       |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
       _Wagoner._      |             |           |
  Ralph E. Cross,      |New Britain, |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
      _Privates._      |             |           |
  Alt, John,           |Bristol,     |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | April 22, 1863,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Alpress, Edward A.,  |     ”       |     ”     |Wd. Aug., 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  Ashworth, George,    |New Britain, |     ”     |Wd. Oct. 22, 1862; disch.,
                       |             |           | disab., Feb. 8, 1863,
                       |             |           | New York.
  Bollerer, Jacob,     |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Bunnel, Sterling,    |Bristol,     |     ”     |Wd. May 20, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 22, 1864, term expired.
  Brown, Chas. H.,     |New Britain, |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Jan. 4, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Bartholomew, J. G.,  |Farmington,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Blackman, Chas. L.,  |Cromwell,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | deserted Nov. 14, 1864.
  Bradley, Leonard,    |Farmington,  |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864,
                       |             |           | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Bragdon, Isaac A.,   |New Britain, |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Bollerer, Valentine, |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Buckhardt, Henri M., |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           |  term expired.
  Byington, Henry M.,  |Farmington,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Brand, John,         |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Mch. 7, ’64; m. o.
                       |             |           | June 17, ’65, Norfolk, Va.
  Burns, Bernard,      |New Britain, |     ”     |Died Aug. 14, 1864,
                       |             |           | Andersonville, Ga.
  Connelly, Patrick,   |     ”       |     ”     |Died Aug. 20, 1862,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Callender, Dwight C.,|     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Callender, Fred. E., |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 29, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Costelo, John,       |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged; enlisted U. S. A.,
                       |             |           | Nov. 3, 1862.
  Cobleigh, Wm. C.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | wd.; must. out Aug. 21, ’65.
  Callery, Phillip,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Cummings, James,     |New Britain, |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, ’64; term expired.
  Cook, Lewis R.,      |     ”       |     ”     |Wd. May 20, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 17, ’64; term expired.
  Dunham, Lewis W.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps.
  Dowd, Marshall W.,   |New Hartford,|     ”     |Wound.; re-en. Vet. Jan. 4,
                       |             |           | 1864; m. o. Aug. 21, 1865.
  Dougherty, Michael,  |New Britain, |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Dorman, Chas. A.,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Jan. 4,’64;
                       |             |           | disch. to enter U. S. A.,
                       |             |           | Aug. 9, ’64.
  Eddy, Martin B.,     |New Britain, |     ”     |Wd. July 18, ’63; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, ’64; term expired.
  Fitzgerald, Pat. K., |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | deserted Nov. 13, 1864.
  Franke, Julius,      |     ”       |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  Gussman, Wm.,        |     ”       |     ”     |Died Aug. 1, 1863, of wounds
                       |             |           | received at Fort Wagner.
  Griffin, Charles,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Supposed killed at Fort
                       |             |           | Wagner, July 18, 1863.
  Garry, John W.,      |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Feb. 12, 1863, New York.
  Hamlin, James W.,    |Farmington,  |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Haffy, Bernard,      |New Britain, |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Feb. 10, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Hunt, Joel F.,       |     ”       |     ”     |Wd. May 10, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 6, 1864, term expired.
  Hart, Willis A.,     |     ”       |     ”     |Died June 20, 1863,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Hartman, Gotlieb,    |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 3, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Hubbard, Irwin E.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Hough, Norman E.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1863.
  Irle, Charles,       |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Aug. 2, 1862.
  Jones, John R.,      |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Jan. 4, ’64;
                       |             |           | died Sept. 6, ’64,
                       |             |           | Andersonville, Ga.
  Jones, Charles H.,   |Farmington,  |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | July 1, 1863.
  Lieblee, Henry,      |New Britain, |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Loomis, Merrill A.,  |     ”       |     ”     |Died Feb. 17, 1864,
                       |             |           | Richmond, Va.
  Lindsley, Sol. F.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | March 14, 1862.
  Leonard, Lucius D.,  |Burlington,  |     ”     |Wd.; re-en. Vet. Jan. 4, 1864;
                       |             |           | disch., disab., June 4, 1865.
  McMahon, Matthew,    |New Britain, |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Northrop, Chas. E.,  |Farmington,  |     ”     |Discharged June 13, 1863, to
                       |             |           | accept pro. in S. C. Vols.
  O’Brien, Thomas,     |New Britain, |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  O’shea, James,       |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Pollard, Luther,     |Farmington,  |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | Oct. 30, 1862.
  Post, Conrad,        |New Britain, |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Quintard, Wm. A.,    |Farmington,  |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Robinson, Michael,   |New Britain, |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; Trans..
                       |             |           | Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | March 15, 1864.
  Reindecker, Albert,  |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 28, 1861.
  Riley, Charles,      |     ”       |     ”     |Died Sept. 26, 1862,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Rodgers, Amos T.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1863.
  Recoir, Philip H.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Died April 4, 1863,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Recoir, John H.,     |     ”       |     ”     |Died March 30, 1862,
                       |             |           | Bird’s Island, S. C.
  Stone, Edward A.,    |Farmington,  |     ”     |Wd. Aug. 16, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 3, 1864, term expired.
  Smith, Henry,        |New Britain, |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Smith, Julius B.,    |Burlington,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Sullivan, Michael,   |New Britain, |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Sydenham, Thos. G.,  |Simsbury,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Southergill, George, |New Britain, |     ”     |Died Feb. 15, 1862.
  Spencer, Edwin W.,   |Burlington,  |     ”     |Died Aug. 12, 1862,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Smith, John F.,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, ’64;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Tracy, Thomas E.,    |New Britain, |     ”     |Died Jan. 30, 1862,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Whiting, Wm. R.,     |Farmington,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Weir, John,          |New Britain, |     ”     |Wd. Aug. 16, ’64; disch.
                       |             |           | Nov. 19, ’64; term expired.
  Woodruff, Dwight A., |     ”       |     ”     |Pro. Capt. Co. “E,”
                       |             |           | May 25, ’64; d. of wds.
                       |             |           | Sept. 21, ’64.
  Yates, Edward,       |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.


                      RECRUITS FOR INFANTRY COMPANY “G.”

  Blackman, Mar. A.,   |Huntington,  | Feb. 19,  |Captured by enemy,
                       |             |    ’64,   | May 16, 1864.
  Butler, Fred.,       |New Britain, |  Feb. 3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Clancey, James,      |Saybrook,    | Nov. 21,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Davis, George,      |Bridgeport,  | Oct. 24,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Hitchcock, Henry L., |Southington, | Aug. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Irish, Benjamin,    |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 9,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Jackson, Henry,     |Stamford,    | Aug. 15,  |Wound. June 19, 1864; disch.
                       |             |    ’63,   | disab. June 23, 1865.
  *Johnson, Wm. A.,    |Waterbury,   | Aug. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven. Absent.
  *Johnson, Wm.,       |Norwalk,     | Oct. 13,  |Deserted May 8, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Jones, Edward,      |     ”       |  Oct. 8,  |Deserted Nov. 7, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  June, Theron B.,     |Easton,      | Feb. 25,  |Died March 20, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | of wounds.
  *Kellett, Patrick,   |Cromwell,    | Sept. 5,  |Wd. May 20, 1864; killed
                       |             |    ’63,   | Jan. 13, 1865, Fort Fisher.
  *Kelly, John,        |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 8,  |Dishonorably discharged,
                       |             |    ’63,   | April 27, 1864.
  *Kelly, Patrick,     |Eastford,    | Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Kelley, Phillip,    |Portland,    |  Dec. 5,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven. Absent.
  *King, Robert,       |Waterbury,   |  Dec. 2,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven. Absent.
  *King, Thomas,       |Norwalk,     |  Dec. 1,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |     ’64,  | New Haven.
  *King, Harry,        |New Haven,   |  Dec. 3,  |Deserted July 5, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Kothe, George,      |Stratford,   |  Dec. 2,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Kelleher, Cornelius, |North Haven, |  Dec. 2,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Keenan, Daniel,     |Trumbull,    |  Dec. 5,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven. Absent.
  *Keenan, Edward,     |Killingworth,|  Dec. 6,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Kauphman, Adol.,    |Hartford,    |  Dec. 7,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven. Absent.
  *Krellner, Fred.,    |Cornwall,    |  Dec. 5,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *LeBlanc, J. G. A.,  |Norwalk,     | Oct. 12,  |Mustered out June 15, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Wilmington, N. C.
  *Livingston, Geo.,   |New Britain, | Sept. 4,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  Landers, George,     |Litchfield,  | March  6, |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven. Absent.
  Leheman, August,     |Hebron,      | Dec. 27,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’65,   | New Haven.
  *Maher, Daniel,      |Coventry,    |  Oct. 9,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Hartford, Conn.
  *Meloy, Terrance,    |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 6,  |Wd. Aug. 16, ’64; m. o.
                       |             |   ’63,    | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  *Mathews, Benj. W.,  |Newtown,     | Aug. 29,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *McCauley, James,    |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 5,  |Deserted Oct. 13, 1865.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *McClay, Alex. P.,   |Bethel,      | Oct. 17,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *McGee, Patrick,     |Danbury,     | Oct. 17,  |Wd. May 16, 1864; m. o.
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865. Absent.
  *Morann, James,      |Stamford,    | Oct. 10,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
                       |             |    ’63,   | Absent.
  *Minoyne, Pat.,      |Vernon,      |  Oct. 6,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Moffit, Wm.,        |Bolton,      |  Oct. 7,  |Wd. May 15, 1864; died
                       |             |    ’63,   | Oct. 15, 1864, New Haven.
  *Murphy, John,       |Redding,     | Oct. 31,  |Wd. May 20, 1864; disch.
                       |             |    ’63,   | disab. May 31, 1865.
  *Malone, James,      |Sharon,      | March 4,  |Killed May 16, 1864,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Drury’s Bluff, Va.
  Muller, Auguste,     |Mansfield,   | Dec. 27,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Minter, Fred.,      |Huntington,  |  Dec. 3,  |Killed Feb. 22, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Martin, Thomas,     |North Haven, |  Dec. 2,  |Deserted Jan. 13, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Marx, John,         |     ”       |  Dec. 5,  |Deserted Feb. 19, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *McDonald, James,    |Portland,    |  Dec. 2,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *McDonald, John,     |Waterbury,   |  Dec. 6,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *McCaffrey, Jas.,    |Westport,    |  Dec. 3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *McEwan, John,       |Southbury,   |  Dec. 7,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *McCarty, Pat.,      |Rocky Hill,  |  Dec. 6,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  McCarty, Francis,    |New Haven,   |  Dec. 7,  |Wd. Feb. 22, 1865; disch.
                       |             |    ’64,   | dis. June, 1865.
  *Moran, John,        |Hartford,    |  Dec. 5,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Miller, John,       |Middletown,  |  Dec. 3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Montery, Peter,     |Essex,       |  Dec. 2,  |Deserted June 25, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Marcy, John,        |Andover,     |  Dec. 3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Moore, James,       |Ellington,   |  Dec. 3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Mathews, Wm.,       |Westport,    |  Dec. 3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Moriss, Henry,      |Salisbury,   |  Dec. 6,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Miles, John,        |Hamden,      |  Dec. 2,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *O’Niel, James,      |Roxbury,     |  Dec. 3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *O’Brien, Thomas,    |Sherman,     |  Dec. 7,  |Deserted, Feb. 2, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Preston, John A.,   |New Haven,   |  Dec. 2,  |Deserted, Jan. 13, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Profounter, Joseph, |Kent,        |  Dec. 1,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Perkins, Wm.,       |New Haven,   |  Dec. 3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Peterson, Ernest,   |Old Saybrook,|  Dec. 5,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Permet, Joseph,     |Salisbury,   |  Dec. 6,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Riefenberg,        |Conrad, Norwalk,| Dec. 2, |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Ruis, Henry,        |Winchester,  |  Dec. 2,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Shay, Robert,        |Sharon,      |  Mch. 2,  |Wd. Sept. 12, 1864; disch.
                       |             |    ’64,   | Sept. 4, 1865, Phila., Pa.
  Sydenham, John,      |Simsbury,    | April 12, |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Smith, Andrew,       |Stamford,    |  Dec. 3,  |Mustered out Aug. 14, 1865,
                       |             |     ’64,  | New York.
  Williams, Jas.,      |Suffield,    | Nov. 11,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------

                       NOTE--* Substitutes and Drafted.




                            INFANTRY COMPANY “H.”

  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
         Rank.         | Residence.  |  Date of  |           REMARKS.
                       |             |  Muster.  |
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
                       |             |           |
       _Captain._      |             |           |
  Henry Biebel,        |Bridgeport,  | Sept. 9,  |Discharged March 12, 1865.
                       |             |   1861    |
                       |             |           |
    _1st Lieutenant._  |             |           |
  George Louis,        |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Resigned April 14, 1864.
                       |             |           |
    _2nd Lieutenant._  |             |           |
  Rudolph Kost,        |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged March 13, 1865.
                       |             |           |
      _Sergeants._     |             |           |
  George Soder,        |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Promoted Capt. Co. F.;
                       |             |           | discharged Sept. 11, 1864.
  Alexander Raehe,     |Meriden,     |     ”     |Disch. by order Sec. of War,
                       |             |           | June 28, ’63, Beaufort, S. C.
  Edward Ortman,       |New Haven,   |     ”     |Wd.; re-en. Vt.; wd.; disch.,
                       |             |           | disability, July 14, 1865.
  Casper Zimmerman,    |Meriden,     |     ”     |Wd. Aug. 14, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 12, 1865, term expired.
  Christian Handel,    |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
      _Corporals._     |             |           |
  Andrew Wunk,         |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |           | New Haven.
  Casper Link,         |Meriden,     |     ”     |Disch., disability,
                       |             |           | May 15, 1862.
  George Pfeifer,      |     ”       |     ”     |Disch., disability, April 22,
                       |             |           | 1863, Beaufort, S. C.
  Jacob Schroff,       |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Adam Uhl,            |     ”       |     ”     |Wounded May 20, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 17, term expired.
  Louis Ruden,         |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Jacob Kron,          |Meriden,     |     ”     |Discharged enlisted U. S. A.,
                       |             |           | Nov. 3, 1862.
  Ferdinand Liefeld,   |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
      _Musicians._     |             |           |
  Wm. Goehren,         |New Haven,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Frederick Hess,      |Meriden,     |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | March 11, 1862.
                       |             |           |
       _Wagoner._      |             |           |
  John Hamburger,      |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Wd. Aug. 16, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 8, 1864, term expired.
                       |             |           |
      _Privates._      |             |           |
  Allman, Julius,      |Berlin,      |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; re-en.
                       |             |           | Vet.; disch. Aug. 8, 1865.
  Baechle, John,       |New Haven,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | deserted May 6, 1864.
  Becker, Henry,       |Meriden,     |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Becker, Leonhard,    |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Bauer, Conrad,       |Meriden,     |     ”     |Wd. May 20, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  Bantly, Anton,       |New Haven,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Bantly, Francis,     |E. Hartford, |     ”     |Died Aug. 24, 1864,
                       |             |           | Andersonville, Ga.
  Behne, August,       |Meriden,     |     ”     |Discharged Oct. 26, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Barker, Conrad,      |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 31, 1863, New York.
  Brill, John,         |New Haven,   |     ”     |Transferred to Vet. Res.
                       |             |           | Corps, May 31, 1864.
  Brill, Frederick,    |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Crusins, Oscar,      |Wallingford, |     ”     |Died June 13, 1862, of wounds
                       |             |           | received at James Island.
  Ernest, Paulus,      |Meriden,     |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 24, 1861.
  Felber, John,        |Vernon,      |     ”     |Wound. July 18, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  Felber, Jacob,       |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Gangloff, Chas.,     |Meriden,     |     ”     |Wound. July 10, 1863; re-en.
                       |             |           | Vet.; killed May 20, 1864.
  Gamerdinger, Wm.,    |New Britain, |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1865,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Gerber, Oscar,       |New Haven,   |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 18, 1864, term expired.
  Giebner, William,    |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Glaessner, Fred.,    |Meriden,     |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Haaga, Gottleib,     |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Hartung, Rochus,     |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  Haupt, Henry,        |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Hess, Matthias,      |Wallingford, |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; Trans.
                       |             |           | Vet. Res. C’ps, May 31, 1864.
  Hechler, Christian,  |Meriden,     |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Hesserich, Emil,     |East Windsor,|     ”     |Wounded and missing
                       |             |           | Oct. 22, 1862.
  Keller, Frederick,   |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged, enlisted
                       |             |           | U. S. A., Dec. 15, 1862.
  Ketterer, George,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Died Dec. 28, 1863,
                       |             |           | Richmond, Va.
  Kohlus, Christian,   |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Lehmann, Julius,     |Vernon,      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | wd.; m. o. Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |           | t. exp.
  Liebrich, Charles,   |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Loescher, August,    |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Missing Aug. 16, 1864.
  Lyon, Lewhardt,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | deserted Nov. 11, 1864.
  Maschmeyer, Ed.,     |Meriden,     |     ”     |Died Sept. 5, 1863,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Maschmeyer, Wm.,     |Wallingford, |     ”     |Died Oct. 23, 1862,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Maschmeyer, Her.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 30, 1861.
  Mayer, Fred., 1st,   |     ”       |     ”     |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |           | New Haven.
  Mayer, Jacob,        |Meriden,     |     ”     |Died June 21, 1862,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Mayer, Fred., 2d,    |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Muhlner, Wm.,        |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | June 21, 1862.
  Mydegger, Chas. S.,  |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged disability, Feb. 4,
                       |             |           | 1863, Beaufort, S. C.
  Newhaus, Henry,      |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Oldenburg, Henry,   |Newb’gh, N. Y.,|    ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Pfeiffer, Ortman,    |E. Hartford, |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; must. out
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  Rebstock, Wm.,       |Meriden,     |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; must. out
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  Rebstock, John,      |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Reininger, Jacob,    |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Richter, Edward,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Richards, David,     |     ”       |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  Roselius, Louis,     |Meriden,     |     ”     |Wd. May 16, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 8, 1864, term expired.
  Ruden, Fred.,        |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Dec. 6, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Schaupp, Conrad,     |Meriden,     |     ”     |Trans. V. R. C. May 8, 1864;
                       |             |           | disch. Sept. 12, 1864,
                       |             |           | t. exp.
  Scheele, Christian,  |Wallingford, |     ”     |Disch., disability, April 22,
                       |             |           | 1863, Beaufort, S. C.
  Schmidt, Gustav,     |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Died Aug. 12, 1863, of wounds
                       |             |           | received at Fort Wagner.
  Speer, Frederick,    |     ”       |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863;
                       |             |           | re-en. Vet.;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Schutt, August,      |Meriden,     |     ”     |Wd. July 7, 1863;
                       |             |           | re-en. Vet.;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Schwenk, Andreas,    |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Silex, William,      |Wallingford, |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Stoll, Gotlieb,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Wd. Aug. 16, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Oct. 25, 1864, term expired.
  Tschumme, Con., Jr., |East Windsor,|     ”     |Died June 12, 1862;
                       |             |           | Edisto Island, S. C.
  Tschumme, Con., Sr., |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Unfried, John,       |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Uhl, Conrad,         |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Vogel, Louis,        |Branford,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Mch. 7, ’64; wd.;
                       |             |           | disch. dis. July 14, ’65.
  Wagner, Bernhard,    |E. Windsor,  |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Mch. 7, ’64;
                       |             |           | deserted Nov. 11, 1864.
  Waugroth, Francis,   |Derby,       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Wersching, Hermann,  |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Wind, George,        |Vernon,      |     ”     |Drowned at Dawfuskie Island,
                       |             |           | S. C, April 15, 1862.
  Wirth, Henry,        |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 4, 1862.
  Wolfer, Simeon,      |E. Hartford, |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Zapz, Edward,        |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Feb. 15, 1865;
                       |             |           | term expired.


                      RECRUITS FOR INFANTRY COMPANY “H.”

  *Altis, Albert,      |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 6,  |Deserted Nov. 11, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Bend, John,         |     ”       |  Oct. 7,  |Deserted May 2, 1862.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Borsal, Charles,    |Danbury,     | Oct. 16,  |Deserted Nov. 11, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Brown, Charles,     |Bethel,      | Oct. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  Breachum, Edward,    |Middletown,  | Feb. 29,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Boss, Benjamin,      |Lyme,        |  Mch. 3,  |Wounded May 20, 1864;
                       |             |    ’64,   | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Bradley, John,       |Sharon,      |  Mch. 2,  |Mustered out Sept. 20, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Hartford.
  Bernard, Christopher,|Cheshire,    | Mch. 28,  |Wd. May 10, 1864; disch.,
                       |             |    ’64,   | disability, March 22, 1865.
  Doyle, James,        |Sharon,      | Feb. 27,  |Killed May 15, 1864,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Drury’s Bluff, Va.
  *Gay Eugene,         |Stamford,    | Oct. 15,  |Deserted Nov. 11, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Graham, Chas.,      |Danbury,     | Oct. 23,  |Died Sept. 7, 1864, of wounds.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  Hetzel, George,      |New Haven,   |  Jan. 1,  |Wd. May 10, 1864; disch.
                       |             |     ’62,  | Feb. 15, 1865, term expired.
  Hovey, Charles,      |Sharon,      |  Mch. 2,  |Mustered out June 1, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Hartford.
  *Kierchoff, Biern.,  |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 6,  |Died Aug. 24, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Andersonville, Ga.
  *Kombet, Rudolph,    |Bridgeport,  | Nov. 12,  |Wd. Aug. 16, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  Kern, John,          |Meriden,     | May 12,   |Died Nov. 7, 1864,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Fort Monroe, Va.
  *Lang, John,         |Norwalk,     | Sept. 5,  |Deserted June 20, 1865.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Link, Casper,       |Meriden,     | Feb. 20,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Miller, Peter,      |Danbury,     | Oct. 16,  |Died Aug. 24, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Andersonville, Ga.
  *Miller, Phillip,    |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 8,  |Wd. Aug. 10, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  *Miller, Wm.,        |     ”       | Oct. 13,  |Wd. May 14, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  *Muchar, Jacob,      |     ”       |  Oct. 9,  |Wd. May 14, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  Nauman, Alex.,       |New Haven,   | Nov. 20,  |Wd. May 20, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’62,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  *Newman, Chas.,      |Stamford,    | Oct. 16,  |Wd. Aug. 16, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  Pfister, John G.,    |Hartford,    |  Dec. 8,  |Wd. Aug. 16, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  Renger, Auguste,     |New Haven,   | Nov. 19,  |Mustered out Aug. 15, 1865.
                       |             |    ’62,   |
  Rust, Samuel,        |Hartford,    |  Jan. 7,  |Died of wounds, July 8, 1864,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Rust, William,       |     ”       | Nov. 19,  |Deserted Nov. 11, 1864.
                       |             |    ’62,   |
  Shuster, Fritz,      |New Haven,   | Nov. 19,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’62,   | New Haven.
  Shultz, William,     |Hartford,    | Nov. 28,  |Died July 19, 1863.
                       |             |    ’62,   |
  Seiguit, Jacob,      |     ”       |  Jan. 7,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Sherman, Abram,      |Waterbury,   | Feb. 25,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Schafer, George,     |Middletown,  | Feb. 29,  |Disch., disability,
                       |             |    ’64,   | May 22, 1865, New Haven.
  Wilbur, Frederick,   |Granby,      |  Mch. 3,  |Wd. May 14, 1864;
                       |             |    ’64,   | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------

                      NOTE--* Substitutes and Drafted.




                            INFANTRY COMPANY “I.”

  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
         Rank.         | Residence.  |  Date of  |           REMARKS.
                       |             |  Muster.  |
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
                       |             |           |
       _Captain._      |             |           |
  Thomas Boudren,      |Bridgeport,  | Sept. 5,  |Resigned Jan. 27, 1864.
                       |             |    1861,  |
                       |             |           |
    _1st Lieutenant._  |             |           |
  Daniel J. West,      |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Wounded Oct. 22, 1862;
                       |             |           | mustered out March 15, 1865.
                       |             |           |
    _2nd Lieutenant._  |             |           |
  Stephen S. Stevens,  |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Killed July 18, 1863,
                       |             |           | Fort Wagner, S. C.
                       |             |           |
      _Sergeants._     |             |           |
  Robert B. Gage,      |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Killed Oct. 22, 1862,
                       |             |           | Pocotaligo, S. C.
  John Waters,         |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; pro. 2d Lieut.
                       |             |           | Feb. 19, ’64;
                       |             |           | dis. Mch. 18, 1865.
  Bennett S. Lewis,    |     ”       |     ”     |Pro. Capt. Co. G,
                       |             |           | May 25, 1864; wd.;
                       |             |           | m. o. Dec. 2, 1864.
  Albert B. Clark,     |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet.; deserted
                       |             |           | March 27, 1864.
  Chas. H. Grogan,     |     ”       |     ”     |Died July 28, 1863, of wounds
                       |             |           | received at Fort Wagner.
                       |             |           |
      _Corporals._     |             |           |
  George H. Sherman,   |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Aug. 5, 1863,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Theodore Morris,     |Danbury,     |     ”     |Died July 12, 1862,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Frank Hougue,        |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 19, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  David G. Sheppard,   |New York,    |     ”     |Died of wounds Oct. 28, 1862,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  George A. Staples,   |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Mustered out Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Wm. H. Rossman,      |     ”       |     ”     |Mustered out Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Thomas Condrew,      |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | mustered out Aug. 21, 1864.
  Joseph C. Boudren,   |New Haven,   |     ”     |Missing July 18, 1863,
                       |             |           | Fort Wagner.
                       |             |           |
      _Musicians._     |             |           |
  Joseph O. Conger,    |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Robert D. Kelly,     |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
       _Wagoner._      |             |           |
  Charles Hull,        |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
                       |             |           |
       _Privates._     |             |           |
  Abbott, Alphonso,    |Trumbull,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Abbott, Gustavus A., |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Abbott, Woolsey,     |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Died Nov. 29, 1863,
                       |             |           | Richmond, Va.
  Bailey, David,       |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Feb. 4, 1863,
                       |             |           | to receive promotion.
  Bailey, George W.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Feb. 4, 1863,
                       |             |           | to receive promotion.
  Baldwin, Eli N.,     |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged May 13, 1863,
                       |             |           | to receive promotion.
  Beardsley, John F.,  |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Beck, Jacob,         |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 4, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Beers, Alfred B.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Mch. 7, ’64; pro.
                       |             |           | Capt.; m. o. Aug. 21, ’65.
  Beers, Roderick S.,  |Stratford,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Blakeslee, Henry M., |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Blinn, Sylvester,    |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | June 2, 1863, Beaufort, S. C.
  Bouton, George,      |Peekskill,   |     ”     |Wounded Oct. 22, 1862;
                       |             |           | discharged Sept. 11, 1864.
  Bouton, Wm. H.,      |Stratford,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Brislin, James,      |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Brotherton, Chas. H.,|     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Burritt, Charles,    |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | wd.; must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Carney, Terrence,    |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, enlisted U. S. A.,
                       |             |           | Feb. 22, 1863.
  Collins, Ward H.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Corcoran, Thomas,    |New York,    |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Crofut, Theodore A., |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Dailey, Wm. F.,      |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Davis, Edwin E.,     |Milford,     |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Deavy, Patrick,      |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Died Nov. 3, 1863,
                       |             |           | Richmond, Va.
  Delph, Harry,        |     ”       |     ”     |Killed Oct. 22, 1862,
                       |             |           | Pocotaligo, S. C.
  Dimon, Fred. B.,     |Derby,       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Downs, Wm. H.,       |Trumbull,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Fitch, Walter,       |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Wd.; pro. Adjutant Aug. 28,
                       |             |           | 1863; resigned July 22, 1864.
  Flynn, Michael,      |     ”       |     ”     |Missing July 18, 1863,
                       |             |           | Fort Wagner.
  Fox, George H.,      |     ”       |     ”     |Wd. May 20, 1864; discharged
                       |             |           | Sept. 4, 1864.
  Gilbert, John B.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63; pro.
                       |             |           | Capt.; disch. July 15, ’65.
  Gordon, Orrin,       |Southbury,   |     ”     |Wd. July 10, 1863; Trans.
                       |             |           | Inv. Corps, March 15, 1864.
  Gray, Thompson D.,   |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Oct. 17, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Grogan, Andrew,      |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Pro. 2d Lt. Co. G,
                       |             |           | May 25, ’64; wd.;
                       |             |           | dis. disab. Nov. 22, ’64.
  Hotchkiss, Geo. H.,  |Prospect,    |     ”     |Discharged, enlisted
                       |             |           | U. S. A., Jan. 19, 1863.
  Hanford, Horace T.,  |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Hoag, Walter D.,     |New Canaan,  |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | July 5, 1863,
                       |             |           | Folly Island, S. C.
  Hoag, Geo. W.,       |New Milford, |     ”     |Wd. May 16, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  Hodge, Chas. M.,     |Sherman,     |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | died of wounds July 22, 1864.
  Hodge, David W.,     |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Wd.; re-en. Vet. Dec. 24,
                       |             |           | 1863; must. out
                       |             |           | Aug. 21, 1865.
  Hodge, Horace,       |Sherman,     |     ”     |Died March 2, 1862,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Hubbell, George M.,  |Trumbull,    |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Hubbell, Thomas W.,  |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | deserted Nov. 9, 1864.
  Huckings, Geo. W.,   |Huntington,  |     ”     |Died of wounds Aug. 24, 1864.
  Hull, Lucius L.,     |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 19, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Kelley, Wm. M.,      |      ”      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | died Nov. 18, 1864, Beaufort.
  Kane, Horace,        |Sharon,      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | must. out June 14, ’65,
                       |             |           | Hartford.
  Keyes, William,      |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Mustered out Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Lacy, William O.,    |      ”      |     ”     |Died July 19, 1862,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Lutz, Fred. C.,      |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 4, 1862.
  Lyon, Fred. J.,      |      ”      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Martin, George,      |Oxford,      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Meritt, George L.,   |Trumbull,    |     ”     |Wound. July 10, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term exp.
  Mitchell, William,   |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Molan, Alfred G.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Disch., disability, April 3,
                       |             |           | 1862, Hilton Head, S. C.
  Morris, James A.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Disch., disability, March 16,
                       |             |           | 1862, Hilton Head, S. C.
  Mulloy, James,       |     ”       |     ”     |Trans. V. R. C. May 8, 1864;
                       |             |           | disch. Sept. 12, 1864.
  Murray, Aquilla A.,  |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Peet, George B.,     |Trumbull,    |     ”     |Died Aug. 16, 1863, of wounds
                       |             |           | received Fort Wagner.
  Peet, Joseph A.,     |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Phillips, Alonzo,    |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Missing at Fort Wagner,
                       |             |           | July 18, 1863.
  Platt, Granville,    |     ”       |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  Powers, Almond D.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Quinn, Thomas,       |     ”       |     ”     |Wound. May 20, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 7, 1864.
  Sale, Luther,        |Trumbull,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 6, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Stacy, Albert W.,    |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Missing July 18, 1863, at
                       |             |           | Fort Wagner, S. C.
  Stratton, John H.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 4, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Taylor, Edward B.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Died July 25, 1863, of wounds
                       |             |           | rec’d at Fort Wagner.
  Taylor, Isaac S.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Trans. Inv. Corps, Mch. 15,
                       |             |           | ’64; wound. July 18, ’63.
  Taylor, Thomas,      |     ”       |     ”     |Died Oct. 23, 1862, of wounds
                       |             |           | rec’d at Pocotaligo.
  Thomas, Samuel C.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | died of wds. Aug. 19, 1864.
  Wakeley, Ebenezer,   |     ”       |     ”     |Disch. dis. July 5, 1863,
                       |             |           | Folly Island, S. C.
  Ward, Frederick,     |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Warner, George W.,   |Roxbury,     |     ”     |Missing at Fort Wagner
                       |             |           | July 18, 1863.
  Walker, Webster W.,  |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  White, Edwin N.,     |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Worsley, Byron,      |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Wetmore, Edwin D.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | March 15, 1864.


                      RECRUITS FOR INFANTRY COMPANY “I.”

  Barney, John R.,     |Bridgeport,  | Aug. 27,  |Died March 15, 1865,
                       |             |    ’62,   | Washington, D. C.
  Burns, Andrew W.,    |Bethlem,     | Feb. 27,  |Deserted Nov. 3, 1864.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  Baker, Charles,      |Hartford,    |  Mch. 7,  |Deserted Nov. 9, 1864.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  Burns, John,         |Canaan,      |  Mch. 7,  |Deserted Nov. 3, 1864.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Bradley, Saml.,     |Bridgeport,  |  Dec. 9,  |Deserted March 9, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Brash, Henry J.,    |Norwich,     |  Dec. 9,  |Deserted March 5, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Barnes, Owen,       |     ”       |  Dec. 9,  |Deserted April 10, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  Crockett, Edwin L.,  |Hartford,    | Feb. 26,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Child, Ralph P.,    |     ”       |  Dec. 7,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Hartford.
  Hoyt, George H.,     |Danbury,     | Feb. 27,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Hoag, Jacob,        |Harwinton,   |  Dec. 8,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Ireland, Henry C,    |Burlington,  |  Jan. 4,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Johnson, William,    |Monroe,      | Jan. 28,  |Mustered out June 24, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Fort Monroe, Va.
  Johnstone, John,     |Canaan,      | March 4,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Lyon, Edward H.,     |Bridgeport,  | Sept. 5,  |Mustered out June 29, 1865,
                       |             |    ’62,   | Raleigh, N. C.
  *Larocke, Frank,     |Darien,      | Nov. 12,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Cane, John,         |Canaan,      | March 7,  |Deserted August 14, 1864.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *McCarty, Dennis,    |Danbury,     | Oct. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  Monroe, Alanson,     |N. Canaan,   | Feb. 27,  |Wound. May 15, 1864;
                       |             |    ’64,   | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Molloy, Michael,     |Salisbury,   | March 9,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Mann, James,         |Washington,  | Feb. 27,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Montague, Wm.,       |Southington, |  Jan. 6,  |Died March 28, 1865,
                       |             |    ’65,   | Wilmington, N. C.
  Mulligan, Joseph,    |Woodbury,    |  Dec. 3,  |Deserted April 10, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Nelson, Joseph,     |Ridgefield,  | Oct. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Norman, Henry,      |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 8,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  Nelson, Wm.,         |Columbia,    | March 7,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Ouimet, Euribe,     |Norwalk,     | Oct. 12,  |Died Dec. 8, 1864,.
                       |             |    ’63,   | Fortress Monroe, Va
  O’Connell, Hugh,     |Hartford,    | Feb. 26,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Peck, Robert C.,     |Stratford,   | Aug. 26,  |Died July 20, 1863, of wounds.
                       |             |    ’62,   |
  Penfield, Benj. D.,  |Bridgeport,  | Aug. 30,  |Promoted Adjutant;
                       |             |    ’62,   | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  *Parouet, Alphonso,  |East Haddam, | Sept. 5,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Pantowise, Jacob,   |Danbury,     | Oct. 16,  |Wd. Aug. 16, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’62,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  *Pearn, Emil,        |Waterbury,   | Aug. 22,  |Wd. May 16, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  *Peure, Hiram,       |Mansfield,   | Sept. 22, |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |    ’63,   | April 7, 1865, New Haven.
  *Phillips, Robert,   |Bethel,      | Oct. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  Pool, Jay,           |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 8,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  Purcell, George,     |Washington,  | Feb. 27,  |Deserted Aug. 3, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  Purdy, Wm. B.,       |Danbury,     | Feb. 27,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  Perley, Charles,     |Waterbury,   | Mar. 18,  |Killed Aug. 16, 1864,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Deep Run, Va.
  *Ramsey, James,      |     ”       | Aug. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Robinson, John,     |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 8,  |Wounded May 16, 1864;
                       |             |    ’63,   | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Ross, John,          |Columbia,    | March 7,  |Wound. June 17, 1864; disch.,
                       |             |    ’64,   | disability, Dec. 29, 1864.
  *Rentz, Conrad,      |Southbury,   |  Dec. 6,  |Deserted Feb. 12, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Robinson, Jas.,     |Woodbury,    | Nov. 16,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Ragan, John,        |Stratford,   | Nov. 17,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Ragan, William,     |Salisbury,   |  Dec. 7,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Revert, August,     |Stamford,    |  Dec. 1,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Robesk, Lyman,      |Kent,        |  Dec. 5,  |Deserted April 2, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Rosan, William,     |New Haven,   |  Dec. 2,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Salar, William,     |Danbury,     | Oct. 12,  |Wounded Aug. 14, 1864;
                       |             |    ’64,   | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  *Sampson, George,    |Meriden,     |  Aug. 8,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865;
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Smalley, Henry,     |Chatham,     | Sept. 5,  |Wounded June 17, 1864;
                       |             |    ’63,   | mustered out Aug. 21, 1865.
  *Saxe, Frederick,    |Cornwall,    |  Dec. 6,  |Deserted Feb. 12, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Sebio, Antonia,     |Bethany,     |  Dec. 2,  |Deserted Feb. 19, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Schaffer, Wm.,      |Seymour,     |  Dec. 1,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Seidell, Wm.,       |New Haven,   |  Dec. 2,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Sherbert, Alex.,    |Salisbury,   |  Dec. 2,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Spencer, Edward,    |Derby,       |  Dec. 2,  |Deserted April 10, 1865.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  *Stahl, Henry,       |Westport,    |  Dec. 2,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Spink, George W.,   |Columbia,    |  Dec. 3,  |Mustered out May 31, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Fort Monroe.
  *Steffen, Henry,     |So. Windsor, |  Dec. 3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Stanford, Wm.,      |New Britain, |  Dec. 6,  |Deserted April 13, 1865.
  *Scharf, Henry,      |New Haven,   |  Dec. 6,  |Died March 28, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Wilmington, N. C.
  *Shanley, Thomas,    |S. Windsor,  |  Dec. 3,  |Mustered out June 14, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Hartford.
  *Smith, John, 1st,   |Andover,     |  Dec. 2,  |Did not appear on
                       |             |    ’64,   | Muster Roll.
  *Smith, John, 2d.    |Hamden,      |  Dec. 2,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Smith, John, 3d,    |Stratford,   |  Dec. 6,  |Mustered out May 24, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New York.
  *Smith, Peter G.,    |Rocky Hill,  |  Dec. 6,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Smith, Wm.,         |Watertown,   |  Dec. 6,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Slatterly, Jas.,    |Haddam,      |  Dec. 6,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Snyder, George,     |Hartford,    |  Dec. 6,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Thompson, Fred.,    |Andover,     |  Dec. 1,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Toomey, Dennis,     |New Haven,   |  Dec. 3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Wales, Wm. H.,       |Hartford,    |  Dec. 5,  |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |    ’62,   | July 5, 1863,
                       |             |           | Folly Island, S. C.
  Wordin, Nathl.,      |     ”       | Aug. 29,  |Mustered out June 3, 1865,
                       |             |    ’62,   | City Point, Va.
  *Williams, James,    |Bridgeport,  | Nov. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Weaver, Michael,    |Hartford,    |  Dec. 5,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Wilson, James,      |Bristol,     |  Dec. 5,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Woodman, Geo.,      |Salisbury,   |  Dec. 2,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Moore, Chas. E.      |Stratford,   |  Mch. 9,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------

                      NOTE--* Substitutes and Drafted.




                            INFANTRY COMPANY “K.”

  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
         Rank.         | Residence.  |  Date of  |           REMARKS.
                       |             |  Muster.  |
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------
                       |             |           |
        _Captain._     |             |           |
  Henry G. Gerrish,    |New Haven,   | Sept. 12, |Died Aug. 19, 1862.
                       |             |    ’61,   |
                       |             |           |
    _1st Lieutenant._  |             |           |
  Fred. B. Osborn,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Pro. Capt. Sept. 1, 1862;
                       |             |           | m. o. Oct. 25, 1864,
                       |             |           | term exp.
     _2d Lieutenant._  |             |           |
  Frederick Dodd,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Resigned Oct. 11, 1862.
                       |             |           |
       _Sergeants._    |             |           |
  John C. Nichols,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Pro. 1st Lieut.;
                       |             |           | resigned Jan. 31, 1864.
  Fred. O. Dodd,       |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  James E. Torbet,     |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Wilson Eddy,         |Camb’ge, M’ss.|    ”     |Transferred to Signal Corps,
                       |             |           | U. S. A., Oct. 31, 1863.
  Merritt L. Potter,   |Hamden,      |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Nov. 20, 1862.
                       |             |           |
       _Corporals._    |             |           |
  W. W. Perkins,       |New Haven,   |     ”     |Died Aug. 14, 1862,
                       |             |           | New Haven, Conn.
  Wm. L. Williams,     |     ”       |     ”     |Wound. July 18, 1863; disch.,
                       |             |           | disability, Oct. 18, 1863.
  Edwin J. Hickox,     |Naugatuck,   |     ”     |Died Aug. 27, 1862,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Henry H. Hurlburt,   |Farmington,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, ’64;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Agustus F. Bull,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Robert T. Sperry,    |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | wd.; must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Benj. F. McDonald,   |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Edward Buttricks,    |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
      _Musicians._     |             |           |
  Francis Mackey,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  James McAllister,    |     ”       |     ”     |Deserted Sept. 12, 1861.
                       |             |           |
       _Wagoner._      |             |           |
  Andrew J. Wheeler,   |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Jan. 11, 1862.
                       |             |           |
       _Privates._     |             |           |
  Anthony, Peleg,      |Pomfret,     |     ”     |Deserted Oct. 3, 1861.
  Baker, Joseph,       |Branford,    |     ”     |Killed at Drury’s Bluff,
                       |             |           | Va., May 16, 1864.
  Beecher, Alex. H., Jr.,|New Haven, |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | June 6, 1863, Beaufort, S. C.
  Boardman, And. J.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps
                       |             |           | Sept. 30, 1864.
  Bristol, Julius A.,  |Milford,     |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Brooks, Jabez C.,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Died June 14, 1862,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Brown, Wm. H.,       |     ”       |     ”     |Wd. Aug. 14, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  Bulger, David,       |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Bunnell, Amos A.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | New Haven, Conn.
  Burns, John,         |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Feb. 24, 1863,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Campbell, Geo.,     |W. Farms, N. Y.|    ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | July 5, 1863,
                       |             |           | Folly Island, S. C.
  Cockroft, Ambrose,   |Thompson,    |     ”     |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |           | New Haven.
  Clock, Wm. A. J.,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Cook, John H.,       |Hamden,      |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | discharged.
  Cooper, Chas. W.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Nov. 20, 1862.
  Dorman, Andrew,      |     ”       |     ”     |Died Dec. 19, 1861,
                       |             |           | Fort Monroe, Va.
  Dorman, Lewis,       |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Mch. 11, 1862,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Evarts, Burton A.,   |Woodbridge,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Fisher, John N.,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Ford, Ellsworth W.,  |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Fordham, Benj. H.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | April 26, 1863,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Gesner, George A.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Mch. 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | pro. 2d Lt.;
                       |             |           | m. o. Aug. 21, 1865.
  Gilbert, Wells,      |Branford,    |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Dec. 21, 1862.
  Gilbert, Monroe,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Wd. July 18, 1863; must. out
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term exp.
  Gladstone, Wm.,      |     ”       |     ”     |Died Oct. 6, 1864,
                       |             |           | Andersonville, Ga.
  Granniss, Thomas P., |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Greene, John,        |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Greene, Chas.,       |     ”       |     ”     |Wd. Aug. 14, 1864; disch.
                       |             |           | Nov., 1864, term expired.
  Harrigan, Stephen,   |     ”       |     ”     |Disch., disability,
                       |             |           | Nov. 25, 1863,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Hills, Chauncey,     |Bristol,     |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Hine, James,         |New Haven,   |     ”     |Died Aug. 24, 1864,
                       |             |           | Andersonville, Ga.
  Hitchcock, Frank B., |Naugatuck,   |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Hotchkiss, David B., |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Nov. 1, 1862.
  Hotchkiss, Frank D., |     ”       |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | March 15, 1864.
  Howd, Wm. T.,        |Branford,    |     ”     |Discharged, enlisted
                       |             |           |U. S. A., Nov. 3, 1862.
  Howe, Homer W.,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Howland, Geo W.,     |     ”       |     ”     |Dropped from Rolls,
                       |             |           | Feb. 6, 1864.
  Hoyt, Abner F.,      |Naugatuck,   |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Isbell, Castle E.,   |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged, Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Johnson, Tryon W.,   |New Haven,   |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Joice, Stephen P.,   |Hamden,      |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Hilton Head, S. C.
  Keegan Lawrence,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged, disability,
                       |             |           | Feb. 24, 1863,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Keeler, Charles,     |     ”       |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid
                       |             |           | Corps, Sept. 1, 1863.
  Mack, Frank,         |Putnam,      |     ”     |Died Aug. 20, 1862,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Miller, Geo. B.,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Nichols, Franklin S.,|Naugatuck,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Nichols, Henry,      |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Northrop, Thomas J., |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Paine, Richard J.,   |Branford,    |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Peebles, George F.,  |Middletown,  |     ”     |Wd. July 10, 1863; disch.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864; term expired.
  Rawlings, Chas.,     |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Rogers, Elias H.,    |Hamden,      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Swaine, Alfred,      |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           |Apr. 22, 1863, Beaufort, S. C.
  Smith, Frederick,    |Bridgeport,  |     ”     |Discharged Feb. 7, 1865;
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Smith, John,         |     ”       |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | wd.; must. out Aug. 21, ’65.
  Smith, Robert L.,  |Sheffield, Mass.,|   ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, 1863;
                       |             |           | must. out Aug. 21, ’65.
  Squire, Frank,       |Birmingham,  |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Stevens, Ashbell,    |Naugatuck,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Stevens, Edward A.,  |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Terrill, George R.,  |Litchfield,  |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | Aug. 17, 1862.
  Thatford, Henry C., |Sag Har., L. I.,|   ”     |Discharged Sept. 12, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Thomas, Henry H.,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Tomlinson, H. W.,    |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged disab.
                       |             |           | Sept. 11, 1864, term expired.
  Tousley, Artemus,    |Hamden,      |     ”     |Died July 21, 1863, of wounds
                       |             |           | received Fort Wagner.
  Turner, Isaac,       |New Haven,   |     ”     |Transferred to Invalid Corps,
                       |             |           | Sept. 1, 1863.
  Ward, Geo. E.,       |     ”       |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Warner, John J.,     |Hamden,      |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Wilcox, Aaron E.,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged disability,
                       |             |           | May 11, 1863,
                       |             |           | Beaufort, S. C.
  Willard, Edgar A.,   |Madison,     |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | wd.; trans. V. R. C.,
                       |             |           | Apr. 17, ’65.
  Wilson, James A.,    |Clinton,     |     ”     |Re-en. Vet. Dec. 24, ’63;
                       |             |           | pro. 1st Lt.;
                       |             |           | m. o. Aug. 21, ’65.
  Woodworth, M. L.,    |New Haven,   |     ”     |Discharged Sept. 11, 1864,
                       |             |           | term expired.
  Wooster, Jos. A., Jr.,|     ”      |     ”     |Died of wounds received at
                       |             |           | Morris Island, July 18, 1863.


                      RECRUITS FOR INFANTRY COMPANY “K.”

  *Barnes, Hiram M.,   |New Haven,   | July 13,  |Mustered out Aug. 31, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Clark, Wm. M.,      |     ”       |  Aug. 3,  |Wd. Aug. 16, ’64; m. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | June 20, ’65,
                       |             |           | Goldsboro, N. C.
  Dickerman, John F.,  |     ”       | Mar. 25,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’65,   | New Haven.
  Terry, John,         |Bethlem,     | Feb. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Howell, Abram, Jr.,  |New Haven,   | April 1,  |Disch. dis., July 5, 1863,
                       |             |    ’62,   | Folly Island, S. C.
  Hartley, Peter,      |     ”       | Dec. 29,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  Hanson, Peter,       |Branford,    | Feb. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *Knost, John C.,     |Oxford,      | Nov. 15,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Lockwood, Chas. M.,  |Stamford,    | Jan. 29,  |Disch. dis., Feb. 6, 1863,
                       |             |    ’62,   | Alexandria, Va.
  *Morris, James,      |     ”       | Oct. 15,  |Wd. Aug. 16, 1864; trans.
                       |             |    ’63,   | V. R. C.; disch., dis.
  *Murphy, James,      |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 9,  |Drowned July 9, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | James River, Va.
  *Murphy, John,       |     ”       |  Oct. 5,  |Dishonorably discharged
                       |             |    ’63,   | April 27, 1864.
  Murphy, Wm.,         |Bridgeport,  | Feb. 25,  |Deserted Nov. 9, 1864.
                       |             |    ’64,   |
  O’Donnell, Hugh,     |Waterbury,   | Feb. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  Reed, William,       |Bridgeport,  |  Nov. 7,  |Died July 18, 1863, of wounds
                       |             |    ’62,   | received at Fort Wagner.
  Reinhart, Matthew,   |New Haven,   | Mar. 12,  |Re-en. Vet. March 7, 1864;
                       |             |    ’62,   | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  Schofield, Theo. C., |Stamford,    |  Mar. 1,  |Died July 31, 1862,
                       |             |    ’62,   | Beaufort, S. C.
  *Simmons, John,      |Norwalk,     | Oct. 12,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Smith, Joseph W.,   |     ”       |  Oct. 8,  |Mustered out May 16, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Wilmington, N. C.
  *Southard, John,     |Farmington,  |  Oct. 6,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Staff, Henry,       |Norwalk,     | Oct. 10,  |Wd. May 20, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865, N. Haven.
  *Stanton, Wm.,       |Torrington,  | Oct. 10,  |Wd. May 16, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865, N. Haven.
  *Sullivan, John,     |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 6,  |Deserted May 4, 1865.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Swayne, William,    |     ”       |  Oct. 7,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Sears, Henry E.,    |Oxford,      | Feb. 29,  |Mustered out June 26, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | Goldsboro, N. C.
  *Sullivan, James,    |Newtown,     |  Jan. 5,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’65,   | New Haven.
  *Tagasco, Andrew,    |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 8,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Trask, Geo. H.,     |Willington,  | Sept. 11, |Wd. June 15, 1865; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, ’65, Ft. Monroe.
  *Trechardt, Johannes,|Stamford,    | Oct. 14,  |Deserted Nov. 12, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Tracy, James,       |E. Hartford, |  Feb. 7,  |Mustered out Aug. 14, 1865,
                       |             |    ’65,   | New York.
  *Verner, John,       |Old Saybrook,| Sept. 5,  |Wd. May 16, 1864; must. out
                       |             |    ’63,   | Aug. 21, 1865, New Haven.
  *Wagner, John,       |New Canaan,  |  Oct. 3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Wantt, Charles,     |Mansfield,   |  Oct. 8,  |Died July 20, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Goldsboro, N. C.
  *Welch, Matthew,     |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 8,  |Deserted Nov. 9, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Wheeler, Fred. F.,  |     ”       | Sept. 13, |Died Sept. 27, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Hampton, Va.
  *Wheeler, How. C.,   |     ”       | Sept. 13, |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Whitcomb, Asaph,    |Willington,  | Sept. 17, |Died Dec. 31, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Annapolis, Md.
  *White, James,       |Norwalk,     |  Oct. 3,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  *Whittan, Wm. M.,    |Coventry,    | Oct. 13,  |Wounded Feb. 22, 1865;
                       |             |    ’63,   | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  *Wiess, Nicholas,    |Danbury,     | Oct. 16,  |Killed Aug. 16, 1864,
                       |             |    ’63,   | Deep Run, Va.
  *Williams, David,    |Coventry,    |  Oct. 9,  |Wounded May 10, 1864;
                       |             |    ’63,   | must. out Aug. 21, 1865.
  *Williamson, Geo.,   |Danbury,     | Oct. 17,  |Wounded Sept. 8, 1864; must.
                       |             |    ’63,   | out May 21, 1865, N. Y.
  *Wilson, Charles,    |East Haddam, |  Sept. 5, |Deserted Aug. 19, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Wise, William,      |Norwalk,     |  Sept. 5, |Deserted April 3, 1864.
                       |             |    ’63,   |
  *Wood, Andrew,       |Stonington,  | Jan. 30,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’65,   | New Haven.
  *Wilson, Chas. E.,   |Enfield,     | Nov. 17,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’64,   | New Haven.
  *White, James E.,    |New Britain, |  Feb. 7,  |Mustered out Nov. 4, 1865,
                       |             |    ’65,   | Hartford.
  *White, John,        |Bridgeport,  | Jan. 31,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’65,   | New Haven.
  *Young, James,       |Waterbury.   | Aug. 22,  |Mustered out Aug. 21, 1865,
                       |             |    ’63,   | New Haven.
  ---------------------+-------------+-----------+-----------------------------

                       NOTE--* Substitutes and Drafted.




                   RECRUITS FOR SIXTH REGIMENT, UNASSIGNED.

  ---------------------+-------------+--------------+--------------------------
         Rank.         | Residence.  |   Date of    |           REMARKS.
                       |             |   Muster.    |
  ---------------------+-------------+--------------+--------------------------
                       |             |              |
  Allen, Henry,        |New Haven,   | Nov. 12, ’62,|Deserted Nov. 25, 1862.
  Abele, Agusta,       |Hartford,    | Jan.  8, ’63,|Deserted Jan. 17, 1863.
  Aberton, Geo. A.,    |Washington,  | Mar. 12, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Anderson, Chas.,     |Columbia,    | Mar. 26, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Bradley, Chas.,      |Bridgeport,  | Sept. 2, ’62,|Deserted Oct. 19. 1864.
  Brano, Carlos,       |Hartford,    | Jan.  8, ’63,|Deserted Feb. 19, 1863.
  Brann, Theodore,     |New Haven,   | Jan. 14, ’63,|Deserted Jan. 20, 1863.
  Buttrer, Fred.,      |     ”       | Jan. 14, ’63,|Deserted Jan. 20, 1863.
  Brown, Wm. O.,       |Bridgeport,  | May   5, ’63,|Deserted May 11, 1863.
  Baker, William,      |Burlington,  | Jan.  6, ’65,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Cooper, Charles,     |Norwalk,     | Dec. 15, ’63,|Deserted Dec. 18, 1863.
  Cary, Dennis,        |Salisbury,   | Mar.  9, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Duggan, Timothy,     |Hartford,    | Nov. 22, ’62,|Deserted Dec. 22, 1862.
  Duff, Edward,        |Waterbury,   | July 20, ’63,|Deserted July 27, 1863.
  Daily, Lewis,        |Washington,  | Mar. 12, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Erving, Waldo,       |E. Hartford, | Feb.  2, ’64,|Discharged, disability,
                       |             |              | May 23, 1864, New Haven.
  Frink, Carl,         |Hartford,    | Dec. 11, ’62,|Deserted Dec. 11, 1862.
  Framan, Carl,        |New Haven,   | Jan. 14, ’63,|Deserted Jan. 20, 1863.
  Franke, Edward,      |Hartford,    | Jan.  8, ’63,|Deserted Jan. 17, 1863.
  Frederic, William,   |Granby,      | Mar. 21, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Farley, John,        |Southington, | Jan.  7, ’65,|Discharged April 13, 1865,
                       |             |              | New Haven.
  Gleason, Chas. T.,   |Woodstock,   | Aug. 26, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Glynn, Thomas,       |New Britain, | Oct. 18, ’64,|Discharged Nov. 3, 1862.
  Hill, Wm.,           |New Haven,   | Nov. 20, ’62,|Never reached the Regiment.
  Hickay, Michael,     |Putnam,      | Oct.  9, ’62,|Deserted Nov. 3, 1862.
  Hann, Ludwic,        |Hartford,    | Jan.  8, ’63,|Deserted Jan. 19, 1863.
  Heindrick, Jacob,    |New Haven,   | Jan. 14, ’63,|Never reached the Regiment.
  Hughes, Michael,     |Hartford,    | April 6, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Hamilton, Wm.,       |Marlborough, | Jan.  7, ’65,|Deserted Jan. 23, 1865.
  Jones, William,      |Waterford,   | Mch. 18, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Kelly, Thomas,       |Waterbury,   | Mch.  6, ’63,|Deserted May 26, 1863.
  Logan, John,         |Hartford,    | Dec. 10, ’62,|Deserted Dec. 22, 1862.
  Lein, John,          |     ”       | Jan.  8, ’63,|Deserted Jan. 17, 1863.
  Lalley, Michael,     |Waterbury,   | May  28, ’63,|Deserted May 31, 1863.
  Myers, Peter,        |Hartford,    | Jan.  7, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Merkle, John,        |New Haven,   | Nov. 19, ’62,|Discharged, enlisted
                       |             |              | U. S. A., Dec. 18, 1862.
  Morrissey, John,     |Bridgeport,  | Nov. 15, ’62,|Deserted Dec. 22, 1862.
  Morse, Philo C.,     |New Haven,   | Nov. 15, ’62,|Discharged, enlisted
                       |             |              | U. S. A., Dec. 7, 1862.
  Murphy, Thos., 2d,   |Hartford,    | Dec.  4, ’62,|Deserted Dec. 22, 1862.
  Mulligan, Wm.,       |     ”       | Feb. 15, ’62,|Deserted April 11, 1862.
  McAvoy, James,       |Bridgeport,  | Dec. 29, ’62,|Deserted Jan. 11, 1863.
  Miller, Andrew,      |Hartford,    | Dec. 10, ’62,|Deserted Jan. 1, 1863.
  McClellan, John,     |Bridgeport,  | Dec. 29, ’62,|Discharged, enlisted
                       |             |              | U. S. A., Jan. 18, 1863.
  Murphy, Thomas A.,   |New Haven,   | Oct. 27, ’62,|Deserted Dec. 22, 1862.
  Matthews, John,      |Salisbury,   | Mch.  9, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Martin, Augustus,    |Waterford,   | Mch. 14, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Moynihan, John,      |Lebanon,     | Mch. 18, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Moran, Edward,       |New Britain, | Jan. 23, ’65,|Mustered out Oct. 2, 1865,
                       |             |              | New Haven.
  Nichel, Simon,       |Bridgeport,  | Nov.  8, ’62,|Discharged, enlisted in
                       |             |              | U. S. A., Dec. 10, 1862.
  Olivius, Chas.,      |New Haven,   | Nov. 18, ’62,|Discharged, enlisted in
                       |             |              | U. S. A., Dec. 9, 1862.
  Obert, Franz,        |     ”       | Jan. 14, ’63,|Deserted Jan. 20, 1863.
  Oberson, Francis,    |Salisbury,   | Mch. 22, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Petroff, Peter,      |New Haven,   | Nov. 18, ’62,|Discharged, enlisted
                       |             |              | U. S. A., Dec. 9, 1862.
  Perry, Thomas,       |     ”       | Nov. 12, ’62,|Deserted Nov. 25, 1862.
  Peterson, James,     |Hartford,    | Dec. 10, ’62,|Deserted Dec. 11, 1862.
  Pretter, Bernhard,   |New Haven,   | Jan. 14, ’63,|Never reached the Regiment.
  Pitt, Charles,       |New Haven,   |Sept. 25, ’62,|Deserted Oct. 6, 1862.
  Quinnan, Thomas,     |Hartford,    | Dec. 10, ’62,|Deserted Dec. 22, 1862.
  Rieman, Paul,        |New Haven,   | Jan. 14, ’63,|Enlisted U. S. A.,
                       |             |              | June 23, 1863.
  Smart, William,      |Hartford,    | Nov. 28, ’62,|Deserted Dec. 7, 1862.
  Stevens, Zalmon,     |Waterbury,   | Dec.  3, ’63,|Deserted Feb. 7, 1863.
  Sheldeur, Joseph,    |Bridgeport,  | Dec. 29, ’62,|Deserted Dec. 30, 1862.
  Spranger, Lewis,     |Hartford,    | Jan. 29, ’63,|Deserted Jan. 17, 1864.
  Scoot, James,        |     ”       |Sept. 25, ’62,|Deserted Oct. 1, 1862.
  Sullivan, Patrick,   |     ”       | Dec.  1, ’62,|Deserted Dec. 11, 1862.
  Schneider, Francis,  |Bridgeport,  | Mch. 16, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Tobias, Mark G.,     |     ”       |Sept. 29, ’62,|Discharged; enlisted in
                       |             |              | U. S. A., Oct. 14, 1862.
  Tauril, John,        |E. Granby,   | Mch. 26, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Vincent, Joseph,     |Vernon,      | Mch. 10, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Wilson, Joseph,      |Milford,     | Nov. 12, ’62,|Discharged; enlisted in
                       |             |              | U. S. A., Dec. 7, 1862.
  Westfield, John,     |Hartford,    | Dec. 15, ’62,|Deserted Dec. 15, 1862.
  Wheins, Thomas,      |Waterbury,   | July 13, ’63,|Deserted July 16, 1863.
  Williams, Phillip,   |Washington,  | Feb. 27, ’64,|Deserted March, 1864.
  Wilson, James,       |Sharon,      | Mch.  2, ’64,|Deserted March, 1864.
  Williams, Geo.,      |     ”       | Mch.  4, ’64,|Not taken up on Rolls.
  Willibad, Max,       |Chester,     |Sept. 29, ’64,|Deserted Oct. 15, 1864.
  ---------------------+-------------+--------------+--------------------------




                           ROLL OF HONOR.


        Names.                                General Remarks.

        ABBOTT, EDWIN H.,                     Died in Service.
        ABBOTT, WOOLSEY,                      Died in Prison.
        ACKERMAN, CARL,                       Killed in Battle.
        ALLEN, HENRY,                             ”     ”
        ALLEN, LEWIS C. JR., Captain,         Died in Service.
        ATWATER, FRANKLIN J.,                 Died of Wounds.
        BABCOCK, ANSON E.,                    Died in Service.
        BODGE, GEORGE E.,                     Killed in Battle.
        BAKER, JOSEPH,                            ”     ”
        BAKER, GEORGE H.,                     Died in Service.
        BALDWIN, BRUCE,                       Died of Wounds.
        BALDWIN, HENRY M.,                    Died in Service.
        BARNES, SETH E.,                      Died of Wounds.
        BARNES, SETH J.,                      Died in Service.
        BARTLETT, HALSEY,                     Killed in Battle.
        BARTON, GEORGE A.,                    Died in Service.
        BELCHMER, CHRISTOPHER,                Killed in Battle.
        BEMUS, HENRY,                             ”     ”
        BENNETT, EDWARD,                          ”     ”
        BETHKA, CHARLES,                          ”     ”
        BEYER, MARTIN,                        Killed in Battle.
        BING, EDWARD J.,                      Died in Service.
        BLENEL, VALENTINE,                    Killed in Battle.
        BOSWORTH, D. H.,                      Died in Service.
        BRADLEY, WM. T., 1st LIEUT.,          Died of Wounds.
        BRANDT, HENRY S.,                         ”     ”
        BROOK, JABEZ C.,                      Died in Service.
        BROWN, WILLIAM H.,                    Killed in Battle.
        BRYSEN, FRANK,                        Died of Wounds.
        BRYSEN, DAVID, JR.,                   Died in Service.
        BULKLEY, FREDERICK O.,                    ”     ”
        BUTLER, JESSE,                        Killed in Battle.
        BYXBEE, JOHN,                         Died in Service.
        CHATFIELD, JOHN L., COLONEL,          Died of Wounds.
        COBBE, GEORGE W.,                     Died in Service.
        COOK, HENRY A.,                           ”     ”
        COLLETT, ANATOLE,                     Killed in Battle.
        COLLETT, JAMES,                            ”    ”
        CRUSINS, OSCAR,                       Died of Wounds.
        COREY, WILLIAM H.,                    Killed in Battle.
        CONNELY, PATRICK,                     Died in Service.
        DAVIS, LUTHER,                            ”     ”
        DAWLEY, JAMES,                            ”     ”
        DAY, JOHN W.,                             ”     ”
        DEBOUGE, GUSTAVE,                     Killed in Battle.
        DEARY, PATRICK,                       Died in Prison.
        DELPT, HARRY,                         Killed in Battle.
        DEWITT, WILLIAM,                           ”    ”
        DORMAN, HORACE,                       Died in Service.
        DORMAN, ANDREW,                           ”      ”
        DOYLE, JAMES,                         Killed in Battle.
        DRISCOLL, JOHN F.,                         ”     ”
        DUPAY, JEROME,                             ”     ”
        DUBOIS, CHARLES,                      Died of Wounds.
        EATON, HORATIO D., CAPTAIN,           Killed in Battle.
        FREEMAN, DANIEL,                      Died in Service.
        FRISBEY, HENRY D.,                        ”      ”
        GAGE, ROBERT B.,                      Killed in Battle.
        GANGLOFF, CHARLES,                         ”     ”
        GERRISH, HENRY G., CAPTAIN,           Died in Service.
        GIBBONS, THEODORE,                        ”      ”
        GINDER, BALTHASER,                        ”      ”
        GILBERT, JAMES H.,                        ”      ”
        GLISSMAN, WILLIAM,                    Killed in Battle.
        GOB, CHARLES,                              ”     ”
        GRISWOLD, EUGENE W.,                       ”     ”
        GROGAN, CHARLES H.,                   Died of Wounds.
        GUSSMAN, WILLIAM,                         ”      ”
        HALLER, MARTIN,                       Died of Wounds.
        HAMMOND, CLOVIS E., 1st LIEUT.,           ”      ”
        HART, WILLIS A.,                      Died in Service.
        HAYWARD, NAHUM L.,                        ”      ”
        HAUSSERMAN, MICHAEL,                      ”      ”
        HENNINGER, GEORGE,                    Killed in Battle.
        HESSE, AUGUSTUS,                           ”     ”
        HESSERICK, EMIL,                      Died in Service.
        HEYNE, PAUL,                          Killed in Battle.
        HICKOX, EDWIN J.,                     Died in Service.
        HILL, CHARLES T.,                        ”       ”
        HILL, WARREN F.,                         ”       ”
        HILLS, SEBURY D.,                        ”     Prison.
        HOAR, DELBERT,                        Killed in Battle.
        HODGE, HORACE,                        Died in Service.
        HOLLER, MARTIN,                       Died of Wounds.
        HOYT, HENRY W.,                          ”       ”
        INGALLS, DEXTER W.,                      ”       ”
        JONES, IRA D.,                           ”       ”
        JONES, JOSEPH,                           ”       ”
        JOHNSON, WILLIAM H., 2d LIEUT.,          ”       ”
        JOHNSON, THOMAS,                      Killed in Battle.
        KREITLING, ALBERT,                    Died in Service.
        KEITH, CHARLES S.,                    Killed in Battle.
        KELTERER, GEORGE,                     Died in Prison.
        KIMBERLY, HENRY,                      Killed in Battle.
        KIRSTEN, CHARLES,                     Died of Wounds.
        LACEY, WILLIAM S.,                    Died in Service.
        LANERGHAM, LANKE H.,                  Killed in Battle.
        LAWRENCE, JOSEPH C.,                  Died in Service.
        LINTON, JAMES,                        Killed in Battle.
        LOMBERTI, CHARLES,                    Died of Wounds.
        MACK, FRANK,                          Died in Service.
        MALONE, JAMES,                        Killed in Battle.
        MATTHEWS, DANIEL,                         ”      ”
        MAYER, JACOB,                         Died in Service.
        MASCHMEYER, EDWARD,                   Died in Service.
        MASCHMEYER, WILLIAM,                     ”       ”
        MESSIER, CHARLES,                     Killed in Battle.
        McCHINE, HUGH, JR.,                   Died of Wounds.
        McKENZIE, PATRICK,                    Died in Service.
        McKINNEY, JAMES,                      Killed in Battle.
        McINRO, THOMAS,                       Died in Service.
        MILLARD, THERON,                         ”       ”
        MILNER, WILLIAM,                      Killed in Battle.
        MORRIS, THEODORE,                     Died in Service.
        MOREHOUSE, WM. A.,                    Killed in Battle.
        MOSES, HENRY,                         Died in Service.
        O’CONNER, THOMAS,                        ”       ”
        OSTMAN, WILLARD,                         ”       ”
        PALMER, DAVID C.,                        ”       ”
        PECK, ROBERT C.,                      Wd. and died in Prison.
        PECK, JOHN W.,                        Died in Service.
        PEET, GEORGE B.,                      Died of Wounds.
        PERKINS, WILLIAM W.,                    ”  in Service.
        PHALEN, TIMOTHY A.,                     ”       ”
        PHILLIPS, ALONZO,                       ”  of Wounds.
        PHILLIPS, THEODORE,                     ”       ”
        PICKER, PATSEY,                       Died in Service.
        PUFFER, REUBEN S.,                    Killed in Battle.
        QUINN, JAMES,                         Died in Service.
        RAY, JAMES,                           Died of Wounds.
        RECOIR, JOHN H.,                      Died in Service.
        RECOIR, PHILLIP H.,                     ”       ”
        REED, WILLIAM,                        Died of Wounds.
        REEVES, WILLIAM M.,                   Killed in Battle.
        RILEY, CHARLES,                       Died in Service.
        RINGE, HENRY,                         Killed in Battle.
        ROBBINS, RALPH G.,                    Died in Service.
        ROBINSON, THEODORE T.,                  ”       ”
        ROGERS, EDMOND,                       Killed in Battle.
        ROOT, CALEB B.,                       Died in Service.
        ROYCE, CHARLES B.,                    Killed in Battle.
        SAGE, ELISHA,                         Died in Service.
        SCHMIDT, GUSTAVE,                     Died of Wounds.
        SCHOFIELD, THEODORE C.,               Died in Service.
        SCHOFIELD, WILLIAM,                     ”       ”
        SHULTZ, WILLIAM,                        ”       ”
        SEELEY, JOHN,                           ”       ”
        SHAW, JOSEPH L.,                      Killed in Battle.
        SHEPARD, DAVID G.,                    Died in Service.
        SMITH, OSCAR L.,                      Killed in Battle.
        SOBY, WILLIAM,                        Died of Wounds.
        SPENCER, EDWIN W.,                      ”       ”
        STACEY, ALBERT,                         ”       ”
        STARK, MICHAEL,                       Killed in Battle.
        STEVENS, S. S., 2d LIEUT.,              ”       ”
        STINELL, HERMAN,                        ”       ”
        SOUTHERGILL, GEORGE,                    ”       ”
        TAYLOR, E. B.,                        Died of Wounds.
        TAYLOR, THOMAS,                         ”       ”
        TALMADGE, FRED. A.,                   Died in Service.
        TOUSLEY, ARTEMUS,                     Died of Wounds.
        TRACY, THOMAS E.,                     Died in Service.
        TSCHUMME, CONRAD, JR.,                  ”       ”
        VAILLE, JOHN R.,                        ”       ”
        VOLKMAN, FERDINAND,                     ”       ”
        WARNER, GEORGE,                       Died of Wounds.
        WATERMIRE, FREDERICK,                 Died in Service.
        WATERS, HENRY W.,                       ”       ”
        WHITE, FRANK,                         Killed in Battle.
        WEEKS, ALPHONSO,                      Died in Service.
        WILLIAMS, JOHN,                         ”       ”
        WILCOX, JAY P., CAPTAIN,              Killed in Battle.
        WIND, GEORGE A.,                      Died in Service.
        WOODFORD, EDGAR M.,                     ”       ”
        WOODS, JOHN,                          Killed in Battle.
        WOOSTER, JOSEPH A., Jr.,              Died of Wounds.


NOTE.--No account is rendered of those returned as “Missing,” and
“Supposed Killed.”




                      CASUALTIES OF THE SIXTH.


        Killed in Action,                                   43
        Died of Wounds,                                     46
        Died of Disease,                                   119
        Discharged prior to muster out of Regiment,        666
        Missing at date of muster out of Regiment,          23




                        Transcriber’s Notes:

Unprinted periods were added, where appropriate. Double quote marks
replaced single quote marks, where appropriate. Occasionally, letters
were inverted in the printed copy. Use of commas in the tables at the
end of the book was made consistent. Words and phrases in italics are
surrounded by underscores, _like this_.

Dialect, obsolete, and other non-standard spellings were retained.
Occasionally, names are not in alphabetical order in the tables at the
end of the book. ‘Dawfuskie’ is sometimes printed without the final
‘e.’ In the table of Recruits for the Sixth Regiment, Unassigned, the
entry for Glynn shows a discharge date before the muster date. In the
list of principal engagements, the last entry for Fort Fisher should
be 1865, not 1864, as printed. The word ‘on’ was possibly omitted from
the phrase, ‘... dead negroes top of it.’ It was not clear whether
‘forees’ should be ‘forces’ or ‘forays’ in the phrase, ‘... our forees
neared those of the enemy.’

In the Remarks column of the tables, the original text was on one line
for each entry and ditto marks were used for part or all of the text for
numerous succeeding entries. To make the tables fit a standard
electronic screen, the text in the Remarks column was converted to
multiple lines for each entry. For clarity, the ditto marks were
eliminated and the duplicate text was inserted.

Other changes:

  ‘Vodges’ to ‘Vogdes’ ... Gen. Vogdes was informed ...
  ‘voluntered’ to ‘volunteered’ ... few volunteered for the service ...
  ‘ohn’ to ‘John’ entry for Clark, John in the table of Privates,
    Infantry Company D.
  ‘Wilington’ to ‘Willington’ entry for Trask, George in the table of
    recruits for Infantry Company K.
  duplicate ‘who’ removed from ... of the Sixth who had re-enlisted ...