_It's possible that you won't agree with us that Pat Pending's
    latest adventure is a delightful story--possible IF you haven't been
    used to laughing in recent years. Blue Book printed more than a
    dozen of these stories by Nelson Bond about the "greatest
    inventulator of all time"._


 lighter
    than
     you
   think

 _by NELSON BOND_


 Sandy's eyes needed only jet propulsion to become flying
 saucers. Wasn't Pat wonderful? she beamed, at everyone.


Some joker in the dear, dead days now virtually beyond recall won
two-bit immortality by declaring that, "What this country needs is a
good five-cent cigar."

Which is, of course, Victorian malarkey. What this country _really_
needs is a good five-cent nickel. Or perhaps a good cigar-shaped
spaceship. There's a fortune waiting somewhere out in space for the man
who can go out there and claim it. A fortune! And if you think I'm just
talking through my hat, lend an ear ...

Joyce started the whole thing. Or maybe I did when for the umpteenth
time I suggested she should marry me. She smiled in a way that showed
she didn't disapprove of my persistence, but loosed a salvo of
devastating negatives.

"No deal," she crisped decisively. "Know why? No dough!"

"But, sugar," I pleaded, "two can live as cheaply as one--"

"This is true," replied Joyce, "only of guppies. Understand, Don, I
don't mind changing my name from Carter to Mallory. In fact, I'd rather
like to. But I have no desire whatever to be known to the neighbors as
'that poor little Mrs. Mallory in last year's coat.'

"I'll marry you," she continued firmly, "when, as and if you get a
promotion."

Her answer was by no stretch of the imagination a reason for loud
cheers, handsprings and cartwheels. Because I'm a Federal employee. The
United States Patent Office is my beat. There's one nice thing to be
said about working for the bewhiskered old gentleman in the
star-spangled stovepipe and striped britches: it's permanent. Once you
get your name inscribed on the list of Civil Service employees it takes
an act of Congress to blast it off again. And of course I don't have to
remind you how long it takes _that_ body of vote-happy windbags to act.
Terrapins in treacle are greased lightning by comparison.

But advancement is painfully slow in a department where discharges are
unheard of and resignations rare. When I started clerking for this
madhouse I was assistant to the assistant Chief Clerk's assistant. Now,
ten years later, by dint of mighty effort and a cultivated facility for
avoiding Senatorial investigations, I've succeeded in losing only one of
those redundant adjectives.

Being my secretary, Joyce certainly realized this. But women have a
remarkable ability to separate business and pleasure. So:

"A promotion," she insisted. "Or at least a good, substantial raise."

"In case you don't know it," I told her gloomily, "you are displaying a
lamentably vulgar interest in one of life's lesser values. Happiness,
not money, should be man's chief goal."

"What good is happiness," demanded Joyce, "if you can't buy money with
it?"

"Why hoard lucre?" I sniffed. "You can't take it with you."

"In that case," said Joyce flatly, "I'm not going. There's no use
arguing, Don. I've made up my mind--"

At this moment our dreary little impasse was ended by a sudden tumult
outside my office. There was a squealing shriek, the shuffle of
footsteps, the pounding of fists upon my door. And over all the shrill
tones of an old, familiar voice high-pitched in triumph.

"Let me in! I've got to see him instantaceously. This time I've got it;
I've absolutely _got_ it!"

Joyce and I gasped, then broke simultaneously for the door as it flew
open to reveal a tableau resembling the Laocoon group _sans_ snake and
party of the third part. Back to the door and struggling valiantly to
defend it stood the receptionist, Miss Thomas. Held briefly but volubly
at bay was a red-thatched, buck-toothed individual--and I _do_ mean
individual!--with a face like the map of Eire, who stopped wrestling as
he saw us, and grinned delightedly.

"Hello, Mr. Mallory," he said. "Hi, Miss Joyce."

"Pat!" we both cried at once. "Pat Pending!"



Miss Thomas, a relative newcomer to our bailiwick, seemed baffled by the
warmth of our greeting. She entered the office with our visitor, and as
Joyce and I pumphandled him enthusiastically she asked, "You--you _know_
this gentleman, Mr. Mallory?"

"I should say we do!" I chortled. "Pat, you old naughty word! Where on
earth have you been hiding lately?"

"Surely you've heard of the great Patrick Pending, Miss Thomas?" asked
Joyce.

"Pending?" faltered Miss Thomas. "I seem to have heard the name. Or seen
it somewhere--"

Pat beamed upon her companionably. Stepping to my desk, he up-ended the
typewriter and pointed to a legend in tiny letters stamped into the
frame: _Reg. U.S. Pat. Off.--Pat. Pending._

"Here, perhaps?" he suggested. "I invented this. And the airplane, and
the automobile, and--oh, ever so many things. You'll find my name
inscribed on every one.

"I," he announced modestly, "am Pat Pending--the greatest inventulator
of all time."

Miss Thomas stared at me goggle-eyed.

"_Is_ he?" she demanded. "I mean--_did_ he?"

I nodded solemnly.

"Not only those, but a host of other marvels. The bacular clock, the
transmatter, the predictograph--"

Miss Thomas turned on Pat a gaze of fawning admiration. "How wonderful!"
she breathed.

"Oh, nothing, really," said Pat, wriggling.

"But it is! Most of the things brought here are so absurd. Automatic
hat-tippers, self-defrosting galoshes, punching bags that defend
themselves--" Disdainfully she indicated the display collection of
screwball items we call our Chamber of Horrors. "It's simply marvelous
to meet a man who has invented things really worth while."

Honestly, the look in her eyes was sickening. But was Pat nauseated? Not
he! The big goon was lapping it up like a famished feline. His simpering
smirk stretched from ear to there as he murmured, "Now, Miss Thomas--"

"Sandra, Mr. Pending," she sighed softly. "To you just plain ... Sandy.
Please?"

"Well, Sandy--" Pat gulped.

I said disgustedly, "Look, you two--break it up! Love at first sight is
wonderful in books, but in a Federal office I'm pretty sure it's
unconstitutional, and it _may_ be subversive. Would you mind coming down
to earth? Pat, you barged in here squalling about some new invention. Is
that correct?"

With an effort Pat wrenched his gaze from his new-found admirer and
nodded soberly.

"That's right, Mr. Mallory. And a great one, too. One that will
revolutionate the world. Will you give me an applicaceous form, please?
I want to file it immediately."

"Not so fast, Pat. You know the routine. What's the nature of this
remarkable discovery?"

"You may write it down," said Pat grandiloquently, "as Pat Pending's
lightening rod."

I glanced at Joyce, and she at me, then both of us at Pending.

"But, Pat," I exclaimed, "that's ridiculous! Ben Franklin invented the
lightning rod two hundred years ago."

"I said _lightening_," retorted my redheaded friend, "not _lightning_.
My invention doesn't conduct electricity _to_ the ground, but _from_
it." He brandished a slim baton which until then I had assumed to be an
ordinary walking-stick. "With this," he claimed, "I can make things
weigh as much or as little as I please!"

The eyes of Sandy Thomas needed only jet propulsion to become flying
saucers.

"Isn't he wonderful, Mr. Mallory?" she gasped.

But her enthusiasm wasn't contagious. I glowered at Pending coldly.

"Oh, come now, Pat!" I scoffed. "You can't really believe that yourself.
After all, there _are_ such things as basic principles. Weight is not a
variable factor. And so far as I know, Congress hasn't repealed the Law
of Gravity."

Pat sighed regretfully.

"You're always so hard to convince, Mr. Mallory," he complained.
"But--oh, well! Take this."

He handed me the baton. I stared at it curiously. It looked rather like
a British swagger stick: slim, dainty, well balanced. But the ornamental
gadget at its top was not commonplace. It seemed to be a knob or a dial
of some kind, divided into segments scored with vernier markings. I
gazed at Pending askance.

"Well, Pat? What now?"

"How much do you weigh, Mr. Mallory?"

"One sixty-five," I answered.

"You're sure of that?"

"I'm not. But my bathroom scales appeared to be. This morning. Why?"

"Do you think Miss Joyce could lift you?"

I said thoughtfully, "Well, that's an idea. But I doubt it. She won't
even let me try to support _her_."

"I'm serious, Mr. Mallory. Do you think she could lift you with one
hand?"

"Don't be silly! Of course not. Nor could you."

"There's where you're wrong," said Pending firmly. "She can--and will."

He reached forward suddenly and twisted the metal cap on the stick in my
hands. As he did so, I loosed a cry of alarm and almost dropped the
baton. For instantaneously I experienced a startling, flighty giddiness,
a sudden loss of weight that made me feel as if my soles were treading
on sponge rubber, my shoulders sprouting wings.

"Hold on to it!" cried Pat. Then to Joyce, "Lift him, Miss Joyce."

Joyce faltered, "How? Like th-this?" and touched a finger to my midriff.
Immediately my feet left the floor. I started flailing futilely to
trample six inches of ozone back to the solid floorboards. To no avail.
With no effort whatever Joyce raised me high above her head until my
dazed dome was shedding dandruff on the ceiling!

"Well, Mr. Mallory," said Pat, "do you believe me now?"

"Get me down out of here!" I howled. "You _know_ I can't stand high
places!"

"You now weigh less than ten pounds--"

"Never mind the statistics. I feel like a circus balloon. How do I get
down again?"

"Turn the knob on the cane," advised Pat, "to your normal weight.
Careful, now! _Not so fast!_"

His warning came too late. I hit the deck with a resounding thud, and
the cane came clattering after. Pat retrieved it hurriedly, inspected it
to make sure it was not damaged. I glared at him as I picked myself off
the floor.

"You might show some interest in _me_," I grumbled. "I doubt if that
stick will need a liniment rubdown tonight. Okay, Pat. You're right and
I'm wrong, as you usually are. That modern variation of a witch's
broomstick _does_ operate. Only--how?"

"That dial at the top governs weight," explained Pat. "When you turn
it--"

"Skip that. I know how it is operated. I want to know what makes it
work?"

"Well," explained Pat, "I'm not certain I can make it clear, but it's
all tied in with the elemental scientific problems of mass, weight,
gravity and electric energy. What _is_ electricity, for example--"

"I used to know," I frowned. "But I forget."

Joyce shook her head sorrowfully.

"Friends," she intoned, "let us all bow our heads. This is a moment of
great tragedy. The only man in the world who ever knew what electricity
is--and he has forgotten!"

"That's the whole point," agreed Pending. "No one knows what
electricity really is. All we know is how to use it. Einstein has
demonstrated that the force of gravity and electrical energy are
kindred; perhaps different aspects of a common phenomenon. That was my
starting point."

"So this rod, which enables you to defy the law of gravity, is
electrical?"

"Electricaceous," corrected Pat. "You see, I have transmogrified the
polarifity of certain ingredular cellulations. A series of
disentrigulated helicosities, activated by hypermagnetation, set up a
disruptular wave motion which results in--counter-gravity!"

And there you are! Ninety-nine percent of the time Pat Pending talks
like a normal human being. But ask him to explain the mechanism of one
of his inventions and linguistic hell breaks loose. He begins jabbering
like a schizophrenic parrot reading a Sanskrit dictionary backward! I
sighed and surrendered all hope of ever actually learning _how_ his
great new discovery worked. I turned my thoughts to more important
matters.

"Okay, Pat. We'll dismiss the details as trivial and get down to brass
tacks. What is your invention used for?"

"Eh?" said the redhead.

"It's not enough that an idea is practicable," I pointed out. "It must
also be practical to be of any value in this frenzied modern era. What
good is your invention?"

"What good," demanded Joyce, "is a newborn baby?"

"Don't change the subject," I suggested. "Or come to think of it, maybe
you should. At the diaper level, life is just one damp thing after
another. But how to turn Pat's brainchild into cold, hard cash--that's
the question before the board now.

"Individual flight _a la_ Superman? No dice. I can testify from personal
experience that once you get up there you're completely out of control.
And I can't see any sense in humans trying to fly with jet flames
scorching their base of operations.

"Elevators? Derricks? Building cranes? Possible. But lifting a couple
hundred pounds is one thing. Lifting a few tons is a horse of a
different color.

"No, Pat," I continued, "I don't see just how--"

Sandy Thomas squeaked suddenly and grasped my arm.

"That's it, Mr. Mallory!" she cried. "That's it!"

"Huh? What's what?"

"You wanted to know how Pat could make money from his invention. You've
just answered your own question."

"I have?"

"Horses! Horse racing, to be exact. You've heard of handicaps, haven't
you?"

"I'm overwhelmed with them," I nodded wearily. "A secretary who repulses
my honorable advances, a receptionist who squeals in my ear--"

"Listen, Mr. Mallory, what's the last thing horses do before they go to
the post?"

"Check the tote board," I said promptly, "to find out if I've got any
money on them. Horses hate me. They've formed an equine conspiracy to
prove to me the ancient adage that a fool and his money are soon
parted."

"Wait a minute!" chimed in Joyce thoughtfully. "I know what Sandy means.
They weigh in. Is that right?"

"Exactly! The more weight a horse is bearing, the slower it runs. That's
the purpose of handicapping. But if a horse that was supposed to be
carrying more than a hundred pounds was actually only carrying
_ten_--Well, you see?"

Sandy paused, breathless. I stared at her with a gathering respect.

"Never underestimate the power of a woman," I said, "when it comes to
devising new and ingenious methods of perpetrating petty larceny.
There's only one small fly in the ointment, so far as I can see. How do
we convince some racehorse owner he should become a party to this gentle
felony?"

"Oh, you don't have to," smiled Sandy cheerfully. "I'm already
convinced."

"You? You own a horse?"

"Yes. Haven't you ever heard of Tapwater?"

"Oh, sure! That drip's running all the time!"

Joyce tossed me a reproving glance.

"This is a matter of gravity, Donald," she stated, "and you keep
treating it with levity. Sandy, do you _really_ own Tapwater? He's the
colt who won the Monmouth Futurity, isn't he?"

"That's right. And four other starts this season. That's been our big
trouble. He shows such promise that the judges have placed him under a
terrific weight handicap. To run in next week's Gold Stakes, for
instance, he would have to carry 124 pounds. I was hesitant to enter him
because of that. But with Pat's new invention--" She turned to Pat, eyes
glowing--"he could enter and win!"

Pat said uncertainly, "I don't know. I don't like gambling. And it
doesn't seem quite ethical, somehow--"

I asked Sandy, "Suppose he ran carrying 124. What would be the probable
odds?"

"High," she replied, "_Very_ high. Perhaps as high as forty to one."

"In that case," I decided, "it's not only ethical, it's a moral
obligation. If you're opposed to gambling, Pat, what better way can you
think of to put the parimutuels out of business?"

"And besides," Sandy pointed out, "this would be a wonderful opportunity
to display your new discovery before an audience of thousands. Well,
Pat? What do you say?"

Pat hesitated, caught a glimpse of Sandy's pleading eyes, and was lost.

"Very well," he said. "We'll do it. Mr. Mallory, enter Tapwater in the
Gold Stakes. We'll put on the most spectaceous exhibition in the history
of gambilizing!"



Thus it was that approximately one week later our piratical little crew
was assembled once again, this time in the paddock at Laurel. In case
you're an inland aborigine, let me explain that Laurel race track (from
the township of the same name) is where horse fanciers from the District
of Columbia go to abandon their Capitol and capital on weekends.

We were briefing our jockey--a scrawny youth with a pair of oversized
ears--on the use of Pat's lightening rod. Being short on gray matter as
well as on stature, he wasn't getting it at all.

"You mean," he said for the third or thirty-third time, "you don't want
I should _hit_ the nag with this bat?"

"Heavens, no!" gasped Pat, blanching. "It's much too delicate for that."

"Don't fool yourself, mister. Horses can stand a lot of leather."

"Not the horse, stupid," I said. "The bat. This is the only riding crop
of its kind in the world. We don't want it damaged. All you have to do
is _carry_ it. We'll do the rest."

"How about setting the dial, Don?" asked Joyce.

"Pat will do that just before the horses move onto the track. Now let's
get going. It's weigh-in time."

We moved to the scales with our rider. He stepped aboard the platform,
complete with silks and saddle, and the spinner leaped to a staggering
102, whereupon the officials started gravely handing him little leather
sacks.

"What's this?" I whispered to Sandy. "Prizes for malnutrition? He must
have won all the blackjacks east of the Mississippi."

"The handicap," she whispered back. "Lead weights at one pound each."

"If he starts to lose," I ruminated, "they'd make wonderful
ammunition--"

"One hundred and twenty-four," announced the chief weigher-inner. "Next
entry!"

We returned to Tapwater. The jockey fastened the weights to his gear,
saddled up and mounted. From the track came the traditional bugle call.
Sandy nodded to Pat.

"All right, Pat. Now!"

Pending twisted the knob on his lightening rod and handed the stick to
the jockey. The little horseman gasped, rose three inches in his
stirrups, and almost let go of the baton.

"H-hey!" he exclaimed. "I feel funny. I feel--"

"Never mind that," I told him. "Just you hold on to that rod until the
race is over. And when you come back, give it to Pat immediately.
Understand?"

"Yes. But I feel so--so lightheaded--"

"That's because you're featherbrained," I advised him. "Now, get going.
Giddyap, Dobbin!"

I patted Tapwater's flank, and so help me Newton, I think that one
gentle tap pushed the colt half way to the starting gate! He pattered
across the turf with a curious bouncing gait as if he were running on
tiptoe. We hastened to our seats in the grandstand.

"Did you get all the bets down?" asked Joyce.

I nodded and displayed a deck of ducats. "It may not have occurred to
you, my sweet," I announced gleefully, "but these pasteboards are
transferrable on demand to rice and old shoes, the sweet strains of _Oh,
Promise Me!_ and the scent of orange blossoms. You insisted I should
have a nest egg before you would murmur, 'I do'? Well, after this race
these tickets will be worth--" I cast a swift last glance at the tote
board's closing odds, quoting Tapwater at 35 to 1--"approximately
seventy thousand dollars!"

"Donald!" gasped Joyce. "You didn't bet all your savings?"

"Every cent," I told her cheerfully. "Why not?"

"But if something should go wrong! If Tapwater should lose!"

"He won't. See what I mean?"

For even as we were talking, the bell jangled, the crowd roared, and the
horses were off. Eight entries surged from the starting gate. And
already one full length out in front pranced the weight-free, lightfoot
Tapwater!

At the quarter post our colt had stretched his lead to three lengths,
and I shouted in Pending's ear, "How much does that jockey weigh,
anyway?"

"About six pounds," said Pat. "I turned the knob to cancel one
eighteen."

At the half, all the other horses could glimpse of Tapwater was heels.
At the three-quarter post he was so far ahead that the jockey must have
been lonely. As he rounded into the stretch I caught a binocular view of
his face, and he looked dazed and a little frightened. He wasn't
actually _riding_ Tapwater. The colt was simply skimming home, and he
was holding on for dear life to make sure he didn't blow off the horse's
back. The result was a foregone conclusion, of course. Tapwater crossed
the finish line nine lengths ahead, setting a new track record.

The crowd went wild. Over the hubbub I clutched Pat's arm and bawled,
"I'll go collect our winnings. Hurry down to the track and swap that
lightening rod for the real bat we brought along. He'll have to weigh
out again, you know. Scoot!"

The others vanished paddockward as I went for the big payoff. It was
dreary at the totalizer windows. I was one of a scant handful who had
bet on Tapwater, so it took no time at all to scoop into the valise I
had brought along the seventy thousand bucks in crisp, green lettuce
which an awed teller passed across the counter. Then I hurried back to
join the others in the winner's circle, where bedlam was not only
reigning but pouring. Flashbulbs were popping all over the place,
cameramen were screaming for just one more of the jockey, the owner, the
fabulous Tapwater. The officials were vainly striving to quiet the
tumult so they could award the prize. I found Pending worming his way
out of the heart of the crowd.

"Did you get it?" I demanded.

He nodded, thrust the knobbed baton into my hand.

"You substituted the normal one?"

Again he nodded. Hastily I thrust the lightening rod out of sight into
my valise, and we elbowed forward to share the triumphant moment. It was
a great experience. I felt giddy with joy; I was walking on little pink
clouds of happiness. Security was mine at last. And Joyce, as well.

"Ladies and gentlemen!" cried the chief official. "Your attention,
please! Today we have witnessed a truly spectacular feat: the setting of
a new track record by a champion racing under a tremendous handicap. I
give you a magnificent racehorse--_Tapwater_!"

"That's right, folks!" I bawled, carried away by the excitement. "Give
this little horse a great big hand!"

Setting the example, I laid down the bag, started clapping vigorously.
From a distance I heard Pat Pending's agonized scream.

"Mr. Mallory--the suitcase! Grab it!"

I glanced down, belatedly aware of the danger of theft. But too late.
The bag had disappeared.

"Hey!" I yelled. "Who swiped my bag? Police!"

"Up there, Mr. Mallory!" bawled Pat. "Jump!"

I glanced skyward. Three feet above my head and rising swiftly was the
valise in which I had cached not only our winnings but Pat's
gravity-defying rod! I leaped--but in vain. I was _still_ making feeble,
futile efforts to make like the moon-hurdling nursery rhyme cow when
quite a while later two strong young men in white jackets came and
jabbed me with a sedative ...



Later, when time and barbiturates had dulled the biting edge of my
despair, we assembled once again in my office and I made my apologies to
my friends.

"It was all my fault," I acknowledged. "I should have realized Pat
hadn't readjusted the rod when I placed it in my bag. It felt lighter.
But I was so excited--"

"It was _my_ fault," mourned Pat, "for not changing it immediately. But
I was afraid someone might see me."

"Perhaps if we hired an airplane--?" I suggested.

Pat shook his head.

"No, Mr. Mallory. The rod was set to cancel 118 pounds. The bag weighed
less than twenty. It will go miles beyond the reach of any airplane
before it settles into an orbit around earth."

"Well, there goes my dreamed-of fortune," I said sadly. "Accompanied by
the fading strains of an unplayed wedding march. I'm sorry, Joyce."

"Isn't there one thing you folks are overlooking?" asked Sandy Thomas.
"My goodness, you'd think we had lost our last cent just because that
little old bag flew away!"

"For your information," I told her, "that is precisely what happened to
me. My entire bank account vanished into the wild blue yonder. And some
of Pat's money, too."

"But have you forgotten," she insisted, "that we _won_ the race? Of
course the track officials were a wee bit suspicious when your suitcase
took off. But they couldn't prove anything. So they paid me the Gold
Stakes prize. If we split it four ways, we all make a nice little
profit.

"Or," she added, "if you and Joyce want to make yours a double share, we
could split it three ways.

"Or," she continued hopefully, "if Pat wants to, we could make _two_
double shares, and split it fifty-fifty?"

From the look in Pat's eyes I knew he was stunned by this possibility.
And from the look in hers, I felt she was going to make every effort to
take advantage of his bewilderment.

So, as I said before, what this country needs is a good cigar-shaped
spaceship. There's a fortune waiting somewhere out in space for the man
who can go out there and claim it. Seventy thousand bucks in cold, hard
cash.

Indubitatiously!