TO ELBRIDGE GERRY.

[J. T. Austin, Life of Elbridge Gerry, vol. i., pp. 125-127; a
text is in Force, American Archives, 4th ser., vol. iv., p. 541;
and a draft is in the Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADELPHIA, Jan. 2, 1776.

MY DEAR SIR,

Your very acceptable letter of the 13th of December is now before
me. Our opinions of the necessity of keeping the military power
under the direction and control of the legislative, I always
thought were alike. It was far from my intention in my letter to
you on the subject, to attempt the correcting any imagined errour
in your judgment, but rather shortly to express my own
apprehensions at this time, when it is become necessary to
tolerate that power, which is always formidable, and has so often
proved fatal to the liberties of mankind.

It gives me great satisfaction to be informed, that the members
of the house of representatives are possessed of so warm a spirit
of patriotism, as that "an enemy to America may as well attempt
to scale the regions of bliss, as to insinuate himself into their
favour." Whatever kind of men may be denominated enemies to their
country, certainly he is a very injudicious friend to it, who
gives his suffrage for any man to fill a public office, merely
because he is rich; and yet you tell me there are recent
instances of this in our government. I confess it mortifies me
greatly. The giving such a preference to riches is both
dishonourable and dangerous to a government. It is indeed equally
dangerous to promote a man to a place of public trust only
because he wants bread, but I think it is not so dishonourable;
for men may be influenced to the latter from the feelings of
humanity, but the other argues a base, degenerate, servile temper
of mind. I hope our country will never see the time, when either
riches or the want of them will be the leading considerations in
the choice of public officers. Whenever riches shall be deemed a
necessary qualification, ambition as well as avarice will prompt
men most earnestly to thirst for them, and it will be commonly
said, as in ancient times of degeneracy,

Quaerenda pecunia primum est,
Virtus post nummos.

"Get money, money still,
And then let virtue follow if she will."

I am greatly honoured, if my late letter has been acceptable to
the house. I hope the militia bill, to which that letter
referred, is completed to the satisfaction of both houses of the
assembly.

The account you give me of the success our people meet with in
the manufacture of salt-petre is highly pleasing to me. I
procured of a gentleman in the colony of New-York, the plan of a
powder mill, which I lately sent to Mr. Revere. I hope it may be
of some use.

I have time at present only to request you to write to me by the
post, and to assure that I am

Your affectionate friend,



RESOLVES OF THE CONTINENTAL CONGRESS.
JANUARY 5, 1776.1

[W. V. Wells, Life of Samuel Adams, vol. ii., pp. 342, 343; a
text is in Journals of the Continental Congress (Library of
Congress edition), vol. iv., pp. 32, 33.]

The committee appointed to consider the letter of General
Washington, dated the 18th of December, and the enclosed papers,
brought in a report upon that part which relates to James Lovell,
who has long been, and still is, detained a close prisoner in
Boston, by order of General Howe, which, being taken into
consideration, was agreed That it appears to your committee that
the said Mr. Lovell hath for years past been an able advocate for
the liberties of America and mankind; that by his letter to
General Washington, which is a part of said enclosed papers, he
exhibits so striking an instance of disinterested patriotism, as
strongly recommends him to the particular notice of this
continent.

Whereupon, RESOLVED, That Mr. James Lovell, an inhabitant of
Boston, now held a close prisoner there by order of General Howe,
has discovered under the severest trials the warmest attachment
to public liberty, and an inflexible fidelity to his country;
that by his late letter to General Washington he has given the
strongest evidence of disinterested public affection, in refusing
to listen to terms offered for his relief, till he could be
informed by his countrymen that they were compatible with their
safety and honor.

RESOLVED, That it is deeply to be regretted that a British
general can be found degenerate enough, so ignominiously and
cruelly to treat a citizen who is so eminently virtuous.

RESOLVED, That it be an instruction to General Washington to make
an offer of Governor Skene in exchange for the said Mr. Lovell
and his family.

RESOLVED, That General Washington be desired to embrace the first
opportunity which may offer of giving some office to Mr. Lovell
equal to his abilities, and which the public service may require.

ORDERED, That a copy of the foregoing resolutions be transmitted
to the General as speedily as possible.

________________________________________________________________
1See below, page 254. Wells, at vol. ii., pp. 364-366, prints
certain resolutions of the Continental Congress of
January 2, 1776, attributing them to Adams.
_______________________________________________________________



TO JAMES WARREN.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library; Cf, R. Frothingham,
Rise of the Republic, p. 470.]

PHILADA Jany 7 1776

MY DEAR SIR--

I verily believe the Letters I write to you are three, to one I
receive from you--however I consider the Multiplicity of Affairs
you must attend to in your various Departments, and am willing to
make due Allowance. Your last is dated the 19th of December. It
contains a List of very important Matters lying before the
General Assembly. I am much pleased to find that there is an End
to the Contest between the two Houses concerning the
Establishment of the Militia--and that you are in hopes of making
an effectual Law for that Purpose. It is certainly of the last
Consequence to a free Country that the Militia, which is its
natural Strength, should be kept upon the most advantageous
Footing. A standing Army, however necessary it may be at some
times, is always dangerous to the Liberties of the People.
Soldiers are apt to consider themselves as a Body distinct from
the rest of the Citizens. They have their Arms always in their
hands. Their Rules and their Discipline is severe. They soon
become attachd to their officers and disposd to yield implicit
Obedience to their Commands. Such a Power should be watchd with a
jealous Eye. I have a good Opinion of the principal officers of
our Army. I esteem them as Patriots as well as Soldiers. But if
this War continues, as it may for years yet to come, we know not
who may succeed them. Men who have been long subject to military
Laws and inured to military Customs and Habits, may lose the
Spirit and Feeling of Citizens. And even Citizens, having been
used to admire the Heroism which the Commanders of their own Army
have displayd, and to look up to them as their Saviors may be
prevaild upon to surrender to them those Rights for the
protection of which against Invaders they had employd and paid
them. We have seen too much of this Disposition among some of
our Countrymen. The Militia is composd of free Citizens. There is
therefore no Danger of their making use of their Power to the
destruction of their own Rights, or suffering others to invade
them. I earnestly wish that young Gentlemen of a military Genius
(& many such I am satisfied there are in our Colony) might be
instructed in the Art of War, and at the same time taught the
Principles of a free Government, and deeply impressd with a Sense
of the indispensible Obligation which every member is under to
the whole Society. These might be in time fit for officers in the
Militia, and being thorowly acquainted with the Duties of
Citizens as well as soldiers, might Command of our Army at such
times as Necessity might require so dangerous a Body to exist.

I am glad that your Attention is turnd so much to the Importation
of Powder & that the manufacture of Salt-petre is in so
flourishing a way. I cannot think you are restraind from
exporting fish to Spain, by the resolve of Congress. I will make
myself more certain by recurring to our Records when the
Secretary returns tomorrow, he being at this time (6 o'clock P.
M.) at his House three miles from Town; and I will inform you by
a Postscript to this Letter, or by another Letter p Post. I have
the Pleasure to acquaint you that five Tons of Powder CERTAINLY
arrivd at Egg harbour the Night before last besides two Tons in
this River--a part of it is consignd to the Congress--the rest is
private property, partly belonging to Mr Thos Boylston and partly
to a Gentleman in this City. Congress has orderd the whole to be
purchasd for publick Use. We are also informd that 6 Tons more
arrivd a few days ago in New York which I believe to be true. But
better still a Vessel is certainly arrivd in this River with
between 50 & 6o Tons of Salt petre. This I suppose will give you
more Satisfaction for the present than telling you Congress News
as you request.

You ask me "When you are to hear of our Confederation?" I answer,
when some Gentlemen (to use an Expression of a Tory) shall "feel
more bold." You know it was formerly a Complaint in our Colony,
that there was a timid kind of Men who perpetually hinderd the
progress of those who would fain run in the path of Virtue and
Glory. I find wherever I am that Mankind are alike variously
classd. I can discern the Magnanimity of the Lyon the Generosity
of the Horse the Fearfulness of the Deer and the CUNNING OF THE
FOX--I had almost overlookd the Fidelity of the Dog. But I
forbear to indulge my rambling Pen in this Way lest I should be
thought chargeable with a Design to degrade the Dignity of our
nature by comparing Men with Beasts. Let me just observe that I
have mentiond only the more excellent Properties that are to [be]
found among Quadrupeds. Had I suggested an Idea of the Vanity of
the Ape the Tameness of the Ox or the stupid Servility of the Ass
I might have been lyable to Censure.

Are you sollicitous to hear of our Confederation? I will tell
you. It is not dead but sleepeth. A Gentleman of this City told
me the other day, that he could not believe the People without
doors would follow the Congress PASSIBUS AEQUIS if such Measures
as SOME called spirited were pursued. It put me in mind of a
Fable of the high mettled horse and the dull horse. My excellenct
Colleague Mr J. A. can repeat this fable to you; and if the
Improvement had been made of it which our very valueable Friend
Coll M----- proposd, you would have seen that Confederation
compleated long before this time. I do not despair of it--since
our Enemies themselves are hastening it. While I am writing an
Express has come in from Baltimore in Maryland with the
Deposition of Cap Horn of the Snow bird belonging to Providence.
The Deponent says that on Monday the first Instant, he being at
Hampton in Virginia heard a constant firing of Cannon--that he
was informd a Messenger had been sent to enquire where the firing
was who reported that the ships of War were cannonading the Town
of Norfolk--that about the Middle of the Afternoon they saw the
smoke ascending from Norfolk as they supposd--that he saild
[from] Hampton the Evening of the same day and the firing
continued till the following afternoon. This will prevail more
than a long train of Reasoning to accomplish a Confederation and
other Matters which I know your heart as well as mine is much set
upon.

I forgot to tell you that a Vessel is arrivd in Maryland having
four thousand yards of Sail Cloth--an Article which I hope will
be much in Demand in America.

Adieu my Friend,



TO JAMES WARREN.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADELPHIA January 10 1776

MY DEAR SIR/

I wrote to you the 7th Instant by Mr Anthony by the way of
Providence, and should not so soon have troubled you with another
Letter, but to inform you that upon looking over the journals of
Congress I find that the Recommendation of the 26th of October to
export Produce for a certain Purpose is confind to the foreign
West Indies--and the Resolution to stop all Trade till the first
of March is subsequent to it. This last Resolution prevents your
exporting merchantable Fish to Spain, for the purpose mentiond,
which I am satisfied was not intended, because I am very certain
the Congress means to encourage the Importation of those
necessary Articles under the Direction of proper Persons, from
every part of the World. I design to propose to my Colleagues to
joyn with me in a Motion, to extend the Recommendation so as to
admit of exporting fish to any Place besides the foreign West
Indies.

A few days ago, being one of a Committee to consider General
Washington's last Letter to Congress, I proposd to the Committee
and they readily consented to report the Inclosd Resolution1
which were unanimously agreed to in Congress. The Committee
reorted that a certain sum should be paid to Mr [Lovell] out of
the military Chest towards enabling him to remove himself & his
Family from Boston, but Precedent was objected to and the last
Resolve was substituted in its stead. The Gentlemen present
however contributed and put into my hands Eighty-two Dollars
for the Benefit of Mrs [Lovell], which I shall remit either in
Cash or a good Bill. I hope I shall soon be so happy as to hear
that he is releasd from Bondage. I feel very tenderly for the
rest of my fellow Citizens who are detaind in that worst of
Prisons. Methinks there is one Way speedily to release them all.

Adieu,

_________________________________________________________________
1See above, page 248.



TO JOHN PITTS.1

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADe Jany 21 1776

MY DEAR SIR

It is a long time since I had the pleasure of receiving a Letter
from you. I flatter myself that you still place me among your
Friends. I am not conscious of having done any thing to forfeit
your Regards for me and therefore I will attribute your Omission
not to a designd Neglect, but to a more probable Cause, the
constant Attention you are called upon to give to the publick
Affairs of our Colony. It is for this Reason that I make myself
easy, though one post arrives and one Express after another
without a Line from you; assuring myself that your Time is
employd to much better purpose than writing to or thinking of me.
I speak Truth when I tell you, that I shall be exceedingly
gratified in receiving your Favors, whenever your Leisure may
admit of your suspending your Attention to Matters of greater
Importance. I will add that your Letters will certainly be
profitable to me; for I shall gain that Intelligence and
Instruction from them which will enable me the better to serve
the Publick in the Station I am placed in here. Give me Leave to
tell you therefore, that I think it is a part of the Duty you owe
to our Country to write to me as often as you can.

You have seen the MOST GRACIOUS Speech--Most Gracious! How
strangely will the Tools of a Tyrant pervert the plain Meaning of
Words! It discovers, to be sure, the most BENEVOLENT & HUMANE
Feelings of its Author. I have heard that he is his own Minister
--that he follows the Dictates of his own Heart. If so, why
should we cast the odium of distressing Mankind upon his Minions
& Flatterers only. Guilt must lie at his Door. Divine Vengeance
will fall on his head; for all-gracious Heaven cannot be an
indifferent Spectator of the virtuous Struggles of this people.

In a former Letter I desired you to acquaint me of your Father's
health and the Circumstances of the Family. I have a very great
Regard for them and repeat the Request.

Adieu,

_________________________________________________________________
1Of Boston. In the preceding year he had been a member of the
second and third provincial congresses of
Massachusetts.



TO JAMES SULLIVAN.1

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADE Jany 12 1776

MY DEAR SIR

Your very acceptable Letter of the 3d Inst duly came to hand. I
thank you heartily for the favor and shall be much obligd to you
if you will write to me as often as your Leisure will admit of
it.

It gave me pain to be informd by you, that by an unlucky
Circumstance you were prevented from executing a plan, the
Success of which would have afforded you Laurels, and probably in
its immediate Effects turnd the present Crisis in favor of our
Country. We are indebted to you for your laudable Endeavor;
Another Tryal will, I hope, crown your utmost Wish.

I have seen the Speech which is falsly & shamefully called MOST
GRACIOUS. It breathes the most malevolent Spirit, wantonly
proposes Measures calculated to distress Mankind, and determines
my Opinion of the Author of it as a Man of a wicked Heart. What a
pity it is, that Men are become so degenerate and servile, as to
bestow Epithets which can be appropriated to the Supreme Being
alone, upon Speeches & Actions which will hereafter be read &
spoken of by every Man who shall profess to have a spark of
Virtue & Honor, with the utmost Contempt and Detestation.--What
have we to expect from Britain, but Chains & Slavery? I hope we
shall act the part which the great Law of Nature Points out. It
is high time that we should assume that Character, which I am
sorry to find the Capital of your Colony has publickly and
expressly disavowd. It is my most fervent prayer to Almighty God,
that he would direct and prosper the Councils of America, inspire
her Armies with true Courage, shield them in every Instance of
Danger and lead them on to Victory & Tryumph.

I am yr affectionate Friend,

_________________________________________________________________
1Of Biddeford; a member of each provincial congress of
Massachusetts.



TO JOHN ADAMS.

[MS., Adams Papers, Quincy; a modified text is in John Adams,
Works, vol. ix., pp. 371-373, and a draft is in the Lenox
Library.]

PHILADE Jany 15 1776.

MY DEAR SIR

Altho I have at present but little Leisure, I can not omit
writing you a few Lines by this Express.

I have seen certain Instructions which were given by the Capital
of the Colony of New Hampshire to its Delegates in their
provincial Convention,1 the Spirit of which I am not altogether
pleasd with. There is one part of them at least, which I think
discovers a Timidity which is unbecoming a People oppressd and
insulted as they are, and who at their own request have been
advisd & authorizd by Congress to set up and exercise Government
in such form as they should judge most conducive to their own
Happiness. It is easy to understand what they mean when they
speak of "perfecting a form of Govt STABLE and PERMANENT"-They
indeed explain themselves by saying that they "SHOULD PREFER THE
GOVT OF CONGRESS, (their provincial Convention) till quieter
times." The Reason they assign for it, I fear, will be considerd
as showing a Readiness to condescend to the Humours of their
Enemies, and their publickly expressly & totally disavowing
Independency either on the Nation or THE MAN who insolently &
perseveringly demands the Surrender of their Liberties with the
Bayonet pointed at their Breasts may be construed to argue a
Servility & Baseness of Soul for which Language doth not afford
an Epithet. It is by indiscrete Resolutions and Publications that
the Friends of America have too often given occasion to their
Enemies to injure her Cause. I hope however that the Town of
Portsmouth doth not in this Instance speak the Sense of that
Colony. I wish, if it be not too late, that you would write your
Sentiments of the Subject to our worthy Friend Mr L------ who I
suppose is now in Portsmouth.--If that Colony should take a wrong
Step, I fear it would wholly defeat a Design which, I confess I
have much at heart.

A motion was made in Congress the other Day to the following
purpose--that whereas we had been chargd with aiming at
Independency, a Comte should be appointed to explain to the
People at large the Principles & Grounds of our Opposition &c.
The Motion alarmd me. I thought Congress had already been
explicit enough, & was apprehensive that we might get our selves
upon dangerous Ground. Some of us prevaild so far as to have the
Matter postpond but could not prevent the assigning a Day to
consider it.--I may perhaps have been wrong in opposing this
Motion, and I ought the rather to suspect it, because the
Majority of your Colony as well as of the Congress were of a
different Opinion.

I had lately some free Conversation with an eminent Gentleman
whom you well know, and whom your Portia, in one of her Letters,
admired if I recollect right, for his EXPRESSIVE SILENCE, about a
Confederation--A Matter which our much valued Friend Coll W------
is very sollicitous to have compleated. We agreed that it must
soon be brought on, & that if all the Colonies could not come
into it, it had better be done by those of them that inclind to
it. I told him that I would endeavor to unite the New England
Colonies in confederating, if NONE of the rest would joyn in it.
He approvd of it, and said, if I succeeded, he would cast in his
Lot among us.

Adieu.

Jany 16th

As this Express did not sett off yesterday, according to my
Expectation, I have the Opportunity of acquainting you that
Congress has just receivd a Letter from General Washington
inclosing the Copy of an Application of our General Assembly to
him to order payment to four Companies stationd at Braintree
Weymouth & Hingham. The General says they were never regimented,
& he can not comply with the Request of the Assembly without the
Direction of Congress. A Come is appointed to consider the
Letter, of which I am one. I fear there will be a Difficulty, and
therefore I shall endeavor to prevent a Report on this part of
the Letter, unless I shall see a prospect of justice being done
to the Colony, till I can receive from you authentick Evidence of
those companies having been actually employed by the continental
officers, as I conceive they have been, in the Service of the
Continent. I wish you wd inform me whether the two Companies
stationd at Chelsea & Malden were paid out of the Continents
Chest. I suppose they were, and if so, I cannot see Reason for
any Hesitation about the paymt of these. I wish also to know how
many Men our Colony is at the Expence of maintaining for the
Defence of its Sea Coasts. Pray let me have some Intelligence
from you, of the Colony which we represent. You are sensible of
the Danger it has frequently been in of suffering greatly for
Want of regular information.

_________________________________________________________________
1Cf. New Hampshire Provincial Papers, vol. vii., pp. 701, 702.



ARTICLE SIGNED "CANDIDUS."

[W. V. Wells, Life of Samuel Adams,1 vol. ii., pp. 360-363.]

[February 3, 1776.]

When the little pamphlet, entitled " Common Sense," first made
its appearance in favor of that so often abjured idea of
independence upon Great Britain, I was informed that no less than
three gentlemen of respectable abilities were engaged to answer
it. As yet, I have seen nothing which directly pretends to
dispute a single position of the author. The oblique essay in
Humphrey's paper, and solemn "Testimony of the Quakers," however
intended, having offered nothing to the purpose, I shall take
leave to examine this important question with all candor and
attention, and submit the result to my much interested country.

Dependence of one man or state upon another is either absolute or
limited by some certain terms of agreement. The dependence of
these Colonies, which Great Britain calls constitutional, as
declared by acts of Parliament, is absolute. If the contrary of
this be the bugbear so many have been disclaiming against, I
could wish my countrymen would consider the consequence of so
stupid a profession. If a limited dependence is intended, I would
be much obliged to any one who will show me the Britannico-
American Magna Charta, wherein the terms of our limited
dependence are precisely stated. If no such thing can be found,
and absolute dependence be accounted inadmissible, the sound we
are squabbling about has certainly no determinate meaning. If we
say we mean that kind of dependence we acknowledged at and before
the year 1763, I answer, vague and uncertain laws, and more
especially constitutions, are the very instruments of slavery.
The Magna Charta of England was very explicit, considering the
time it was formed, and yet much blood was spilled in disputes
concerning its meaning.

Besides the danger of an indefinite dependence upon an
undetermined power, it might be worth while to consider what the
characters are on whom we are so ready to acknowledge ourselves
dependent. The votaries of this idol tell us, upon the good
people of our mother country, whom they represent as the most
just, humane, and affectionate friends we can have in the world.
Were this true, it were some encouragement; but who can pretend
ignorance, that these just and humane friends are as much under
the tyranny of men of a reverse character as we should be could
these miscreants gain their ends? I disclaim any more than a
mutual dependence on any man or number of men on earth; but an
indefinite dependence upon a combination of men who have, in the
face of the sun, broken through the most solemn covenants,
debauched the hereditary, and corrupted the elective guardians of
the people's rights; who have, in fact, established an absolute
tyranny in Great Britain and Ireland, and openly declared
themselves competent to bind the Colonies in all cases
whatsoever,--I say, indefinite dependence on such a combination
of usurping innovators is evidently as dangerous to liberty, as
fatal to civil and social happiness, as any one step that could
be proposed even by the destroyer of men. The utmost that the
honest party in Great Britain can do is to warn us to avoid this
dependence at all hazards. Does not even a Duke of Grafton
declare the ministerial measures illegal and dangerous? And shall
America, no way connected with this Administration, press our
submission to such measures and reconciliation to the authors of
them? Would not such pigeon-hearted wretches equally forward the
recall of the Stuart family and establishment of Popery
throughout Christendom, did they consider the party in favor of
those loyal measures the strongest? Shame on the men who can
court exemption from present trouble and expense at the price of
their posterity's liberty! The honest party in England cannot
wish for the reconciliation proposed. It is as unsafe to them as
to us, and they thoroughly apprehend it. What check have they now
upon the Crown, and what shadow of control can they pretend, when
the Crown can command fifteen or twenty millions a year which
they have nothing to say to? A proper proportion of our commerce
is all that can benefit any good man in Britain or Ireland; and
God forbid we should be so cruel as to furnish bad men with the
power to enslave both Britain and America. Administration has now
fairly dissevered the dangerous tie. Execrated will he be by the
latest posterity who again joins the fatal cord!

"But," say the puling, pusillanimous cowards, "we shall be
subject to a long and bloody war, if we declare independence." On
the contrary, I affirm it the only step that can bring the
contest to a speedy and happy issue. By declaring independence we
put ourselves on a footing for an equal negotiation. Now we are
called a pack of villainous rebels, who, like the St. Vincent's
Indians, can expect nothing more than a pardon for our lives, and
the sovereign favor respecting freedom, and property to be at the
King's will. Grant, Almighty God, that I may be numbered with the
dead before that sable day dawns on North America.

All Europe knows the illegal and inhuman treatment we have
received from Britons. All Europe wishes the haughty Empress of
the Main reduced to a more humble deportment. After herself has
thrust her Colonies from her, the maritime powers cannot be such
idiots as to suffer her to reduce them to a more absolute
obedience of her dictates than they were heretofore obliged to
yield. Does not the most superficial politician know, that while
we profess ourselves the subjects of Great Britain, and yet hold
arms against her, they have a right to treat us as rebels, and
that, according to the laws of nature and nations, no other state
has a right to interfere in the dispute? But, on the other hand,
on our declaration of independence, the maritime states, at
least, will find it their interest (which always secures the
question of inclination) to protect a people who can be so
advantageous to them. So that those shortsighted politicians, who
conclude that this step will involve us in slaughter and
devastation, may plainly perceive that no measure in our power
will so naturally and effectually work our deliverance. The
motion of a finger of the Grand Monarch would produce as gentle a
temper in the omnipotent British minister as appeared in the
Manilla ransom and Falkland Island affairs. From without,
certainly, we have everything to hope, nothing to fear. From
within, some tell us that the Presbyterians, if freed from the
restraining power of Great Britain, would overrun the peaceable
Quakers in this government. For my own part, I despise and detest
the bickerings of sectaries, and am apprehensive of no trouble
from that quarter, especially while no peculiar honors or
emoluments are annexed to either. I heartily wish too many of the
Quakers did not give cause of complaint, by endeavoring to
counteract the measures of their fellow-citizens for the common
safety. If they profess themselves only pilgrims here, let them
walk through the men of this world without interfering with their
actions on either side. If they would not pull down kings, let
them not support tyrants; for, whether they understand it or not,
there is, and ever has been, an essential difference in the
characters.

Finally, with M. de Vattel, I account a state a moral person,
having an interest and will of its own; and I think that state a
monster whose prime mover has an interest and will in direct
opposition to its prosperity and security. This position has been
so clearly demonstrated in the pamphlet first mentioned in this
essay, that I shall only add, if there are any arguments in favor
of returning to a state of dependence on Great Britain, that is,
on the present Administration of Great Britain, I could wish they
were timely offered, that they may be soberly considered before
the cunning proposals of the Cabinet set all the timid, lazy, and
irresolute members of the community into a clamor for peace at
any rate.

CANDIDUS

_________________________________________________________________
1Wells, at vol. ii,, pp. 349-352, prints an article entitled " An
Earnest Appeal to the People," and signed "Sincerus,"
attributing the authorship to Adams.



TO MRS. ADAMS.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADA Feby 26 1776.

MY DEAR

I have been impatiently waiting for a Letter from you. I think
your last was dated the 21st of January--you cannot do me a
greater Pleasure than by writing to me often. It is my Intention
to make you a Visit as soon as the Roads which are now
excessively bad shall be settled. Perhaps it may be not before
April. I have tarried through the Winter, because I thought my
self indispensably obligd so greatly to deny my self. Some of my
Friends here tell me that I ought not to think of leaving this
City at so critical a Season as the Opening of the Spring, but I
am happy in the return of Mr Adams with Mr Gerry and in being
assured that my Absence from Duty for a short time may be
dispensd with and though I am at present in a good State of
Health, the Jaunt may be necessary for the Preservation of it.
Whenever I shall have the pleasure of seeing you, to me it will
be inexpressible, and I dare say our Meeting, after so long an
Absense, will not be disagreeable to you.

I have nothing new to write to you. In one of your Letters you
told me that Dr C had requested that I would sometimes write you
on the Politicks of this place, and that he might see my Letters
of that kind. Pay my due Regards to the Doctor when you see him &
tell him that I can scarsely find time to write you even a Love
Letter. I will however for once give you a political Anecdote. Dr
Smith Provost of the College here, by the Invitation of the
Continental Congress, lately deliverd a funeral Oration on the
gallant General Montgomery who fell at the Walls of Quebec.
Certain political Principles were thought to be interwoven with
every part of the Oration which were displeasing to the Auditory.
It was remarkd that he could not even keep their Attention. A
Circle of Ladies, who had seated themselves in a convenient place
on purpose to see as well as hear the Orator, that they might
take every Advantage for the Indulgence of Griefe on so
melancholly an Occasion, were observd to look much disappointed
and chagrind. The next day a Motion was made in Congress for
requesting a Copy for the Press. The Motion was opposd from every
Quarter, and with so many Reasons that the Gentleman who made the
Motion desired Leave to withdraw it. Such was the fate of that
Oration which is celebrated in the NEWSPAPERS of this City,
perhaps by some one of the Orators Friends for I will not presume
that HE was privy to the Compliment paid to it as "VERY ANIMATED
AND PATHETICK."



TO JAMES WARREN.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADE March 8 1776

MY DEAR SIR

I now sit down just to acknowledge the Receipt of your favor of
the 14th of Feby, and to mention to you a Matter which considerd
in it self may appear to be of small Moment but in its Effects
may be mischievous. I believe I may safely appeal to all the
Letters which I have written to my Friends since I have been in
this City to vindicate my self in affirming that I have never
mentiond Mr C or referrd to his Conduct in any of them, excepting
one to my worthy Colleague Mr A when he was at Watertown a few
Weeks ago, in which I informd him of the side Mr C had taken in a
very interresting Debate; and then I only observd that he had a
Right to give his opinion whenever he was prepard to form one.
Yet I have been told that it has been industriously reported that
Mr J A & my self have been secretly writing to his Prejudice and
that our Letters had operated to his being superceded. So fully
perswaded were Gentlemen of the Truth of this Report, and Mr D of
N Y in particular whom I have heard express a warm Affection for
Mr C, that he seemd scarcely willing to credit me when I
contradicted it. Whether the report and a Beliefe of it engagd
the confidential Friends of Mr C to open a charitable
Subscription in support of his Character, I am not able to say.
If it was so, they ought in justice to him to have made
themselves certain of the Truth of it; for to offer Aid to the
Reputation of a Gentleman without a real Necessity is surely no
Advantage to it. A Letter was handed about addressed to Mr C. The
Contents I never saw--his Friends signd it. Other Gentlemen at
their request also set their hands to it, perhaps with as much
Indifference as a Man of Business would give a shilling to get
rid of the Importunity of a Beggar. I hear it is supposd in
Watertown to be an Address of Thanks from the Congress to Mr C
for his eminent Services, in which his recall from Business here
is mentiond with Regret--but this is most certainly a Mistake.
The Gentlemen signd it in their private Capacity. With Submission
they should not have addressd it to another Person or publishd it
to the World after the Manner of other Addressers; for if they
intended it to recommend Mr C to his own Constituents, was it not
hard to oblige him to blow the Trumpet himself which they had
prepared to sound his Praise. But Majr Osgood is in haste. I must
therefore drop this Subject FOR THE PRESENT and conclude with
assuring you that I am affectionately yours,



TO MRS. ADAMS.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADELPHIA March 10th 1776

MY DEAR BETSY

I arrivd in this City from Baltimore last Saturday. Having been
indisposd there so as to be obligd to keep my Chamber ten days, I
was unable to travel with my Friends, but through the Goodness of
God I have got rid of my Disorder and am in good Health. Mrs
Ross, at whose House I took Lodging in Baltimore treated me with
great Civility and Kindness and was particularly attentive to me
in my Sickness, and Wadsworth is as clever a young Man, as I ever
met with. Tell Mr Collson, if you see him, he more than answers
my Expectation even from the good Character he gave me of him.

I hope, my dear, that you and my Faniily enjoy a good Share of
Health. It is my constant & ardent Prayer that the best of
Heavens Blessings may rest on you and on them. I lately receivd a
Letter from my Son, and since I came to this Place, General
Morris of New York tells me he frequently saw him at Peeks Kill,
and that he behavd well. Nothing gives me greater Satisfaction
than to hear that he supports a good Reputation. I hope my
Friends do not flatter me.

I am greatly disappointed in not receiving your last Letter. It
was owing to the Friendship of Mr Hancock who took it up in this
place, and not expecting my Return from Baltimore so soon, he
forwarded it by a careful hand who promisd him to deliver it to
me there. I shall receive it in a day or two by the Post. Pray
write to me by every opportunity and believe me to be,

Your affectionate,

P. S.

Just as I was going to close this Letter I receivd from Baltimore
your kind Letter of the 26th of January. The Post being now ready
to set off I have only time to acknowledge the favor.

March 12th



TO JOSEPH PALMER.1

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library; a part of the letter is
in New England Historical and Genealogical Register, vol. xxx.,
p. 310; a portion of the text is in W. C. Ford, Writings of
George Washington, vol. iii., p. 103, from MS. owned by Mrs. J.
S. H. Fogg.]

PHILAD April 2 1776

MY DEAR SIR/

I am yet indebted to you for the obliging Letter I received from
you some Months ago. The Subject of it was principally concerning
a young Gentleman whom I personally know, and whose Merit in my
opinion intitles him to singular Notice from his Country. This
may seem like Flattery--you may be assured it is not--nor indeed
do I know how flatter. Words however are oftentimes, though
spoken in Sincerity, but Wind. If I had had it in my power
substantially to have servd that young Gentleman you would have
long ago heard from me. The Want of that opportunity causd me to
lay down my pen divers times after I had even begun to write to
you--you will not therefore, I hope, construe my long Delay as
the least Want of that just Regard which I owe to you.

Many Advantages arose to our Colony by the Congress adopting the
Army raisd in N Engd the last Spring but among the Misfortunes
attending it this was one, namely that it being now a Continental
Army, the Gentlemen of all Colonies had a Right to and put in for
a Share in behalf of their Friends in filling up the various
offices. By this means it was thought that military knowledge and
Experience as well as the military Spirit would spread thro the
Colonies and besides that they would all consider themselves the
more interrested in the Success of our Army and in providing for
its support. But then there was the less Room for Persons who
were well worthy of Notice in the Colonies which had first raisd
the Army. This was the Cause why many of our Friends were
discontented who did not advert to it. When the Quarter Master
was appointed, I question whether any of your Friends knew, I am
sure I did not, that the Gentleman I have referrd to sustaind
that office; there was therefore no designd Neglect of him here.
Mr Ms Character stood so high that no Gentleman could hesitate to
put him into a place which was understood to be vacant & which he
was so well qualified to fill. The Truth is, we have never had
that Information from our Friends at Watertown of the State of
things which we have thought we had good reason to expect from
them. I do assure you I have often been made acquainted with the
State of Affairs in our Colony, as well as I could from Letters
shown to me by Gentlemen of other Colonies. I do not mention this
without duly considering that the Attention of our Friends must
have been turnd to a great Variety of Business.

I heartily congratulate you upon the sudden and important Change
of our Affairs in the Removal of the Barbarians from the Capital.
We owe our grateful Acknowledgments to him who is, as he is
frequently stiled in sacred Writ "The Lord of Hosts" "The God of
Armies"--We have not yet been informd with Certainty what Course
the Enemy have steerd. I hope we shall be upon our Guard against
future Attempts. Will not Care be taken immediately to fortify
the Harbour & thereby prevent the Entrance of Ships of War ever
hereafter? But I am called to Duty and must break off abruptly.

Adieu my Friend and be assured I am affectionately yours,

_________________________________________________________________
1Of Braintree. A member of each provincial congress of
Massachusetts.



TO SAMUEL COOPER.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADA April 3 1776.

MY DEAR FRIEND

I lately recd a very obliging Letter from you for which I now
return you my hearty Thanks. I wish your Leisure would admit of
your frequently favoring me with your Thoughts of our publick
Affairs. I do assure you I shall make use of them, as far as my
Ability shall extend, to the Advantage of our Country. If you
please, I will employ a few Minutes in giving you my own Ideas,
grounded on the best Intelligence I have been able to obtain.

Notwithstanding Shame and Loss attended the Measures of the
British Court the last Summer and Fall, yet by the latest
Accounts recd from our Friends in that Country, it appears that
they are determind to persevere. They then reckond (in December)
upon having 20,000 Troops in America for the next Campaign. Their
Estimate was thus-- 6000 in Boston--7000 to go from Ireland--3000
Highlanders raising under General Frazier and the rest to be in
Recruits--of the 7000 from Ireland, we are told, that 3000 were
to sail for Virginia and North Carolina & were expected to be on
that Coast in March or the Beginning of April. It is probable
then that the Ministry have not quitted the Plan which they had
agreed upon above a twelvemonth ago; which was, to take
Possession of New York--make themselves Masters of Hudsons River
& the Lakes, thereby securing Canada and the Indians--cut off all
Communication between the Colonies Northward & Southward of
Hudsons River, and thus to subdue the former in hopes by
instigating the Negroes to make the others an easy Prey. Our
Success, a great Part of which they had not then heard of, it is
to be hoped has renderd this Plan impracticable; yet it is
probable that the main Body of these Troops is designd to carry
it into Execution, while the rest are to make a Diversion in the
Southern Colonies. Those Colonies, I think, are sufficiently
provided for. Our Safety very much depends upon our Vigilance &
Success in N York & Canada. Our Enemies did not neglect Hudsons
River the last year. We know that one of their Transports arrivd
at N York, but Gage, seizd with a Panick orderd that & the other
transports destind for that Place, to Boston. I have ever thought
it to be their favorite Plan; not only because it appeard to me
to be dictated by sound Policy, but because from good
Intelligence which I receivd from England the last Winter, they
revivd it after it had been broken in upon by Gage, and sent
Tryon to New York to remove every obstacle in the Way of landing
the Troops there, and to cooperate with Carleton in the Execution
of it.--

The Kings Troops have now abandond Boston, on which I sincerely
congratulate you. We have not yet heard what Course they have
steerd. I judge for Hallifax. They may return if they hear that
you are off your Guard. Or probably they may go up St Lawrence
River as early as the Season will admit of it. Does it not behove
N England to secure her self from future Invasions, while the
Attention of Congress is turnd to N York & Canada. We seem to
have the Game in our own hands; if we do not play it well,
Misfortune will be the Effect of our Negligence and Folly. The
British Court sollicited the Assistance of Russia; but we are
informd that they faild of it through the Interposition of France
by the Means of Sweden. The ostensible Reason on the Part of
Russia was, that there was no Cartel settled between Great
Britain and America; the Want of which will make every Power
reluctant in lending their Troops. France is attentive to this
Struggle and wishes for a Separation of the two Countries. I am
in no Doubt that she would with Chearfulness openly lend her Aid
to promote it, if America would declare herself free and
independent; for I think it is easy to see what great though
different Effects it would have in both those Nations. Britain
would no longer have it in her Power to oppress.

Is not America already independent? Why then not declare it? Upon
whom was she ever supposd to be dependent, but upon that Nation
whose most barbarous Usage of her, & that in multiplied Instances
and for a long time has renderd it absurd ever to put Confidence
in it, & with which she is at this time in open War. Can Nations
at War be said to be dependent either upon the other? I ask then
again, why not declare for Independence? Because say some, it
will forever shut the Door of Reconciliation. Upon what Terms
will Britain be reconciled with America? If we may take the
confiscating Act of Parliamt or the Kings last Proclamation for
our Rule to judge by, she will be reconciled upon our abjectly
submitting to Tyranny, and asking and receiving Pardon for
resisting it. Will this redound to the Honor or the Safety of
America? Surely no. By such a Reconciliation she would not only
in the most shameful Manner acknowledge the Tyranny, but most
wickedly, as far as would be in her Power, prevent her Posterity
from ever hereafter resisting it.

But the Express now waits for this Letter. I must therefore break
off. I will write to you again by another opportunity. Pay my
Respects to the Speaker pro Temp. and tell him that I have never
receivd a Line from him since I have been in this City. My
Respects are also due to Mr S P S,1 from whom I yesterday receivd
a kind Letter, which I shall duly acknowledge to him when I have
Leisure to write. Give me Leave to assure you that I am with the
most friendly Regards for your Lady & Family very affectionately,

Yours,

________________________________________________________________
1Samuel P. Savage.



TO JOSEPH HAWLEY.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADE April 15 1776

MY DEAR SIR

Your obliging Letter of the 1st Instt came duly to my hand. So
early as the last Winter was a twelve month past I was informd by
a worthy and very intelligent Friend in London, that the
Subduction of the New England Colonies was the FIRST Object of
our Enemies. This was to be effected, in a Manner coincident with
your Ideas, by establishing themselves on Hudsons River. They
were thereby at once to secure Canada and the Indians, give
Support and Protection to the numerous Tories in New York, supply
their Army at Boston with Provisions from that Colony and
intirely prevent the southern from affording any Aid to those
invaded Colonies. This Plan was in my opinion undoubtedly
dictated by sound Policy; and it would have been put in Execution
the last Summer, had not the necessities to which Gage was reducd
& his Apprehensions from our having a formidable Army before
Boston, obligd him to break in upon it. They did not neglect
Hudsons River the last year; for we know that two of their
Transports actually arrivd at New York; But these were
immediately orderd by Gage, together with the rest of the Fleet
to Boston. My Friend in London whose Intelligence I have never
yet found to fail, informd me the last Fall, that our Enemies did
not quit this Plan. Upon hearing that it had been thus
interrupted, they revivd it, and sent Tryon to New York to keep
the People there in good Humour and cooperate with Carleton in
the Execution of it. They reckond the last Winter upon having
20,000 Troops in America for the ensuing Campaign, of which 3000
were to go to Virginia or one of the Carolinas. These last I
suppose are designd for a Diversion, while the main Body of all
the Troops they will be able to send, will be employd in
executing their original & favorite Plan. Thus, my Friend, I am
yet happy in concurring with you in Sentiments; and I shall
persevere in using the small Influence I have here, agreable to
your repeated Advice, "to prevent the Enemies establishing
themselves & making Advances on Hudson & St Lawrence Rivers."

The Mercenary Troops have at length abandond Boston on which, I
perceive, you will not allow me YET to give you joy. May I not
however advise, that the favorable opportunity which this
important Event, added to the Season of the year has offerd, be
improvd in fortifying the Harbour so as to render it
impracticable for the Enemies Ships to enter it hereafter. I hope
this fortunate Change of Affairs has not put you off your Guard.
Should you not immediately prepare against future Invasions,
which may be made upon you before you are aware? Your Sea Coasts
must still be defended. We shall soon realize the Destination of
the Enemies Forces. Those under the Command of General Howe will
probably remain at Hallifax till the Season of the year will
admit of their going up St Lawrence River. The Troops coming from
Ireland may be destind to New York & will expect to get
Possession there. At least they will attempt it. A failure may
lead their Views back to Boston; for I am in no Apprehensions
that they will think of subduing the Southern Colonies till they
shall have first subdued those of the North. The Southern
Colonies, I think, are sufficiently provided for, to enable them
to repell any Force that may come against them the ensuing
Summer. Our Safety therefore much depends upon the Care which New
England shall take for her own Preservation and our Vigilance and
Success in New York and Canada. There are Forces enough already
ORDERD to answer all our Purposes. Our business is, to imitate
our Enemies in Zeal Application & Perseverance in carrying our
own Plans into Execution.

I am perfectly satisfied with the Reasons you offer to show the
Necessity of a publick & explicit Declaration of Independency. I
cannot conceive what good Reason can be assignd against it. Will
it widen the Breach? This would be a strange Question after we
have raised Armies and fought Battles with the British Troops,
set up an American Navy, permitted the Inhabitants of these
Colonies to fit out armed Vessels to cruize on all Ships &c
belonging to any of the Inhabitants of Great Britain declaring
them the Enemies of the united Colonies, and torn into Shivers
their Acts of Trade, by allowing Commerce subject to Regulations
to be made by OUR SELVES with the People of all Countries but
such as are Subjects of the British King. It cannot surely after
all this be imagind that we consider our selves or mean to be
considerd by others in any State but that of Independence. But
moderate Whigs are disgusted with our mentioning the Word!
Sensible Tories are better Politicians. THEY know, that no
foreign Power can consistently yield Comfort to Rebels, or enter
into any kind of Treaty with these Colonies till they declare
themselves free and independent. They are in hopes that by our
protracting this decisive Step we shall grow weary of War; and
that for want of foreign Connections and Assistance we shall be
driven to the Necessity of acknowledging the Tyrant and
submitting to the Tyranny. These are the Hopes and Expectations
of Tories, while moderate Gentlemen are flattering themselves
with the Prospect of Reconciliation when the Commissioners that
are talked of shall arrive. A mere Amusement indeed! When are
these Commissioners to arrive? Or what Terms of Reconciliation
are we to expect from them that will be acceptable to the People
of America? Will the King of Great Britain empower his
Commissioners even to promise the Repeal of all or any of their
obnoxious and oppressive Acts? Can he do it? Or if he could, has
he ever yet discoverd a Disposition which shew the least Degree
of that princely virtue, Clemency? I scruple not to affirm it as
my opinion that his heart is more obdurate, and his Disposition
towards the People of America is more unrelenting and malignant
than was that of Pharaoh towards the Israelites in Egypt. But let
us not be impatient. It requires Time to convince the doubting
and inspire the timid. Many great Events have taken place "since
the stopping the Courts in Berkshire"--Events at that time
unforeseen. Whether we shall ever see the Commissioners is Matter
of Uncertainty. I do not, I never did expect them. If they do
come the Budget must open and it will be soon known to all
whether Reconciliation is practicable or not. If they do not come
speedily, the hopes which some Men entertain of reconciliation
must vanish. I am my dear Sir very respectfully,

Yours,



TO SAMUEL COOPER.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADA April 30 1776

MY DEAR SIR

I am to acknowledge the Receipt of your Favor of the 18th Instant
by the Post. The Ideas of Independence spread far and wide among
the Colonies. Many of the leading Men see the absurdity of
supposing that Allegiance is due to a Sovereign who has already
thrown us out of his Protection. South Carolina has lately assumd
a new Government. The Convention of North Carolina have
unanimously agreed to do the same & appointed a Committee to
prepare & lay before them a proper Form. They have also revokd
certain Instructions which tied the Hands of their Delegates
here. Virginia whose Convention is to meet on the third of next
month will follow the lead. The Body of the People of Maryland
are firm. Some of the principal Members of their Convention, I am
inclind to believe, are timid or lukewarm but an occurrence has
lately fallen out in that Colony which will probably give an
agreable Turn to their affairs. Of this I will inform you at a
future time when I may be more particularly instructed concerning
it. The lower Counties on Delaware are a small People but well
affected to the Common Cause. In this populous and wealthy Colony
political Parties run high. The News papers are full of the
Matter but I think I may assure you that Common Sense, prevails
among the people--a Law has lately passed in the Assembly here
for increasing the Number of Representatives and tomorrow they
are to come to a Choice in this City & diverse of the Counties--
by this Means it is said the representation of the Colony will be
more equal. I am told that a very popular Gentleman who is a
Candidate for one of the back Counties has been in danger of
losing his Election because it was reported among the Electors
that he had declared his Mind in this City against Independence.
I know the political Creed of that Gentleman. It is, so far as
relates to a Right of the British Parliament to make Laws binding
the Colonies in any Case whatever, exactly correspondent with
your own. I mention this Anecdote to give you an Idea of the
Jealousy of the People & their attention to this Point. The
Jerseys are agitating the great Question. It is with them rather
a Matter of Prudence whether to determine till some others have
done it before them. A Gentleman of that Colony tells me that at
least one half of them have New Engd Blood running in their
Veins--be this as it may their Sentiments & Manners are I believe
similar to those of N England. I forbear to say any thing of New
York, for I confess I am not able to form any opinion of them. I
lately recd a Letter from a Friend in that Colony informing me
that they would soon come to a Question of the Expediency of
taking up Government; but to me it is uncertain what they will
do. I think they are at least as unenlightned in the Nature &
Importance of our political Disputes as any one of the united
Colonies. I have not mentiond our little Sister Georgia; but I
believe she is as warmly engagd in the Cause as any of us, & will
do as much as can be reasonably expected of her. I was very
sollicitous the last Fall to have Governments set up by the
people in every Colony. It appears to me to be necessary for many
reasons. When this is done, and I am inclind to think it will be
soon, the Colonies will feel their Independence--the Way will be
prepared for a Confederation, and one Government may be formd
with the Consent of the whole--a distinct State composd of all
the Colonies with a common Legislature for great & General
Purposes. This I was in hopes would have been the Work of the
last Winter. I am disappointed but I bear it tollerably well. I
am disposd to believe that every thing is orderd for the best,
and if I do not find my self chargeable with Neglect I am not
greatly chagrind when things do not go on exactly according to my
mind. Indeed I have the Happiness of believing that what I most
earnestly wish for will in due time be effected. We cannot make
Events. Our Business is wisely to improve them. There has been
much to do to confirm doubting Friends & fortify the Timid. It
requires time to bring honest Men to think & determine alike even
in important Matters. Mankind are governed more by their feelings
than by reason. Events which excite those feelings will produce
wonderful Effects. The Boston Port bill suddenly wrought a Union
of the Colonies which could not be brot about by the Industry of
years in reasoning on the necessity of it for the Common Safety.
Since the memorable 19th of April one Event has brot another on,
till Boston sees her Deliverance from those more than savage
Troops upon which the execrable Tyrant so much relyed for the
Completion of his horrid Conspiracys and America has furnishd her
self with more than seventy Battalions for her Defence. The
burning of Norfolk & the Hostilities committed in North Carolina
have kindled the resentment of our Southern Brethren who once
thought their Eastern Friends hot headed & rash; now indeed the
Tone is alterd & it is said that the Coolness & Moderation of the
one is necessary to allay the heat of the other. There is a
reason that wd induce one even to wish for the speedy arrival of
the British Troops that are expected at the Southward. I think
our friends are well prepared for them, & one Battle would do
more towards a Declaration of Independency than a long chain of
conclusive Arguments in a provincial Convention or the
Continental Congress. I am very affectionately yours,



TO JOHN SCOLLAY.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADELPHIA April 30 1776

MY DEAR SIR

While I was sitting down to write you a friendly Letter I had the
pleasure of receiving your Favor of the 22 Instant by the Post.
My Intention was to congratulate you and your Brethren the
Selectmen, upon the precipitate Flight of the British Army & its
Adherents from the Town of Boston, and to urge on you the
Necessity of fortifying the Harbour so as that the Enemies Ships
might never approach it hereafter. Our grateful Acknowledgments
are due to the Supreme Being who has not been regardless of the
multiplied Oppressions which the Inhabitants of that City have
sufferd under the Hand of an execrable Tyrant. Their Magnanimity
& Perseverance during the severe Conflict has afforded a great
Example to the World, and will be recorded by the impartial
Historian to their immortal Honor. They are now restored to their
Habitations & Privileges; and as they are purgd of those Wretches
a Part of whose Policy has been to corrupt the Morals of the
People, I am perswaded they will improve the happy opportunity of
reestablishing ancient Principles and Purity of Manners--I
mention this in the first place because I fully agree in Opinion
with a very celebrated Author, that, "Freedom or Slavery will
prevail in a (City or) Country according as the Disposition &
Manners of the People render them fit for the one or the other";
and I have long been convincd that our Enemies have made it an
Object, to eradicate from the Minds of the People in general a
Sense of true Religion & Virtue, in hopes thereby the more easily
to carry their Point of enslaving them. Indeed my Friend, this is
a Subject so important in my Mind, that I know not how to leave
it. Revelation assures us that "Righteousness exalteth a Nation"-
-Communities are dealt with in this World by the wise and just
Ruler of the Universe. He rewards or punishes them according to
their general Character. The diminution of publick Virtue is
usually attended with that of publick Happiness, and the publick
Liberty will not long survive the total Extinction of Morals.
"The Roman Empire, says the Historian, MUST have sunk, though the
Goths had not invaded it. Why? Because the Roman Virtue was
sunk." Could I be assured that America would remain virtuous, I
would venture to defy the utmost Efforts of Enemies to subjugate
her. You will allow me to remind you, that the Morals of that
City which has born so great a Share in the American Contest,
depend much upon the Vigilance of the respectable Body of
Magistrates of which you are a Member.

I am greatly concernd at the present defenceless State of Boston,
& indeed of the whole Eastern District which comprehends New
England. We have applied for and obtaind a Committee of Congress
to consider the State of that District. In the mean time I hope
the General Assembly and the Town are exerting themselves for the
Security of the Harbour. I could indeed earnestly wish that the
Inhabitants of Boston, who have so long born the Heat & Burden of
the Day might now have some Respite. But this is uncertain. Their
generous Exertions in the American Cause, have renderd them
particularly obnoxious to the Vengeance of the British Tyrant. It
is therefore incumbent on them to be on their Guard, and to use
the utmost Activity in putting themselves in a Posture of
Defence.

I trust their Spirits are not depressd by the Injuries they have
sustaind. The large Experience they have had of military Tyranny
should rather heighten their Ideas of the Blessings of civil
Liberty and a free Government. While THEIR OWN troops are posted
among them for their Protection, they surely will not lose the
Feelings and resign the Honor of Citizens to the military; but
remember always that standing Armies are formidable Bodies in
civil Society, & the Suffering them to exist at any time is from
Necessity, & ought never to be of Choice.

It is with heartfelt Pleasure that I recollect the Meetings I
have had with my much esteemd Fellow Citizens in Faneuil Hall,
and I am animated with the Prospect of seeing them again in that
Place which has long been sacred to Freedom. There I have seen
the Cause of Liberty & of Mankind warmly espousd & ably
vindicated; and that, at Times when to speak with Freedom had
become so dangerous, that other Citizens possessd of less Ardour,
would have thought themselves excusable in not speaking at all.

Be so kind as to pay my due Respects to my Friends & be assured
that I am with the most friendly Regards for Mrs Scollay &
Family,

Very Affectionately,
Yours,



TO JAMES WARREN.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADA May 12 1776

MY DEAR SIR

I had the pleasure of receiving your very friendly Letter of the
2d Instant by a Mr Parks. I can readily excuse your not writing
to me so often as I could wish to receive your Letters, when I
consider how much you are engagd in the publick Affairs; and so
you must be while your Life is spared to your Country. I am
exceedingly concernd to find by your Letter as well as those of
my other Friends that so little attention has been given to a
Matter of such weighty Importance as the fortifying the Harbour
of Boston. To what can this be attributed? Is it not wise to
prevent the Enemies making Use of every Avenue especially those
which lead into the Capital of our Country. I hope no little
party Animosities even exist much less prevail in our Councils to
obstruct so necessary a Measure. Such Contentions you well
remember that Fiend Hutchinson & his Confederates made it their
constant Study to stir up between the friends of the Colony in
the different parts of it, in order to prevent their joynt
exertions for the Common Good. Let us with great Care avoid such
Snares as our Enemies have heretofore laid for our ruin, and
which we have found by former Experience have provd too
successfull to their wicked purposes. This will, I think be an
important Summer to America; I confide therefore in the Wisdom of
our Colony, and that they will lay aside the Consideration of
smaller Matters for the present, and bend their whole Attention
to the necessary Means for the common Safety. I hope the late
Situation of Boston is by this time very much alterd for the
better; if not, it must needs be a strong Inducement to the Enemy
to reenter it, and whether we ought not by all means in our Power
to prevent it, I will leave to you and others to judge.

Yesterday the Congress resolvd into a Committee of the whole to
take under Consideration the report of a former Committee
appointed to consider the State of the Eastern District which
comprehends New Engd. It was then agreed that the Troops in
Boston be augmented [to] Six Thousand. The Question lies before
the Congress and will be considerd tomorrow. I am inclind to
think the Vote will obtain. [But] what will avail the ordering
additional Regiments if Men will not inlist? Do our Countrymen
want animation at a time when [all] is at Stake! Your Presses
have been too long silent. What are your Committees of
Correspondence about? I hear Nothing of circular Letters--of
joynt Committees, &c. Such Methods have in times past raised
[the] Spirits of the people--drawn off their Attention from
PICKING UP PINS, & directed their Views to great objects--But,
not having had timely Notice of the Return of this Express, I
must conclude (with my earnest prayers for the recovery of your
Health,) very affectionately,

Your,



TO GEORGE WASHINGTON.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADA May 15 1776

SIR/

It was not till the Beginning of this Month that I had the Honor
of receiving your Favor of the 22d of March, respecting a
Proposition of Coll Baillie for opening a Road from Connecticutt
River to Montreal. The President, soon after, laid before
Congress your Letter of the 5th, a Paragraph of which referrs to
the same Subject. The Resolution of Congress thereon has, I
presume, before this Time been transmitted to you by him; by
which it appears that they have fully concurrd with you in
Opinion of the Utility of the Measure proposd.

I beg Leave by this Opportunity to acquaint your Excellency, that
the Letters I have receivd from some Gentlemen of the Colony of
Massachusetts Bay express great Concern at the present
defenceless state of the Town of Boston, while they are not
without Apprehension of another Visit from the Enemy. They
thought themselves extremely happy in your Presense there, and
regretted very much the Necessity of your Departure, to which
Nothing reconciles them, but their earnest Desire that the
general Service may be promoted. Congress have resolvd that the
five Battalions in that Colony be filled up, and new ones raisd
for the Defence of the Eastern District. As two General Officers
will be sent thither, it would, I am perswaded, give great
Satisfaction to the People, if General Gates and Mifflin might be
fixed upon. This however, I chearfully submit to your Excellencys
Judgment and Determination; being well assurd, that the Safety of
that distressd City will have as full a Share of your Attention
as shall be consistent with the good of the whole. I have the
Honor to be with very great Esteem and Affection,

Your Excellencys most humbe servt



TO HORATIO GATES.

[MS., Lenox Library.]

PHILADE June 10 1776

MY DEAR SIR

Your Favor of the 8th Instant was brought to me by Express. I am
exceedingly concernd that a General Officer is not yet fixed upon
to take the Command of the Troops in Boston--ever since the Enemy
abandond that place I have been apprehensive that a renewed
attack would probably be made on some part of Massachusetts Bay.
Your Reasons clearly show that it will be the Interest of the
Enemy to make a grand push there if they are not properly
provided for a Defence. Congress judgd it necessary that a Major
& Brigr Genl should be sent to Boston or they would not have
orderd it three Weeks ago. The Wish of the Colony with regard to
particular Gentlemen has been repeatedly urgd, and I thought that
an appointment which has been made since you left us would have
given a favorable Issue to our request. The Necessity of YOUR
taking the Command in the Eastern District immediately, has been
in my mind most pressing since I have been informd by your Letter
that your Intelligence in respect to the Attack on the
Massachusetts is direct & positive.

It will be a great Disappointment to me if General Mifflin does
not go with you to Boston. I believe that to prevent the apparent
necessity for this, Genl Whitcomb was thrown into View. He is
indeed in many respects a good Man, but to the other I think the
preference must be given.

The Hint you gave me when I last saw you respecting the Enemies
offering to treat, I have revolvd in my Mind. It is my opinion
that no such offers will be made but with a Design to take
Advantage by the Delay they may occasion. We know how easily our
people, too many of them, are still amusd with vain hopes of
reconciliation. Such Ideas will, no doubt, be thrown out to them,
to embarrass the Army as others have been; but I conceive that
the General in whose Wisdom & Valor I confide, will, without
Hesitation employ all his Force to annoy & conquer immediately
upon the Enemies Approach. We want our most stable Councellors
here. To send Gentlemen of INDECISIVE Judgments to assist as
field Deputies would answer a very ill purpose. The sole Design
of the Enemy is to subjugate America. I have therefore no
Conception that any terms can be offerd but such as must be
manifestly affrontive. should those of a different Complexion be
proposd, under the hand of their Commanding officer, the General
will have the oppty of giving them in to Congress in the space of
a Day. This I imagine he will think prudent to do--at the same
time, I am very sure, he will give no Advantage to the Enemy, and
that he will conduct our affairs in so critical a Moment in a
Manner worthy of himself.

I am affectionately yours,



PEREZ MOULTON.1

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADA June 1776

MY DEAR SIR

When I was at Watertown in August last the General Assembly being
then sitting, a Crowd of Business prevented our coming to an
Agreement respecting an allowance adequate to your Services in
the Secretaries Office, or even conversing upon the Subject. I
have been very easy about it, because I have never had the least
Doubt of your Integrity and Honor. Publick Affairs have demanded
so much of my Attention here that I have scarcely had Time to
spend a thought on my domestick Concerns. But I am apprehensive
that Mrs A------ will soon be in Want of Money for her Support,
if that is not already her Case. I shall therefore be much obligd
to you if you will let her have such a part of the Fees you may
have receivd as you can conveniently spare. Her Receipt shall be
acknowledgd by me. And as I foresee that I shall not have the
opportunity of visiting my Friends in New England so soon as I
have intended, you will further oblige me by sending me an
Account of the Monies paid into the office together with your own
opinion of what may be a reasonable and generous Allowance for
your Service.

I am with great Esteem & Affection,
Your Friend & hbl Servt

_________________________________________________________________
1Cf., page 109. His name appears as "Morton" in Acts and Resolves
of the Province of Massachusetts, vol. v. He
was deputy secretary under Adams.



TO JOSEPH HAWLEY.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADE July 9 1776--

MY DEAR SIR/

I should sooner have acknowledgd the Receipt of your Letters
dated at Northampton & Springfield the 17th and 22d of May, had I
not expected that before this Time I should have had the pleasure
of seeing and conversing with you--but Business here has been so
pressing and important, that I have not thought it consistent
with my Duty as yet to absent myself.

Our repeated Misfortunes in Canada have greatly chagrind every
Man who wishes well to America. I dare not at present communicate
to you what I take to have been the real Causes of these
Disasters. Some of them indeed must be obvious to any Man who has
been attentive to that Department. Our secret Enemies have found
Means to sow the Seeds of Discord & Faction there and Heaven has
sufferd the small Pox to prevail among our Troops. It is our Duty
to try all Means to restore our Affairs to a good Footing but I
despair of that being effected till next Winter. To be acting
merely on the defensive at the Time when we should have been in
full possession of that Country is mortifying indeed. The Subject
is disgusting to me. I will dismiss it.

How[e] is arrivd, as you have heard, with his Troops at New York.
The People in this Colony & the Jerseys are in Motion and if the
New England Militia joyn our Army with their usual Alertness &
Spirit, I have no doubt but the Enemy will meet with a warm
Reception. A few days may probably bring on Event which will give
a favorable Turn to our Affairs.

The Congress has at length declared the Colonies free and
independent States. Upon this I congratulate you for I know your
heart has long been set upon it. Much I am affraid has been lost
by delaying to take this decisive Step. It is my opinion that if
it had been done Nine months ago we might have been justified in
the Sight of God and Man, three Months ago.1 If we had done it
then, in my opinion Canada would [by] this time have been one of
the united Colonies; but "Much is to be endurd for the hardness
of Mens hearts." We shall now see the Way clear to form a
Confederation, contract Alliances & send Embassadors to foreign
Powers & do other Acts becoming the Character we have assumd.
Adieu my Friend. Write to me soon.

_________________________________________________________________
1The first thirteen words of this sentence are crossed out in the
draft.



TO RICHARD HENRY LEE.

[MS., American Philosophical Society; a draft is in the Samuel
Adams Papers, Lenox Library; and a text is in R. H. Lee, Life of
R. H. Lee, vol. i., pp. 182-184.]

PHILADA July 15 1776

MY DEAR SIR

I must acknowledge that when you left Congress I gave you Reason
to expect a Letter from me before this Time. You will not, I am
very certain, attribute my omission to the Want of a most cordial
Esteem for you. The Truth is, I hardly knew how to write without
saying something of our Canadian Affairs; and this is a Subject
so thoroughly mortifying to me, that I could wish totally to
forget all that has past in that Country. Let me however just
mention to you that Schuyler & Gates are to command the Troops to
be employ'd there; the former, while they are without, and the
latter, while they are within the Bounds of Canada.--Admitting
both these Generals to have the military Accomplishments of
Marlborough and Eugene, I cannot conceive that such a Disposition
of them can be attended with any happy Effects, unless Harmony
subsists between them.--Alass! I fear this is not the Case--
Already Disputes have arisen, which they have referrd to
Congress! And though they appear to treat each other with a
Politeness becoming their Rank, in my Mind, Altercations between
Commanders who have Pretensions so nearly equal, I mean in Point
of COMMAND, forebode a Repetition of Misfortunes--I sincerely
wish my Apprehensions may prove to be groundless.

General Howe, as you have heard, is arrivd at New York. He has
brought with him from 8 to 10,000 troops. Lord Howe arrivd the
last Week, and the whole Fleet is hourly expected. The Enemy
landed on Staten Island. Nothing of Importance has been done,
saving that last Friday at about three in the afternoon a 40 and
a 20 Gun Ship with several Tenders, taking the Advantage of a
fair and fresh Gale and flowing Tide, passd by our Forts as far
as the Encampment at Kings bridge. General Mifflin who commands
there in a Letter of the 5 Instant informd us he had twenty one
Cannon planted and hoped in a Week to be formidable.
Reinforcements are arrivd from N England, and our Army are in
high Spirits. I am exceedingly pleasd with the calm & determind
Spirit, which our Commander in Chiefe has discoverd in all his
Letters to Congress. May Heaven guide and prosper Him! The
Militia of the Jerseys--Pennsylvania & Maryland are all in
Motion--General Mercer commands the flying Camp in the jerseys.
We have just now appointed a Committee to bring in a Plan for
Reinforcement to compleat the Number of 20,000 Men to be posted
in that Colony.

Our Declaration of Independency has given Vigor to the Spirits of
the People. Had this decisive Measure been taken Nine Months ago,
it is my opinion that Canada would at this time have been in our
hands. But what does it avail to find fault with what is past.
Let us do better for the future. We were more fortunate than
expected in having 12 of the 13 Colonies in favor of the all
important Question. The Delegates of N York were not impowered to
give their Voice on either Side. Their Convention has since
acceeded to the Declaration & publishd it even before they
receivd it from Congress. So mighty a Change in so short a Time!
N Jersey has finishd their Form of Government, a Copy of which I
inclose. They have sent us five new Delegates, among whom are Dr
Witherspoon & judge Stockden.1 All of them appear to be attachd
to the American Cause. A Convention is now meeting in this City
to form a Constitution for this Colony. They are empowerd by
their Constituents to appoint a new Committee of Safety to act
for the present & to chuse new Delegates for Congress. I am told
there will be a Change of Men, and if so, I hope for the better.

A Plan for Confederation has been brot into Congress wch I hope
will be speedily digested and made ready to be laid before the
several States for their approbation. A Committee has now under
Consideration the Business of foreign Alliance.

It is high time for us to have Ambassadors in foreign Courts. I
fear we have already sufferd too much by Delay. You know upon
whom our Thoughts were turnd when you was with us.

I am greatly obligd to you for favoring me with the Form of
Governt agreed upon by your Countrymen. I have not yet had time
to peruse it, but dare say it will be a Feast to our little
Circle. The Device on your great Seal pleases me much.

Pray hasten your journey hither. Your Country most pressingly
sollicits, or will you allow me to say, DEMANDS your Assistance
here. I have written in great haste. Adieu to my dear Sir, and be
assured that I am very Affectionately,

Your Friend,

_________________________________________________________________
1Stockton.



TO JAMES WARREN.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILAD July 16--1776

MY DEAR FRIEND

There is no Necessity of my troubling you with a lon Epistle at
present, for my very worthy Friend and Colleague1 who kindly
takes the Charge of this will fully inform you of the State of
Affairs here. He will tell you some things which I have often
wishd to communicate to you, but have not thought it prudent to
commit to writing.

Our declaration of Independence has already been attended with
good Effects. It is fortunate beyond our Expectation to have the
Voice of every Colony in favor of so important a Question.

I inclose you the Form of a Constitution which the Convention of
Virginia have agreed upon for that Colony. It came to my hand
yesterday by the Post, and I spare it to you, although I have not
had time to peruse it. I suppose there are other Copies in Town.
Adieu.

_________________________________________________________________
1John Adams.



TO JAMES WARREN.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADA July 17 1776

MY DEAR SIR

By this Express the General Assembly will receive the most
earnest Recommendation of Congress to raise & send with all
possible Speed the 2000 Men requested of them for New York above
a Month ago. There never was a more pressing Necessity for their
Exertions than at present. Our Army in N. Y. consists of not more
than half the number of those which we have reason to expect will
in a very short Time be ready to attack them--and to this let me
add that when we consider how many disaffected Men there are in
that Colony, it is but little better than an Enemies Country. I
am sensible this is a busy Season of the year, but I beg of you
to prevail on the People to lay aside every private Concern and
devote themselves to the Service of their Country. If we can gain
the Advantage of the Enemy this Campaign we may promise ourselves
Success against every Effort they will be able to make hereafter.
But I need not multiply words. I am sure YOUR Mind is fully
impressd with the Importance of this Measure. Adieu my Friend,
the Express waits--



TO JOHN PITTS.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

[PHILADELPHIA, July 17, 1776]

MY DEAR SIR

You were informd by the last Post that Congress had declared the
thirteen united Colonies free, & independent States. It must be
allowd by the impartial World that this Declaration has not been
made rashly. The inclosd Catalogue of Crimes of the deepest Dye,
which have been repeatedly perpetrated by the King will justify
us in the Eyes of honest & good Men. By multiplied Acts of
Oppression and Tyranny he has long since forfeited his Right to
Govern. The Patience of the Colonies in enduring the most
provoking Injuries so often repeated will be Matter of
Astonishmt. Too Much I fear has been lost by Delay, but an
accession of several Colonies has been gaind by it. The Delegates
of every colony were present & concurrd in this important act;
except those of N. Y. who were not authorizd to give their Voice
on the Question, but they have since publickly said that a new
Convention was soon to meet in that Colony & they had not the
least Doubt of their acceeding to it. Our Path is now open to
form a plan of Confederation & propose Alliances with foreign
States. I hope our Affairs will now wear a more agreable Aspect
than they have of late.



TO SAMUEL COOPER.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADA July 20 1776

MY DEAR SIR/

I have the Pleasure of informing you, that the Continental Troops
under the Command of Major Genl Lee, have tryumphd over the
British Forces in South Carolina, the particulars of which you
have in the inclosd Paper. I trust this Blow has given so great a
Check to the Power of the Enemy as to prevent their doing us any
material Injury in that part of America. We look towards New
York, and earnestly Pray that God would order a decisive Event in
our Favor there--you must have earlier Intelligence from time to
time of the Circumstances of our Affairs in that Department than
you can have from this place. Yesterday Circular Letters with
inclosd Declarations from Lord Howe to the late Governors of New
Jersey & the Colonies Southward as far as Georgia, were laid
before Congress. As they were orderd to be publishd, I have the
Opportunity of transmitting a printed Copy of them for your
Amusement. There were also Letters from London to private Persons
probably procured if not dictated by the British Ministry and
written with a manifest Intention to form a Party here in favor
of his Lordship, to induce People to believe that he is a cordial
Friend to America, and that he is empowerd to offer Terms of
Accommodation acceptable to the Colonists. But it is now too late
for that insidious Court to play such Tricks with any reasonable
Hopes of Success. The American States have declard themselves no
longer the Subjects of the British King. But if they had remaind
such, the Budget is now opened to the World, and the People see
with their own Eyes, with how much MAGNANIMITY the Prince offers
them Pardon on Condition that they will submit to be his abject
Slaves.

I was informd in a Letter I recd from London last March, that
this very Nobleman declind to accept the Commission until he
should be vested with Authority to offer to us honorable Terms--
that he made a Merit of it. And yet he now comes with Terms
disgraceful to human Nature. If he is a good kind of Man, as
these Letters import, I am mistaken if he is not weak & ductile.
He has always voted, as I am told in favor of the Kings Measures
in Parliament, and at the same time professd himself a Friend to
the Liberties of America! He seems to me, either never to have
had any good Principles at all, or not to have had Presence of
Mind openly and uniformly to avow them. I have an Anecdote which
I will communicate to you at another Time--at present I have not
Leisure.

Pray let me have a Letter from you soon. You cannot do me a
greater Act of Kindness or more substantially serve me than by
writing often.

I am affectionately,
Your Friend,

Will you be kind enough to let my Family know that I am in
health. I wish you wd present my respectful Compts to my very
venerable Friend D C----y.1 I hope the worthy old Gentleman is in
Health & Spirits.

________________________________________________________________
1Cf., page 155.



TO BENJAMIN KENT.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILAD July 27 1776

MY DEAR FRIEND

I must beg you to impute to the true Reason my not having yet
acknowledgd & answerd your very obliging Letter of the 24 May.
The WANT OF LEISURE often prevents my indulging the natural
Inclination of my Mind to converse with my distant Friends by
familiar Epistles; for however unequal I feel my self to the
Station in which our Country has placed me here, I am
indispensibly obligd to attend the Duties of it with Diligence.

It has been difficult for a Number of persons sent from all parts
of so extensive a Territory and representing Colonies (or as I
must now call them STATES) which in many Respects have had
different Interests & Views, to unite in Measures materially to
affect them all. Hence our Determinations have been necessarily
slow. We have however gone on from Step to Step, till at length
we are arrivd to perfection, as you have heard, in a Declaration
of Independence. Was there ever a Revolution brot about,
especially so important as this without great internal Tumults &
violent Convulsions! The Delegates of every Colony in Congress
have given their
       Voices in favor of the great Question, & the People I am
told, recognize the Resolution as though it were a Decree
promulgated from Heaven. I have thot that if this decisive
Measure had been taken six months earlier, it would have given
Vigor to our Northern Army & a different Issue to our military
Exertions in Canada. But probably I was mistaken. The Colonies
were not then all ripe for so momentous a Change. It was
necessary that they shd be united, & it required Time & patience
to remove old prejudices, to instruct the unenlightend, convince
the doubting and fortify the timid. Perhaps if our Friends had
considerd how much was to be previously done they wd not have
been, as you tell me some of them were, "impatient under our
Delay."

New Govts are now erecting in the several American States under
the Authority of the people. Monarchy seems to be generally
exploded. And it is not surprising to me, that the Aristocratick
Spirit which appeard to have taken deep Root in some of them, now
gives place to that of Democracy, You justly observe that "the
Soul or Spirit of Democracy is VIRTUE." No State can long
preserve its Liberty "where Virtue is not supremely honord." I
flatter my self you are mistaken in thinking ours is so very
deficient, and I do assure you, I find reliefe in supposing your
Colouring is too high. But if I deceive my self in this most
essential point, I conjure you and every Man of Influence by
Example and by all Means to stem the Torrent of Vice, which, as a
celebrated Author tells us, "prevailing would destroy, not only a
Kingdom or an Empire, but the whole moral Dominion of the
Almighty throughout the Infinitude of Space." I have Time only to
add that I am very affectionately,

Yours,



TO JOSEPH TRUMBULL.1

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADE Augt 3 17762

MY DEAR SIR

Our Friend Coll W brought & deliverd to me your Letter of the---
July directed to Mr J. A. and myself. The Inclosures clearly show
the deplorable State of our Affairs in the Northern Department
and it is easy to see the Source of them. I am fully of opinion
that ONE MAN must be removd to some other Department, to put an
End to our Misfortunes there but this has hitherto been
impracticable, though it has been attempted and urgd. A little
Time may perhaps unravel Mysteries and convince Gentlemen that
they have been under certain Prejudices to which the wisest Men
are lyable. It appears to me very extraordinary that Mr L. should
insist upon acting after being apprizd of the Resolve of
Congress, and it is still more extraordinary that he meets with
the Support of . . . . in such Conduct. I am very sure that our
Affairs must greatly suffer if he is allowd to persist in so
doing, and your Reputation as well as the Good of the Service may
be at Stake. I think it would not be amiss for you to State the
Matter to the General by which means it might be laid before
Congress. You are the best judge of the part proper for you to
act on this occasion in your own Department but I shall certainly
do all in my Power to have the Evils you mention corrected. I
have communicated your Letter to several Gentlemen who will joyn
with me in every practicable Method for this purpose. Congress
have this day passd several Resolutions which I hope tend to this
good Effect. Paymasters & Deputy Paymasters are to make weekly
Returns to Congress of the State of the Military Chests under
their Direction. Jonn Trumble Esqr Pay Master in the Northern
Department is to transmit as soon as possible an Acct of all the
Monies which have passed through his Hands. Commissaries & Depy
Comssys Genl in the several Departments are to transmit to
Congress weekly Accots of Monies they receive of Pay Masters or
their Deputies--Quarter Masters & Deputy Qr Masters to do the
same--and the Commanding Officers in Each Departmt are to make
monthly returns to Congress of the Drafts they make on the
respective Paymasters. Comry General, Qr Masters Genl & their
Deputies to make monthly Returns at least of Stores in their
Possession & the Distribution of them. These Resolutions perhaps
may not please EVERY BODY, but if they are duly executed, they
may detect Mistakes or Frauds if any should happen. As to what
has happend in Canada & near it, some person is in my opinion
most egregiously to blame, and, to use a homely Proverb, the
Saddle has been laid, or attempted to be laid on the wrong horse.
I hope that by strict Scrutiny the Causes will be found out and
the guilty Man made to suffer. My Regards to Genl Mifflin & all
Friends.

I am respectfully,
Yours,

Since writing the foregoing I have turnd to the printed Journals
of Congress and find that on the 17th of July 1775 Walter
Livingston Esq was appointed "Commissary of Stores & provisions
for the New York Departmt during the PRESENT Campaign. "Upon what
Grounds then does he speak of himself as vested by Congress with
full powers to act TILL REVOK'D? The last Campaign wch limitted
his power to act, is finishd. Under what pretence can he be
supported by his Patron, especially since by the Resolution of
Congress of the 8th of July last, you have "full Power to supply
both Armies, that upon the Lakes as well as that at N Y, & also
to appoint & employ such persons under you & to remove any Deputy
Commissary as you shall think proper & expedient,"3 and for this
express Reason "it being absolutely necessary that the Supply of
BOTH Armies shd be under ONE Direction." Has not Genl S----- seen
this Resolution? or if he has seen it, Does he judge that the
Supply of the two Armies shd be under different Directions, &
undertake to order accordingly? If the Persons whom you send to
act under you in the Northern Army are confined & limitted by ANY
other Person after they arrive there, unless by order of
Congress, & without giving you Notice in case such order shd be
made, we must expect a Repetition of the most mortifying
Disappointments. Upon my Word I think it your Duty to remonstrate
this, either to the Commander in Chief or to the Congress. The
former I should suppose you would prefer.

Adieu,

_________________________________________________________________
1Addressed to him at New York; commissary-general of the
continental army.
2At this point reference should be made to the pamphlet entitled
"An Oration delivered at the State House in Philadelphia . . . on
Thursday, the 1st of August, 1776, by Samuel Adams." This was
"reprinted" at London, and the text is given in W. V. Wells, Life
of Samuel Adams, vol. iii., pp. 405-422. Wells, at vol. ii., p.
440, states briefly the reasons why he does not credit the
production to Adams. See also, against its authenticity,
Proceedings of Massachusetts Historical Society, 1st ser., vol.
xiii., p. 451. The text has been published, with no allusion to
its doubtful origin, as recently as 1900, in The World's Orators,
edited by Guy C. Lee, vol. viii., pp. 239-265. John Eliot of
Boston apparently had the matter in mind when he wrote to Jeremy
Belknap, June 17, 1777: "Mr S. Adams is a gentleman who hath
sacrificed an immense fortune in the service of his country. He
is an orator likewise, & there is a famous oration upon the
independance of America, which, it is said, he delivered at
Philadelphia, January, 1776, but which was never seen in America
before." Collections of Massachusetts Historical Society, 6th
ser., vol. iv., pp. 124, 125. Cf., Sabin, Bibliotheca Americana,
No. 344.
3Journals of the Continental Congress (Library of Congress
edition), vol. v., p. 527.



TO JOHN ADAMS.

[MS., Adams Papers, Quincy; a text is in W. V. Wells, Life of
Samuel Adams, vol. ii., p. 441.]

PRINCETOWN Augt 13 1776

DEAR SIR

Before this reaches you,1 you will have heard of the Arrival of
near an hundred more of the Enemies ships. There are too many
Soldiers now in Philada waiting for Arms. Is it not of the utmost
Importance that they should march even without Arms, especially
as they may be furnishd with the Arms of those who are sick at N
York. Would it not be doing great Service to the Cause at this
time if you wd speak to some of the Come of Safety of
Pennsylvania relative to this matter. I write in haste. The
Bearer will inform you of the State of things.

Your Friend,

________________________________________________________________
1Addressed to John Adams at Philadelphia.



TO JOHN ADAMS.

[MS., Adams Papers, Quincy; a portion of the text is in W. V.
Wells, Life of Samuel Adams, vol. ii., p. 442.]

N YORK Augt 16 1776

MY DEAR SIR

I sit down to write in great Haste as the post is just going. I
reachd P. Ferry on Tuesday Six Clock P M & passd over the next
morning--found the Genl & his family in Health & spirits. Indeed
every Officer & Soldier appears to be determind. I have not had
Oppty to view the Works here, but I am told they are strong &
will be well defended whenever an Attack is made which is
expected daily. I see now more than I ever did the Importance of
Congress attending immediately to Inlistments for the next
Campaign. It would be a pity to lose your old Soldiers. I am of
Opinion that a more generous Bounty shd be given, 20 Dollars &
100 Acres of Land for three years at least--but enough of this--

The State of our Northern Army mends apace. The Number of
invalids decreases. Harmony prevails. They carry on all kinds of
Business within themselves. Smiths Armourers Carpenters Turners
Carriage Makers Rope Makers &c &c they are well provided with.
There were at Tyconderoga Augt 12 2,668 Rank & file fit for Duty
at Crown Point & Skeensborough 750, in Hospital 1,110-Lt
Whittemore returnd from his Discoveries--he left St Johns July 30
saw 2000 or 2500 at that place & Chamblee. Stores coming on from
Montreal--counted 30 Batteaus. No Vessell built or building. This
Accot may I think be depended upon. In my opinion we are happy to
have G Gates there. The Man who has the Superintendency of Indian
Affairs--the nominal Command of the Army--is the REAL Contractor
& Quarter Master Genl &c &c has too many Employmtts to attend to
the reform of such an Army--besides the Army can confide in the
VALOR & MILITARY Skill & Accomplishments of GATES--SAT VERBUM
SAPIENTI; pray write me & let me know the Confed. &c goes on.
Major Meigs a brave officer & a Prisoner taken at Quebeck is at
this time, as I suppose, at Philadelphia--he wishes to be
exchanged--such an Officer would be very usefull here. I wish you
wd give him your Assistance. I propose to sett off tomorrow for
the Eastward.

Adieu,

Cap Palmer is in this City waiting for inlisting orders. I wish
the Rank of the Navy officers was settled & the Commissions made
out. Capt Dearborne of N Hampshire is in the same Predicament
with Major Meigs. Coll Whipple who now sends his Regards to you,
is very desirous that he may also be exchand--his Character is
remarkeably good as Maj Meigs can inform you.



TO JOHN ADAMS.

[MS., Adams Papers, Quincy; a text is in John Adams, Works, vol.
ix., pp. 441-443.]

BOSTON Sep 16 1776

MY DEAR SIR/

I very gratefully acknowledge the Receipt of your Letter dated
the of August. I should have written to you from this place
before, but I have not had Leisure. My Time is divided between
Boston & Watertown, and though we are not engagd in Matters of
such Magnitude as now employ your Mind, there are a thousand
things which call the Attention of every Man who is concernd for
his Country. Our Assembly have appointed a Committee to prepare a
Form of Government--they have not yet reported. I believe they
will agree in two legislative Branches --their great Difficulty
seems to be to determine upon a free and adequate Representative,
--they are at present an unwieldy Body. I will inform you more of
this when I shall have the Materials. The Defence of this Town
you know has lain much upon our Minds. Fortifications are erected
upon several of the Islands, which I am told require at least
8000 Men. You shall have a particular Account when I am at
Leisure,--by my Manner of writing you may conclude that I am now
in haste. I have receivd no Letter from Philade or New York since
I was favord with yours, nor can I find that any other person
has. It might be of Advantage to the common Cause for us to know
what is doing at both those important places. We have a Report
that a Committee is appointed (as the expression is) "to meet the
Howes," and that you are one. This, without Flattery gave me
pleasure. I am indeed at a Loss to conclude how such a Movement
could be made consistent with the Honor of the Congress, but I
have such an Opinion of the Wisdom of that Body, that I must not
doubt of the Rectitude of the Measure. I hope they will be
vigilant and firm, for I am told that Lord Howe is, though not a
great man, an artful Courtier. May God give us Wisdom Fortitude
Perseverance and every other virtue necessary for us to maintain
that Independence which we have asserted. It would be ridiculous
indeed if we were to return to a State of Slavery in a few Weeks
after we had thrown off the Yoke and asserted our Independence.
The Body of the people of America, I am perswaded, would resent
it--but why do I write in this Stile--I rely upon the Congress &
the committee. I wish however to know a little about this Matter,
for I confess I cannot account for it to my own Mind. I will
write to you soon-in the mean time,

Adieu,

What has been the Issue of the Debates upon a weighty Subject
when I left you, and another Matter (you know what I mean) of
great Importance? Is it not high time they were finishd?

Pay my due Regards to the President Mess Paine1 & Gerry2 Coll
Lees and other Friends.

_______________________________________________________________
1Robert Treat Paine.
2A portion of a letter by Samuel Adams to Gerry, dated September
23, 1776, is printed in W. V. Wells, Life of
Samuel Adams, vol. ii., pp. 447, 448.



TO JOHN ADAMS.

[MS., Adams Papers, Quincy; a text is in John Adams, Works, vol.
ix., pp. 446, 447.]

BOSTON Sep 30 1776

MY DEAR SIR/

I am much obligd to you for your two Letters of the 8th & 14th of
this Month, which I receivd, together, by the last Post. The
Caution given in the first of these Letters was well designd; and
had it come to me as early as you had Reason to expect it would,
I should have been relievd of a full fortnights Anxiety of Mind.
I was indeed greatly "concernd" for the Event of the proposd
Conference with Lord Howe. It is no Compliment when I tell you,
that I fully confided in the Understanding and Integrity of the
Gentlemen appointed by Congress; but being totally ignorant of
the Motives which inducd such a Measure, I was fearful lest we
might be bro't into a Situation of great Delicacy and
Embarrassment. I perceive that his Lordship would not converse
with you as Members of Congress or a Committee of that Body; from
whence I concluded that the Conference did not take its Rise on
his part. As I am unacquainted with its Origination and the
Powers of the Committee, I must contemplate the whole Affair as a
Refinement in Policy beyond my Reach, and content myself with
remaining in the Dark, till I have the Pleasure of seeing you,
when, I trust, the Mystery will be fully explaind to me. Indeed I
am not so sollicitous to know the Motives from whence this
Conference sprang, or the Manner in which it was brought up, as I
am pleasd with its Conclusion. The Sentiments and Language of the
Committee, as they are related to me, were becoming the Character
they bore. They mannagd with great Dexterity. They maintaind the
Dignity of Congress, and in my Opinion, the Independence of
America stands now on a better footing than it did before. It
affords me abundant Satisfaction, that the Minister of the
British King, commissiond to require and fondly nourishing the
Hopes of receiving the Submission of America, was explicitly and
authoritatively assured, that neither the Committee nor that
Congress which sent them had Authority to treat in any other
Capacity than as INDEPENDENT STATES. His Lordship, it seems, "has
no Instruction on that Subject." We must therefore fight it out,
and trust in God for Success. I dare assure my self, that the
most effectual Care has before this time been taken, for the
Continuance and Support of our Armies, not only for the Remainder
of the present, but for a future year. The People will cheerfully
support their Independence to the utmost. Their Spirits will rise
upon their knowing the Result of the late Conference. It has, you
may depend upon it, been a Matter of great Expectation. Would it
not be attended with a good Effect, if an Account of it was
publishd by Authority of Congress? It would, I should think, at
least put it out of the Power of disaffected Men (and there are
some of this Character even here) to amuse their honest Neighbors
with vain hopes of Reconciliation.

I wish that Congress would give the earliest Notice to this
State, of what may be further expected to be done here for the
Support of the Army. The Season is advancing or rather passing
fast. I intended when I sat down to have written you a long
Epistle, but I am interrupted. I have a thousand Avocations which
require my Attention. Many of them are too trifling to merit your
Notice. Adieu, my Friend. I hope to see you soon.



TO SAMUEL MATHER.

[MS., Dreer Collection, Historical Society of Pennsylvania; a
text is in the Emmet Collection, Lenox Library; and a draft is in
the Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADA Octob 26 1776

MY DEAR SIR,

On the Evening of the 24th Instant I arrivd in good health in
this City--I give you this Information in Compliance with my
Word, and flattering my self that I shall very soon be favord
with a Letter from you--I will promise to give you hereafter as
much Intelligence as the Secrecy to which I am in honour bound
will allow.

I met with Nothing disagreable in my journey, saving my being
prevented from passing through the direct Road in East Chester,
the Enemy having taken Possession of the Ground there--Our Army
is extended in several Encampments from Kings Bridge to White
Plains which is 12 or 15 Miles Northward, commanded by the
Generals Lord Sterling, Bell (of Maryland) Lincoln, McDougal,
Lee, Heath & Putnam--I mention them, I think, in the order as
they are posted from the Plains to the Bridge--The Generals Head
Quarters are now at Valentine Hill about the Center of the
Encampments. The Army is in high Spirits and wish for Action.
There have been several Skirmishes; one on Fryday the 18th in
which the Massachusetts Regiment commanded by Coll Glover
distinguishd their Bravery and they have receivd the Thanks of
the General. In this Rencounter the Enemy sustaind a considerable
Loss, it is said not less than 700 Men--Another on the Night of
the 21st. The infamous Major Rogers with about 400 Tories of Long
Island, having advancd towards Mareneck1 on the Main, was
defeated by a Party of ours with the Loss of 36 Prisoners besides
killed & wounded. This valiant Hero was the first off the Field--
Such Skirmishes, if successful on our Part, will give Spirit to
our Soldiers and fit them for more important and decisive Action,
which I confess I impatiently wish for.--I have said that our
Soldiers are in high Spirits; I add, that so far as I can learn
the Character of the General officers of the Enemys Army, we at
least equal them in this Instance, we have an excellent
Commissary & Quarter Master General, officers of great Importance
--Mifflin, who servd so much to our Advantage in the latter of
these Employments, has condescended to take it again though he
had been promoted to the Rank & Pay of a Brigadier General--The
Enemy is posted in a rough hilly Country, the Advantages of which
Americans have convincd them they know how to improve--Under all
these Circumstances I should think that the sooner a General
Battle was brot on, the better; but I am no Judge in military
Matters.

An interresting Affair, about which a Circle of Friends whom I
had the Pleasure of meeting at Dr Chauncys, is finishd, I think,
agreably to their Wishes--I can only add at present that I am
with the most cordial Esteem,

Sir your assured Friend
& very humble Servant

_________________________________________________________________
1Mamaroneck.



TO MRS. ADAMS.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADA, Novr 14th 1776

MY DEAR BETSY

I wrote to you within a Day or two after my Arrival here by an
Express. I cannot say that I was not disappointed in not
receiving a Line from you by the last Post, as I thought I had
Reason to expect. While I am absent from you I am continually
anxious to know the State of your Health. I must therefore beg
you to write to me often. I have not for many years enjoyd a
greater Share of that invalueable Blessing than I have since I
left Boston. I believe the journey on Horseback has been greatly
beneficial to me.

We have lately receivd Intelligence from the Northern Army of
certain Movements of the Enemy in that Quarter, of which you will
see an Account in the inclosd News Paper. This day we have
further Intelligence that they have totally abandond Crown Point
& retreated into Canada. We have also just receivd a Letter from
a Gentleman living on the Sea Coasts of New Jersey informing us
that near 100 Sail of the Enemies Ships with two Frigates & a
fifty Gun Ship were seen steering to the Eastward. It is supposd
they are bound to England. We had before heard that the whole
Force of the Enemy had marchd unexpectedly & precipitately into
the City of New York. This evening an Express is come in from
General Greene who commands on this Side the North River in the
Jersys with Advice that ten thousand of the Enemies Troops were
embarkd, and that it was given out that they were destind to
South Carolina. This may be a Feint. Possibly they may be coming
to this City, which in my Opinion is rather to be desired,
because the People of this State are more numerous than that of
South Carolina. In either Case however I dare say that a good
Account will be given of them. It is said that Lord Dunmore is to
take the Command. If this be true, it looks as if they were going
to Virginia. Be it as it may, the withdrawing so great a Part of
their Troops from New York, it is hoped, will make it an easy
matter for our Army to conquer the Remainder.

It has not been usual for me to write to you of War or
Politicks,--but I know how deeply you have always interrested
yourself in the Welfare of our Country and I am disposd to
gratify your Curiosity. Besides you will hope that from these
Movements of our Enemies a Communication between Boston and
Philadelphia will be more safe and we may the more frequently
hear from each other.

Novr 17th I wish you would acquaint your Brother Sammy that
General Mifflin is now Quartermaster General in Room of Coll
Moylan--that when I was at Head Quarters I mentiond to the
General the treatment your Brother had met with. He told me that
he would have him state the Matter to him in Writing and that he
would endeavor to have justice done to him. The Letter your
Brother formerly wrote to me I left at Boston. If he will give me
a full Account of the Matter in another Letter, I will state it
to General Mifflin, but the Circumstances of things are such at
present that I would not have him depend on its being immediately
attended to. I will however do all in my power to serve him.

Our Friend Mr Lovell1 is at last exchangd. We receivd a Letter
from him two or three days ago. Probably before this reaches you
he will have arrivd at Boston. Pray remember me to my Daughter,
Sister Polly with the rest of my Family & Friends, and be assured
that I am most sincerely & affectionately,

Your,

_________________________________________________________________
1Cf. page 248.



TO MRS. ADAMS.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADELPHIA Novr 29 1776

MY DEAR BETSY

I take this Opportunity by Mr Chamberlain to acquaint you that I
am in good health & Spirits. This Intelligence, I flatter myself,
will not be disagreable to you. I have not receivd a Line from
you since I left Boston which gives me Reason to suspect that
your Letters may have fallen into wrong hands.

Traveling, it seems, is of late become somewhat dangerous; should
this be intercepted and be seen by the two Brothers,1 they will
have an opportunity of knowing that I am still most firmly
attachd to the best Cause that virtuous Men contend for, and that
I am animated with the full Perswasion that righteous Heaven will
support the Americans if they persevere in their manly Struggles
for their Liberty. I have no Reason to suspect the Virtue of the
Generality of my Countrymen. There are indeed Poltrons & Trayters
everywhere. I do not therefore think it strange that some such
Characters are to be found in this City, but the indignation of
the People kindles at the expected approach of the Enemies Army,
and every proper measure is taking to meet them on the Road and
stop their wild Career.--I am told that Lord Howe has lately
issued a Proclamation offering a general Pardon with the
Exception of only four Persons viz Dr Franklin Coll Richard Henry
Lee Mr John Adams & myself. I am not certain of the Truth of this
Report. If it be a Fact I am greatly obligd to his Lordship for
the flattering opinion he has given me of my self as being a
Person obnoxious to those who are desolating a once happy Country
for the sake of extinguishing the remaining Lamp of Liberty, and
for the singular Honor he does me in ranking me with Men so
eminently patriotick.

I hope you will write to me by every opportunity. Pay my due
Respects to my Family and Friends and be assured that I am most
affectionately,

Your,

_________________________________________________________________
1Presumably Admiral Howe and General Howe.



TO JAMES WARREN.

[MS., Chamberlain Collection, Boston Public Library.]

PHILADE, Novr 29 1776

MY DEAR SIR/

I inclose a Resolve1 passd in Congress and attested by the
Secretary which I doubt not the Honbl House of Representatives
will duly regard. Indeed I am in hopes your Committee for
providing Cloathing &c for the Army have already in a great
Measure answerd the Request. You will have heard of the
Scituation of the Armies before this will reach you. A Part of
the Enemy have got on this Side of Hudsons River, but I dare say
you will have a good Account of them. I am more chagrind at the
Disgrace than the Loss we have met with by the Surrender of Forts
Washington & Lee. They should not have cost the Enemy less than
thousands of their Troops. After all, what have the mighty
Victors gaind? a few Miles of Ground at the Expence of many
Millions of their Treasure & the Effusion of much of their Blood.
But we must stop their Career. This I am satisfied can & will be
done. Mr Gerry writes to you by this opportunity--therefore I
need not add more than that I am very affectionately,

Yours,

_________________________________________________________________
1A marginal postscript, in the autograph of Adams, reads: "Pray
deliver the inclosd, if your Leisure will admit with
your own hand."



TO JAMES WARREN.

[W. V. Wells, Life of Samuel Adams, vol. ii., pp. 452-454; an
incomplete text.]

[PHILADELPHIA, December 4, 1776.]

It affords me singular pleasure to be informed that our General
Assembly is now sitting in Boston. I have been of opinion that
the public business could be done with more despatch there than
elsewhere. "You have appointed a committee of war," with very
extensive powers, "and appropriated to their disposition two
hundred thousand pounds to purchase everything necessary to carry
on the war with vigor next year." I heartily rejoice to hear
this. I hope the committee are men of business, and will make a
good use of the powers and moneys they are intrusted with. Let me
tell you, that every nerve must be strained to resist the British
tyrant, who, in despair of availing himself of his own troops
which lately he so much prided himself in, is now summoning the
powers of earth and hell to subjugate America. The lamp of
liberty burns there and there only. He sees it, and is impatient
even to madness to extinguish it. It is our duty, at all hazards,
to prevent it.

But I am sensible I need not write you in this style. You and the
rest of my countrymen have done, and I have no doubt will
continue to do, your duty in defence of a cause so interesting to
mankind. It is with inexpressible pleasure that I reflect that
the mercenary forces of the tyrant have for two years in vain
attempted to penetrate the Eastern Colonies; there our enemies
themselves, and those who hate us, acknowledge that the rights of
man have been defended with bravery. And did not South Carolina
nobly withstand the efforts of tyranny? She did. Virginia too,
and North Carolina, have in their turn acted with a spirit
becoming the character of Americans But what will be said of
Pennsylvania and the Jerseys? Have they not disgraced themselves
by standing idle spectators while the enemy overran a great part
of their country? They have seen our army unfortunately separated
by the river, retreating to Newark, to Elizabethtown, Woodbridge,
Brunswick, and Princeton. The enemy's army were, by the last
account, within sixty miles of this city. If they were as near
Boston, would not our countrymen cut them all to pieces or take
them prisoners? But by the unaccountable stupor which seems to
have pervaded these States, the enemy have gained a triumph which
they did not themselves expect. A triumph, indeed! Without a
victory! Without one laurel to boast of! For Bunker's Hill they
fought and bled. They sacrificed their bravest officers, and we
wished them twenty such victories. But the people of the Jerseys
have suffered them to run through their country without the risk
of even a private soldier! They expended their ammunition at
trees and bushes as they marched! But I hear the sound of the
drum. The people of Pennsylvania say of themselves, that they are
slow in determining, but vigorous in executing. I hope that we
shall find both parts of this prediction to be just. They say, We
are now determined, and promise to bring General Howe to a hearty
repentance for venturing so near them. I have the pleasure to
tell you that, within a few days past, they have made a spirited
appearance. In spite of Quakers, Proprietarians, timid Whigs,
Tories, petit-maitres, and trimmers, there is a sufficient number
of them in arms resolved to defend their country. Many of them
are now on the march. Heaven grant they may be honorable
instruments to retrieve the reputation of their countrymen and
reduce Britain to a contemptible figure at the end of this
campaign.

I am glad to hear our harbor looks so brilliant. I HOPE IT IS
FORTIFIED AGAINST EVERY ATTEMPT OF THE ENEMY NEXT SPRING.

In your letters, you ask me two important questions. I dare not
repeat them. With regard to the last you will understand me when
I tell you, let not your mind be troubled about it.



TO MRS. ADAMS.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADELPHIA Decr 9 1776

MY DEAR BETSY

My last by Mr Pliarne I hope you will have receivd before this
reaches you. I am still in good Health and Spirits, although the
Enemy is within Forty Miles of this City. I do not regret the
Part I have taken in a cause so just and interresting to Mankind.
I must confess it chagrins me greatly to find it so illy
supported by the People of Pennsylvania and the Jerseys. They
seem to me to be determind to give it up--but I trust that my
dear New England will maintain it at the Expence of every thing
dear to them in this Life---they know how to prize their
Liberties. May Heaven bless them! It is not yet determind to what
place to adjourn the Congress, if it should be necessary to move.
Wherever I may be, I shall write to you by every Opportunity. Mr
Brown who carries this Letter will give you a particular Account
of the Circumstances of things here--to him I refer you. Pray
remember me to my Daughter, Sister Polly, the rest of my Family &
Friends. I hope the Life of our valueable Friend Mrs March will
yet be spared. She is indeed a good Woman. Tell my worthy
Neighbor Mr Preston, that I rejoyce to hear of his honorable
Appointment. I hope & believe he will use his office well. I wish
to have a Letter from you. You cannot imagine how highly I prize
such a Favor. My daily Prayer is for your Safety, & Happiness in
this Life & a better. Adieu, my dear. You cannot doubt the
sincere & most cordial Affection of,

Your,

Decr 11

Since writing the above I have receivd your Letter of the 9th of
Novr, for which I am much obligd to you. If this City should be
SURRENDERD, I should by no means despair of our Cause. It is a
righteous Cause and I am fully perswaded righteous Heaven will
succeed it. Congress will adjourn to Baltimore in Maryland, about
120 Miles from this place, when Necessity requires it and not
before. It is agreed to appoint a Day of Prayer, & a Come will
bring in a Resolution for that purpose this day. I wish we were
a more religious People. That Heaven may bless you here &
hereafter is the most ardent Prayer of, my dear, most cordially,

Your,



TO GEORGE WASHINGTON.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

PHILADELPHIA Decr 12 1776

SIR

We are this moment informd by a Gentleman who is Brother of Coll
Griffin, and has lately been at New York, that a Body of ten
thousand of the Enemies Troops had actually arrivd at Rhode
Island. As Congress is now adjournd to Baltimore in Maryland, and
the President and the Board of War are not in Town, we think it
our Duty to send you this Intelligence; and as there is no
General Officer in that Department, we refer it to your
Consideration whether the Service does not absolutely require
that one be immediately sent to take the Command of Troops that
may be raisd there to repel the Progress of the Enemy.

If Major General Gates or Green,1 who are greatly belovd in that
Part of America with a suitable Number of Brigadiers could be
spared for this Service, it would be attended with another
Advantage, that of facilitating the new Inlistments.

We intreat your Attention to this important Matter, and are with
great Respect,

Sir your very humble Servants,2

_________________________________________________________________
1The words "or Green" and "with a suitable number of Brigadiers,"
were added by interlineations in the first draft.
2Signed by Adams, Elbridge Gerry, William Ellery, and William
Whipple.



TO MRS. ADAMS.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

BALTIMORE IN MARYLAND

Decr 19th 1776

MY DEAR BETSY

The Day before yesterday I arrivd in this Place which is One
hundred Miles from Philadelphia. The Congress had resolvd to
adjourn here when it should become absolutely necessary and not
before. This sudden Removal may perhaps be wonderd at by some of
my Friends, but was not without the advice of Generals Putnam &
Mifflin, who were at Philadelphia to take Measures for its
Preservation from the Enemy. For my own part, I had been used to
Alarms in my own Country, and did not see the Necessity of
removing so soon, but I suppose I misjudgd because it was
otherwise ruled. It must be confessd that deliberative Bodies
should not sit in Places of Confusion. This was heightned by an
unaccountable Backwardness in the People of the jerseys &
Pennsylvania to defend their Country and crush their Enemies when
I am satisfied it was in their Power to do it. The British as
well as Hessian officers have severely chastisd them for their
Folly. We are told that such savage Tragedies have been acted by
them without Respect to Age or Sex as have equaled the most
barbarous Ages & Nations of the World. Sorry I am that the People
so long refusd to harken to the repeated Calls of their Country.
They have already deeply staind the Honor of America, and they
must surely be as unfeeling as Rocks if they do not rise with
Indignation and revenge the shocking Injuries done to their Wives
and Daughters. Great Britain has taught us what to expect from
Submission to its Power. No People ever more tamely surrenderd
than of that Part of the Jerseys through which the Enemy marchd.
No opposition was made. And yet the grossest Insults have been
offerd to them, and the rude Soldiery have been sufferd to
perpetrate Deeds more horrid than Murder. If Heaven punishes
Communities for their Vices, how sore must be the Punishment of
that Community who think the Rights of human Nature not worth
struggling for and patiently submit to Tyranny. I will rely upon
it that New England will never incur the Curse of Heaven for
neglecting to defend her Liberties. I pray God to increase their
Virtue and make them happy in the full and quiet Possession of
those Liberties they have ever so highly prizd. YOUR Wellfare, my
dear, is ever near my heart. Remember me to my Daughter Sister
Polly & the rest of my Family and Friends. I am in high Health &
Spirits. Let me hear from you often.

Adieu,

Mr. Hancock is just now arrivd with his Family--all in good
health.



TO JAMES WARREN.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

BALTIMORE IN MARYLAND Decr 25 1776

MY DEAR SIR

Although I have been continually writing to you, I have had the
Pleasure of receiving only one Letter from you since I left New
England. The Congress is here, scituated conveniently enough and
doing Business. You will ask me perhaps, How we came here. I
confess I did not see the Necessity of removing so soon; but I
must think I misjudgd because it was ruled otherwise, not indeed
until the Opinions of Putnam & Mifflin then in Philadelphia, had
been taken. The Truth is, the Enemy were within seventeen Miles
of us, and it was apprehended by some that the People of
Pennsylvania, influenced by Fear Folly or Treachery, would have
given up their Capital to appease the Anger of the two Brothers &
atone for their Crime in suffering it to remain so long the Seat
of Rebellion. We are now informd that they have at length
bestirrd themselves and that hundreds are daily flocking to Genl
Washingtons Camp, so that it is hoped if our Army pursues as
expeditiously as they have retreated, they will take them all
Prisoners before they can reach the Borders of Hudsons River.

We have this day receivd a Letter from General Schuyler, which
has occasiond the passing a Resolution, forwarded to you, I
suppose by this opportunity. The General says he is informd that
the Levies are making very tardily. I hope he has been
misinformd. It is certainly of the greatest Importance that New
England in a particular Manner should be very active in
Preparation to meet the Enemy early in the Spring. The British
Tyrant will not quit his darling Plan of subduing that Country.
The Intent of the Enemy seems to me to be to attack it on all
Sides. Howes Troops have penetrated this way far beyond his
Expectations; I flatter myself they will be driven back to New
York & winter there. Carleton will, unless prevented by an
immediate Exertion of New England, most certainly possess himself
of Tyconderoga as soon as Lake Champlain shall be frozen hard
enough to transport his Army. Clinton it is said is gone to Rhode
Island with 8 or 10 thousand to make Winter Quarters there. The
infamous Behavior of the People of Jersey & Pennsylvania will
give fresh Spirits to the British Court and afford them a further
Pretence to apply to every Court in Europe where they can have
any Prospect of Success. Russia has already been applied to.
Their whole Force will be poured into N England for they take it
for granted that having once subdued those stubborn States, the
rest will give up without a Struggle. They will take Occasion
from what has happend in Jersey to inculcate this Opinion. How
necessary is it then for our Countrymen to strain every Nerve to
defeat their Design. The Time is short. Let this be the only
Subject of our Thoughts and Consultation. Our Affairs in France
wear a promising Aspect. Let us do our Duty and defend the fair
Inheritance which our Fathers have left us--our pious Forefathers
who regarded Posterity & fought and bled that they might transmit
to us the Blessing of Liberty.

When we first heard at Philadelphia of Clintons having saild to
Rhode Island, Mr Gerry and myself joynd with Coll Whipple of New
Hampshire & Mr Ellery of Rhode Island in a Letter to Genl
Washington and proposed to him the sending Gen Gates or Greene
with a suitable number of Brigadiers to take the Command in the
Eastern Departmt. [In] his answer which we receivd in this place
he tells us he has orderd M Genl Spencer & B Genl Arnold to
repair thither who he hopes may be sufficient to head the
yeomanry of that Country & repel the Enemy in their attempts to
gain possession of that part of the Continent. He [adds] that he
will if possible, send some other Brigadiers, and says Gen
Wooster is also at hand.

I wrote to you after my Arrival at Philade & inclosd a Resolution
of Congress relative to the procuring of cloathing in N E for the
Army. In another Letter I gave you a hint which I think of great
Importance if the Measure proposd [be] practicable. I hope both
these Letters were duly receivd by you. You cannot, my dear Sir,
do me a greater Kindness than by writing to me. I suffer much
thro want of Intelligence from N E; I pray you therefore let your
Letters to me be very frequent.

I am very cordially your friend,

By a late Letter from London written by a Gentn upon whose
Intelligence I greatly rely a Treaty is on foot with Russia to
furnish Britain with 20 or 30,000 troops. Levies are making with
all possible Industry in Germany & in Britain & Ireland from
where it is expected that 20,000 will be raisd. It [is] indeed to
be supposd that, as usual, a greater Appearance will be made on
paper than they will realize. But let us consider that they
realizd in America the last year 35,000 and do without doubt . .
. . . . . they lose because they are able to do it, we may then
set down their actual force in America by May or June next at
least 55 and probably 60,000.

We have the pleasure of hearing that a valueable Prize is arrivd
at [Boston]--among the rest of her Cargo 10,000 Suits of Cloaths!
A most fortunate Prize for us, especially as she is said to be
the last of 8 Vessels taken bound to Quebec. However while we are
pleasing ourselves with the Acquisition we should remember that
the Want of those supplys will be a strong Stimulus to Carleton
to make an early & bold push over the Champlain in hopes of
furnishing himself at Albany; & increases the Necessity of the
Eastern States sending their Troops to Tyconderoga immediately to
supply the places of those who will return home, when the time of
their Inlistments shall expire. I have good Information from
England that a certain Captn Furze who [was] in Boston the last
year & gaind the Confidence & recd the Civilities of the People;
when he returnd gloried in the Deception & carried Intelligence
to the British Ministry, particularly of the Fortifications in &
about Boston. Some of the People may remember him. How careful
ought we to be lest while we mean only innocent Civility, we
expose our Councils & Operations to Spies.

I remain very cordially your friend,



TO MRS. ADAMS.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

BALTIMORE IN MARYLAND 26 Decr 1776

MY DEAR BETSY

I have written to you once since I arrivd here, and am determind
to omit no opportunity, because I flatter myself you will at all
times be gratified in hearing from me. I am at present in good
health and am exceedingly happy in an Acquaintance with Mr Samuel
Purviance a Merchant of this Place, with whom I have indeed
before corresponded, but I never saw him till I came here. He is
a sensible, honest and friendly Man, warmly attachd to the
American Cause, and has particularly endeard himself to me by his
great Assiduity in procuring Reliefe in this part of the
Continent for the Town of Boston at a Time when her Enemies would
have starvd her by an oppressive Port bill.

Just now I receivd a Letter from my Son dated the 7th Instant; he
tells me he had very lately heard from his Sister and that she
and the rest of my Family were well. I pray God to continue your
Health and protect you in these perilous times from every kind of
Evil. The Name of the Lord, says the Scripture, is a strong
Tower, thither the Righteous flee and are Safe. Let us secure his
Favor, and he will lead us through the journey of this Life and
at length receive us to a better.

We are now informd that the People of Jersey & Pennsylvania are
in Possession of their Understanding and that they are turning
out in great Numbers to the Assistance of General Washington. Had
they done this early they would not have so deeply staind the
Reputation of America. However I shall hardly think they will do
their Duty at last if they suffer the Enemy to return without
paying dearly for the barbarous Outrages they have committed in
the Country, without Regard to Age or Sex.

Our Affairs in France & Spain wear a pleasing Aspect, but human
Affairs are ever uncertain. I have strongly recommended to my
Friends in New England to spare no Pains or Cost in preparing to
meet the Enemy early in the Spring. We have a righteous Cause,
and if we defend it as becomes us, we may expect the Blessing of
Heaven.

Remember me to my Daughter, Sister Polly & the rest of my Family
& Friends. Adieu, my dear,



TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL OF MASSACHUSETTS.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

BALTIMORE Decr 30 1776

SIR

Being a Committee of Congress we are directed to employ some
suitable Person to make Application to your Honorable Board for
certain Ordnance and other Stores, which have been represented by
General Schuyler as immediately necessary for the Use of the
Northern Army. We accordingly send forward Collo Stewart, who
will lay before the Board such Stores as are wanted; which we
hope may be procurd on just and equitable Terms, and transported
with all possible Dispatch to General Schuyler, whose Receipt
will be duly acknowledgd by Congress.

We need not urge the great Importance of having our Army in that
Quarter well furnishd with every necessary Article, there being
not the least Reason to doubt of General Carletons Intentions as
early as possible to push his Forces into the Eastern States, or
of his Success in such an Attempt unless seasonably prevented.

It is therefore our earnest Request that you would afford Coll
Stuart every possible advice & assistance in the Prosecution of
this Business, and furnish him with such Money as he may have
need of for the purpose in which Case your Draft on the President
of the Congress will be duly honord.

We are with the most cordial Esteem
Sir
your most obedient
& very humble Servants



TO WALTER STEWART.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library; a portion is printed in
W. V. Wells, Life of Samuel Adams, vol. ii., pp. 450, 451.]

BALTIMORE Decr 30 1776

SIR

We are a Committee of Congress1 authorizd and directed to appoint
some suitable Person to apply to Mr Livingston Owner of a Furnace
in the State of New York, and to Governor Trumbull who has the
Direction of the Furnace in the State of Connecticutt also to the
Council of the State of Massachusetts Bay, to procure such Cannon
and Ordnance Stores, as General Schuyler has represented to be
immediately necessary for the use of the Army in the Northern
Department.

We know of no one in whom we can more chearfully confide, for the
Performance of this important Business than your self; and
therefore we request you to undertake it, as Major General Gates
has assured us, that it is not inconsistent with the General
Service, or the Duty of that Station which you hold under his
immediate Command.

You have herewith a List of the Ordnance and Ordnance Stores that
are wanted; and you will be pleasd to make your first Application
to Mr Livingston for such of the Cannon and Stores as he can
furnish. You will then apply to Governor Trumbull, to be furnishd
by him with the Remainder, to be sent to General Schuyler as
early as possible this Winter.

For the Ordnance Stores we depend chiefly upon the Massachusetts
Bay; and desire you to make Application to the Council of that
State; although we would by no means restrain you in Endeavors to
procure them in New York Connecticutt or elsewhere.

We doubt not but you will provide these Necessaries with all
possible Dispatch, and at reasonable Rates; and we desire you to
give Notice to General Schuyler and to us of the Success you may
meet with in your several Applications.

We would inform you that Congress has contracted for Cannon to be
cast in this State at the Rate of Thirty Six pounds ten shillings
p Ton. And the highest price that has been given in Pennsylvania
is Forty Pounds. We desire and expect you will purchase them at
the lowest Rate you can. The Proof of the Cannon must be
according to the Woolwich Practice.

_________________________________________________________________
1The members of the committee were Adams, Lee, Harrison, Whipple
and Hayward.



TO JAMES WARREN.

[MS., Samuel Adams Papers, Lenox Library.]

BALTIMORE Decr 31. 1776

MY DEAR SIR/

I am determind to omit no Opportunity of writing to you, although
I of late very seldom receive a Favor from you. Your second
Letter I receivd a few days ago inclosing Copies of Papers from
Spain. I am much obligd to you for them. Our Affairs in Europe
look well, and additional Measures are taking here to establish
them in that Part of the World on a solid Foundation. I assure
you Business has been done since we came to this Place more to my
Safisfaction than any or every thing done before, excepting the
Declaration of Independence which should have been made
immediately after the 19th of April 75. OUR MINISTERS ABROAD are
directed to assure FOREIGN COURTS that notwithstanding the artful
& insidious Representations of the Emissaries of the British
Court to the Contrary, the Congress and People of America are
determind to maintain their Independence at all Events. This was
done before the late Success in the Jerseys, of which you will
have doubtless had Intelligence before this Letter reaches you. I
now think that Britain will soon make a most contemptible Figure
in America & Europe--but we must still make our utmost Exertions.
Pray let the Levies required of our State be raisd with all
possible Expedition. By this Conveyance you will have a
Resolution giving large Powers to General Washington for a
limited Season. It became in my opinion necessary. The Hint I
gave you some time ago, I still think very important. General
Gates arrivd here yesterday. I have conversd with him upon it. He
told me he had conceivd the Idea before and wishes the Measure
may [be] tryed. It requires Secrecy and Dispatch. Lt Coll Steward
will set off tomorrow with Directions to proceed as far as Boston
to purchase Ordnance & other Stores if they cannot be procurd
elsewhere. He is General Gates Aid de Camp & is very clev[er.] I
wish you would take Notice of him.

But I am now called off. Adieu my Friend,


Regina Azucena