STORIES FROM VIRGIL

                      BY THE
            REV. ALFRED J. CHURCH, M.A.

  _Head Master of King Edward's School, Retford_;
          AUTHOR OF "STORIES FROM HOMER."


          WITH TWENTY-FOUR ILLUSTRATIONS
              FROM PINELLI'S DESIGNS


                 _FIFTH THOUSAND._


     SEELEY, JACKSON, & HALLIDAY, FLEET STREET
                LONDON. MDCCCLXXIX.

             (_All Rights Reserved._)


        UNWIN BROTHERS, THE GRESHAM PRESS,
               CHILWORTH AND LONDON.




  [Illustration: THE FLIGHT FROM TROY.]




CONTENTS.


     CHAP.                                                   PAGE
        I. THE HORSE OF WOOD                                    1

       II. THE SACK OF TROY                                    10

      III. AENEAS AND ANCHISES                                 20

       IV. POLYDORUS--DELOS--CRETE--THE HARPIES                29

        V. KING HELENUS--THE CYCLOPS                           39

       VI. THE SHIPWRECK                                       52

      VII. CARTHAGE                                            58

     VIII. DIDO                                                68

       IX. THE LOVE AND DEATH OF DIDO                          78

        X. THE FUNERAL GAMES OF ANCHISES                       96

       XI. THE FUNERAL GAMES (CONTINUED)                      107

      XII. THE BURNING OF THE SHIPS--THE VOYAGE TO ITALY      115

     XIII. THE SIBYL                                          124

      XIV. THE DWELLINGS OF THE DEAD                          132

       XV. KING LATINUS                                       149

      XVI. THE WRATH OF JUNO                                  159

     XVII. THE GATHERING OF THE CHIEFS                        167

    XVIII. KING EVANDER                                       173

      XIX. THE ARMS OF AENEAS                                 181

       XX. NISUS AND EURYALUS                                 190

      XXI. THE BATTLE AT THE CAMP                             202

     XXII. THE BATTLE ON THE SHORE                            210

    XXIII. THE COUNCIL                                        226

     XXIV. THE BATTLE AT THE CITY                             235

      XXV. THE BROKEN TREATY                                  245

     XXVI. THE DEATH OF TURNUS                                253




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


    THE FLIGHT FROM TROY                           _Frontispiece_

    LAOCOON                                                     8

    AENEAS AND HELEN                                           20

    AENEAS AND THE SHADE OF CREUSA                             26

    THE HARPIES                                                36

    JUNO AND AEOLUS                                            54

    NEPTUNE STILLING THE WAVES                                 56

    DIDO AND THE FALSE ASCANIUS                                76

    DIDO ON THE FUNERAL PILE                                   94

    ENTELLUS KILLING THE BULL                                 110

    CHARON AND THE GHOSTS                                     134

    CERBERUS                                                  136

    AENEAS AND THE SHADE OF DIDO                              138

    THE FURY AT THE FEAST                                     142

    TURNUS OVER THE BODIES OF ALMO AND GALAESUS               168

    AENEAS AND TIBER                                          174

    HERCULES AND CACUS                                        178

    VULCAN AND THE CYCLOPES                                   186

    IRIS APPEARING TO TURNUS                                  190

    NISUS AND EURYALUS                                        198

    THE MOTHER OF EURYALUS RECEIVING THE NEWS OF HIS DEATH    200

    AENEAS AND THE BODY OF LAUSUS                             222

    CAMILLA AND THE SON OF AUNUS                              240

    THE DEATH OF CAMILLA                                      242




  TO THE HONOURED MEMORY

            OF

      JOHN CONINGTON

  THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED.




PREFACE.


The favour with which the public received "Stories from Homer" has
encouraged me to deal in the same way with the Aeneid. I have found it
a difficult task, and I must ask the indulgence of my readers, who
will certainly miss, not only the freshness and simplicity of the
great Greek epic, but those chief characteristics of Virgil, his
supreme mastery of expression and the splendour of his style. I beg
them to remember that I do not attempt to translate my original, that
while I add nothing (except, in a very few instances, an explanatory
phrase), I am constrained to leave out much; and that what I leave
out, or, at the most, very inadequately render, will often be found to
be that which they have been accustomed most to admire in the
poet,--his brilliant rhetoric, his philosophy, his imagination, and
his pathos. My chief aim has been to represent to English readers the
narrative, the interest of which is, perhaps, scarcely appreciated.

The illustrations (with the exception of the second, which is taken
from a photograph of the antique) have been adapted from a series of
designs, published early in this century, by Pinelli, a Roman artist
(1781-1835), who acquired a considerable reputation among his
countrymen, especially for the power of representing energetic action.
I may be allowed to express my great obligations to the pains and
skill (to which indeed this volume is otherwise much indebted) which
have been used in making these designs available for the present
purpose.

    RETFORD,
      _September 25, 1878._




STORIES FROM VIRGIL.




CHAPTER I.

THE HORSE OF WOOD.


For ten years King Agamemnon and the men of Greece laid siege to Troy.
But though sentence had gone forth against the city, yet the day of
its fall tarried, because certain of the gods loved it well and
defended it, as Apollo, and Mars, the God of war, and Father Jupiter
himself. Wherefore Minerva put it into the heart of Epeius, Lord of
the Isles, that he should make a cunning device wherewith to take the
city. Now the device was this: he made a great Horse of wood, feigning
it to be a peace offering to Minerva, that the Greeks might have a
safe return to their homes. In the belly of this there hid themselves
certain of the bravest of the chiefs, as Menelaus, and Ulysses, and
Thoas the Aetolian, and Machaon, the great physician, and Pyrrhus, son
of Achilles (but Achilles himself was dead, slain by Paris, Apollo
helping, even as he was about to take the city), and others also, and
with them Epeius himself. But the rest of the people made as if they
had departed to their homes; only they went not further than Tenedos,
which was an island near to the coast.

Great joy was there in Troy when it was noised abroad that the men of
Greece had departed. The gates were opened, and the people went forth
to see the plain and the camp. And one said to another, as they went,
"Here they set the battle in array, and there were the tents of the
fierce Achilles, and there lay the ships." And some stood and
marvelled at the great peace-offering to Minerva, even the Horse of
wood. And Thymoetes, who was one of the elders of the city, was the
first who advised that it should be brought within the walls and set
in the citadel. But whether he gave this counsel out of a false heart,
or because the Gods would have it so, no man knows. And Capys, and
others with him, said that it should be drowned in water, or burned
with fire, or that men should pierce it and see whether there were
aught within. And the people were divided, some crying one thing and
some another. Then came forward the priest Laocoon, and a great
company with him, crying, "What madness is this? Think ye that the men
of Greece are indeed departed, or that there is any profit in their
gifts? Surely, there are armed men in this mighty Horse; or haply they
have made it that they may look down upon our walls. Touch it not, for
as for these men of Greece, I fear them, even though they bring gifts
in their hands."

And as he spake he cast his great spear at the Horse, so that it
sounded again. But the Gods would not that Troy should be saved.

Meanwhile there came certain shepherds, dragging with them one whose
hands were bound behind his back. He had come forth to them, they
said, of his own accord, when they were in the field. And first the
young men gathered about him mocking him, but when he cried aloud,
"What place is left for me, for the Greeks suffer me not to live, and
the men of Troy cry for vengeance upon me?" they rather pitied him,
and bade him speak, and say whence he came and what he had to tell.

Then the man spake, turning to King Priam: "I will speak the truth,
whatever befall me. My name is Sinon, and I deny not that I am a
Greek. Haply thou hast heard the name of Palamedes, whom the Greeks
slew, but now, being dead, lament; and the cause was that, because he
counselled peace, men falsely accused him of treason. Now, of this
Palamedes I was a poor kinsman, and followed him to Troy. And when he
was dead, through the false witness of Ulysses, I lived in great grief
and trouble, nor could I hold my peace, but sware that if ever I came
back to Argos I would avenge me of him that had done this deed. Then
did Ulysses seek occasion against me, whispering evil things, nor
rested till at the last, Calchas the soothsayer helping him--but what
profit it that I should tell these things? For doubtless ye hold one
Greek to be even as another. Wherefore slay me, and doubtless ye will
do a pleasure to Ulysses and the sons of Atreus."

Then they bade him tell on, and he said,--

"Often would the Greeks have fled to their homes, being weary of the
war, but still the stormy sea hindered them. And when this Horse that
ye see had been built, most of all did the dreadful thunder roll from
the one end of the heaven to the other. Then the Greeks sent one who
should inquire of Apollo; and Apollo answered them thus: 'Men of
Greece, even as ye appeased the winds with blood when ye came to Troy,
so must ye appease them with blood now that ye would go from thence.'
Then did men tremble to think on whom the doom should fall, and
Ulysses, with much clamour, drew forth Calchas the soothsayer into the
midst, and bade him say who it was that the Gods would have as a
sacrifice. Then did many forebode evil for me. Ten days did the
soothsayer keep silence, saying that he would not give any one to
death. But then, for in truth the two had planned the matter
beforehand, he spake, appointing me to die. And to this thing they all
agreed, each being glad to turn to another that which he feared for
himself. But when the day was come, and all things were ready, the
salted meal for the sacrifice and the garlands, lo! I burst my bonds
and fled, and hid myself in the sedges of a pool, waiting till they
should have set sail, if haply that might be. But never shall I see
country, or father, or children again. For doubtless on these will
they take vengeance for my flight. Only do thou, O king, have pity on
me, who have suffered many things, and yet have harmed no man."

And King Priam had pity on him, and bade them loose his bonds, saying,
"Whoever thou art, forget now thy country. Henceforth thou art one of
us. But tell me true: why made they this huge Horse? Who contrived it?
What seek they by it? to please the Gods or to further their siege?"

Then said Sinon, and as he spake he stretched his hands to the sky, "I
call you to witness, ye everlasting fires of heaven, that with good
right I now break my oath of fealty and reveal the secrets of my
countrymen. Listen then, O king. All our hope has ever been in the
help of Minerva. But, from the day when Diomed and Ulysses dared,
having bloody hands, to snatch her image from her holy place in Troy,
her face was turned from us. Well do I remember how the eyes of the
image, well-nigh before they had set it in the camp, blazed with
wrath, and how the salt sweat stood upon its limbs, aye, and how it
thrice leapt from the ground, shaking shield and spear. Then Calchas
told us that we must cross the seas again, and seek at home fresh
omens for our war. And this, indeed, they are doing even now, and will
return anon. Also the soothsayer said, 'Meanwhile ye must make the
likeness of a Horse, to be a peace-offering to Minerva. And take heed
that ye make it huge of bulk, so that the men of Troy may not receive
it into their gates, nor bring it within their walls, and get safety
for themselves thereby. For if,' he said, 'the men of Troy harm this
image at all, they shall surely perish; but if they bring it into
their city, then shall Asia lay siege hereafter to the city of Pelops,
and our children shall suffer the doom which we would fain have
brought on Troy.'"

These words wrought much on the men of Troy, and as they pondered on
them, lo! the Gods sent another marvel to deceive them. For while
Laocoon, the priest of Neptune, was slaying a bull at the altar of
his god, there came two serpents across the sea from Tenedos, whose
heads and necks, whereon were thick manes of hair, were high above the
waves, and many scaly coils trailed behind in the waters. And when
they reached the land they still sped forward. Their eyes were red as
blood and blazed with fire, and their forked tongues hissed loud for
rage. Then all the men of Troy grew pale with fear and fled away, but
these turned not aside this way or that, seeking Laocoon where he
stood. And first they wrapped themselves about his little sons, one
serpent about each, and began to devour them. And when the father
would have given help to his children, having a sword in his hand,
they seized upon himself, and bound him fast with their folds. Twice
they compassed about his body, and twice his neck, lifting their heads
far above him. And all the while he strove to tear them away with his
hands, his priest's garlands dripping with blood. Nor did he cease to
cry horribly aloud, even as a bull bellows when after an ill stroke of
the axe it flees from the altar. But when their work was done, the two
glided to the citadel of Minerva, and hid themselves beneath the
feet and the shield of the goddess. And men said one to another, "Lo!
the priest Laocoon has been judged according to his deeds; for he cast
his spear against this holy thing, and now the Gods have slain him."
Then all cried out together that the Horse of wood must be drawn to
the citadel. Whereupon they opened the Scaean Gate, and pulled down the
wall that was thereby, and put rollers under the feet of the Horse,
and joined ropes thereto. So, in much joy, they drew it into the city,
youths and maidens singing about it the while, and laying their hands
to the ropes with great gladness. And yet there wanted not signs and
tokens of evil to come. Four times it halted on the threshold of the
gate, and men might have heard a clashing of arms within. Cassandra
also opened her mouth, prophesying evil: but no man heeded her, for
that was ever the doom upon her, not to be believed speaking truth. So
the men of Troy drew the Horse into the city. And that night they kept
a feast to all the Gods with great joy, not knowing that the last day
of the great city had come.

  [Illustration: LAOCOON.]




CHAPTER II.

THE SACK OF TROY.


But when night was now fully come, and the men of Troy lay asleep, lo!
from the ship of King Agamemnon there rose up a flame for a signal to
the Greeks; and these straightway manned their ships, and made across
the sea from Tenedos, there being a great calm, and the moon also
giving them light. Sinon likewise opened a secret door that was in the
great Horse, and the chiefs issued forth therefrom, and opened the
gates of the city, slaying those that kept watch.

Meanwhile there came a vision to Aeneas, who now, Hector being dead,
was the chief hope and stay of the men of Troy. It was Hector's self
that he seemed to see, but not such as he had seen him coming back
rejoicing with the arms of Achilles, or setting fire to the ships, but
even as he lay after that Achilles dragged him at his chariot wheels,
covered with dust and blood, his feet swollen and pierced through with
thongs. To him said Aeneas, not knowing what he said, "Why hast thou
tarried so long? Much have we suffered waiting for thee! And what
grief hath marked thy face? and whence these wounds?"

But to this the spirit answered nothing, but said, groaning the while,
"Fly, son of Venus, fly, and save thee from these flames. The enemy is
in the walls, and Troy hath utterly perished. If any hand could have
saved our city, this hand had done so. Thou art now the hope of Troy.
Take then her Gods, and flee with them for company, seeking the city
that thou shalt one day build across the sea."

And now the alarm of battle came nearer and nearer, and Aeneas, waking
from sleep, climbed upon the roof, and looked on the city. As a
shepherd stands, and sees a fierce flame sweeping before the south
wind over the corn-fields or a flood rushing down from the mountains,
so he stood. And as he looked, the great palace of Deiphobus sank down
in the fire, and the house of Ucalegon, that was hard by, blazed
forth, till the sea by Sigeum shone with the light. Then, scarce
knowing what he sought, he girded on his armour, thinking, perchance,
that he might yet win some place of vantage, or, at the least, might
avenge himself on the enemy, or find honour in his death. But as he
passed from out of his house there met him Panthus, the priest of
Apollo that was on the citadel, who cried to him, "O Aeneas, the glory
is departed from Troy, and the Greeks have the mastery in the city;
for armed men are coming forth from the great Horse of wood, and
thousands also swarm in at the gates, which Sinon hath treacherously
opened." And as he spake others came up under the light of the moon,
as Hypanis, and Dymas, and young Coroebus, who had but newly come to
Troy, seeking Cassandra to be his wife. To whom Aeneas spake: "If ye
are minded, my brethren, to follow me to the death, come on. For how
things fare this night ye see. The Gods who were the stay of this city
have departed from it; nor is aught remaining to which we may bring
succour. Yet can we die as brave men in battle. And haply he that
counts his life to be lost may yet save it." Then, even as ravening
wolves hasten through the mist seeking for prey, so they went through
the city, doing dreadful deeds. And for a while the men of Greece fled
before them.

First of all there met them Androgeos with a great company following
him, who, thinking them to be friends, said, "Haste, comrades, why are
ye so late? We are spoiling this city of Troy, and ye are but newly
come from the ships." But forthwith, for they answered him not as he
had looked for, he knew that he had fallen among enemies. Then even as
one who treads upon a snake unawares among thorns, and flies from it
when it rises angrily against him with swelling neck, so Androgeos
would have fled. But the men of Troy rushed on, and, seeing that they
knew all the place, and that great fear was upon the Greeks, slew many
men. Then said Coroebus, "We have good luck in this matter, my
friends. Come now, let us change our shields, and put upon us the
armour of these Greeks. For whether we deal with our enemy by craft or
by force, who will ask?" Then he took to himself the helmet and shield
of Androgeos, and also girded his sword upon him. In like manner did
the others, and thus going disguised among the Greeks slew many, so
that some again fled to the ships and some were fain to climb into the
Horse of wood. But lo! men came dragging by the hair from the temple
of Minerva the virgin Cassandra, whom when Coroebus beheld, and how
she lifted up her eyes to heaven (but as for her hands, they were
bound with iron), he endured not the sight, but threw himself upon
those that dragged her, the others following him. Then did a grievous
mischance befall them, for the men of Troy that stood upon the roof of
the temple cast spears against them, judging them to be enemies. The
Greeks also, being wroth that the virgin should be taken from them,
fought the more fiercely, and many who had before been put to flight
in the city came against them, and prevailed, being indeed many
against few. Then first of all fell Coroebus, being slain by Peneleus
the Boeotian, and Rhipeus also, the most righteous of all the sons of
Troy. But the Gods dealt not with him after his righteousness. Hypanis
also was slain and Dymas, and Panthus escaped not for all that more
than other men he feared the Gods and was also the priest of Apollo.

Then was Aeneas severed from the rest, having with him two only,
Iphitus and Pelias, Iphitus being an old man and Pelias sorely wounded
by Ulysses. And these, hearing a great shouting, hastened to the
palace of King Priam, where the battle was fiercer than in any place
beside. For some of the Greeks were seeking to climb the walls, laying
ladders thereto, whereon they stood, holding forth their shields with
their left hands, and with their right grasping the roofs. And the men
of Troy, on the other hand, being in the last extremity, tore down the
battlements and the gilded beams wherewith the men of old had adorned
the palace. Then Aeneas, knowing of a secret door whereby the unhappy
Andromache in past days had been wont to enter, bringing her son
Astyanax to his grandfather, climbed on to the roof, and joined
himself to those that fought therefrom. Now upon this roof there was a
tower, whence all Troy could be seen, and the camp of the Greeks and
the ships. This the men of Troy loosened from its foundations with
bars of iron, and thrust it over, so that it fell upon the enemy,
slaying many of them. But not the less did others press forward,
casting the while stones and javelins and all that came to their
hands.

Meanwhile others sought to break down the gates of the palace,
Pyrrhus, son of Achilles, being foremost among them, clad in shining
armour of bronze. Like to a serpent was he, which sleeps indeed during
the winter, but in the spring comes forth into the light, full fed on
evil herbs, and, having cast his skin and renewed his youth, lifts his
head into the light of the sun and hisses with forked tongue. And with
Pyrrhus were tall Periphas, and Automedon, who had been armour-bearer
to his father Achilles, and following them the youth of Scyros, which
was the kingdom of his grandfather Lycomedes. With a great battle-axe
he hewed through the doors, breaking down also the door-posts, though
they were plated with bronze, making, as it were, a great window,
through which a man might see the palace within, the hall of King
Priam, and of the kings who had reigned aforetime in Troy. But when
they that were within perceived it, there arose a great cry of women
wailing aloud and clinging to the doors and kissing them. But ever
Pyrrhus pressed on, fierce and strong as ever was his father Achilles,
nor could aught stand against him, either the doors or they that
guarded them. Then, as a river bursts its banks and overflows the
plain, so did the sons of Greece rush into the palace.

But old Priam, when he saw the enemy in his hall, girded on him his
armour, which now by reason of old age he had long laid aside, and
took a spear in his hand, and would have gone against the adversary,
only Queen Hecuba called to him from where she sat. For she and her
daughters had fled to the great altar of the household Gods, and sat
crowded about it like unto doves that are driven by a storm. Now the
altar stood in an open court that was in the midst of the palace, with
a great bay-tree above it. So when she saw Priam, how he had girded
himself with armour as a youth, she cried to him and said, "What hath
bewitched thee, that thou girdest thyself with armour? It is not the
sword that shall help us this day; no, not though my own Hector were
here, but rather the Gods and their altars. Come hither to us, for
here thou wilt be safe, or at the least wilt die with us."

So she made the old man sit down in the midst. But lo! there came
flying through the palace, Polites, his son, wounded to death by the
spear of Pyrrhus, and Pyrrhus close behind him. And he, even as he
came into the sight of his father and his mother, fell dead upon the
ground. But when King Priam saw it he contained not himself, but cried
aloud, "Now may the gods, if there be any justice in heaven,
recompense thee for this wickedness, seeing that thou hast not spared
to slay the son before his father's eyes. Great Achilles, whom thou
falsely callest thy sire, did not thus to Priam, though he was an
enemy, but reverenced right and truth, and gave the body of Hector for
burial, and sent me back to my city."

And as he spake the old man cast a spear, but aimless and without
force, and that pierced not even the boss of the shield. Then said the
son of Achilles, "Go thou and tell my father of his unworthy son and
all these evil deeds. And that thou mayest tell him, die!" And as he
spake he caught in his left hand the old man's white hair, and dragged
him, slipping the while in the blood of his own son, to the altar, and
then, lifting his sword high for a blow, drave it to the hilt in the
old man's side. So King Priam, who had ruled mightily over many
peoples and countries in the land of Asia, was slain that night,
having first seen Troy burning about him, and his citadel laid even
with the ground. So was his carcass cast out upon the earth, headless,
and without a name.




CHAPTER III.

AENEAS AND ANCHISES.


All these things, indeed, Aeneas beheld, but could not bear help, being
one against many. But when the deed was done, and the old man lay
dead, he bethought him of his father Anchises, and his wife Creusa,
and of his little son Ascanius, and how he had left them without
defence at home. But as he turned to seek them, the night being now,
by reason of many fires, as clear as the day, he espied Helen sitting
in the temple of Vesta, where she had sought sanctuary; for she feared
the men of Troy, to whom she had brought ruin and destruction, and not
less her own husband, whom she had deceived. Then was his wrath
kindled, and he spake to himself, "Shall this evil woman return safe
to Sparta? Shall she see again her home and her children, with Trojan
women forsooth to be her handmaidens? Shall Troy be burnt and King
Priam be slain, and she take no harm? Not so; for though there be no
glory to be won from such a deed, yet shall I satisfy myself, taking
vengeance upon her for my kinsmen and my countrymen." But while he
thought these things in his heart, lo! there appeared unto him Venus,
his mother, made manifest as he had never seen her before, as fair and
as tall as the dwellers in heaven behold her. Then Venus spake thus,
"What meaneth all this rage, my son? Hast thou no care for me? Hast
thou forgotten thy father Anchises, and thy wife, and thy little son?
Of a surety the fire and the sword had consumed them long since but
that I cared for them and saved them. It is not Helen; no, nor Paris,
that hath laid low this great city of Troy, but the wrath of the Gods.
See now, for I will take away the mist that covers thine eyes; see how
Neptune with his trident is overthrowing the walls and rooting up the
city from its foundations; and how Juno stands with spear and shield
in the Scaean Gate, and calls fresh hosts from the ships; and how
Pallas sits on the height with the storm-cloud about her and her
Gorgon shield; and how Father Jupiter himself stirs up the enemy
against Troy. Fly, therefore, my son. I will not leave thee till thou
shalt reach thy father's house." And as she spake she vanished in the
darkness.

  [Illustration: AENEAS AND HELEN.]

Then did Aeneas see dreadful forms and Gods who were the enemies of
Troy, and before his eyes the whole city seemed to sink down into the
fire. Even as a mountain oak upon the hills on which the woodmen ply
their axes bows its head while all its boughs shake about it, till at
last, as blow comes after blow, with a mighty groan it falls crashing
down from the height, even so the city seemed to fall. Then did Aeneas
pass on his way, the goddess leading him, and the flames gave place to
him, and the javelins harmed him not.

But when he was come to his house he bethought him first of the old
man his father; but when he would have carried him to the hills,
Anchises would not, being loath to live in some strange country when
Troy had perished. "Nay," said he, "fly ye who are strong and in the
flower of your days. But as for me, if the Gods had willed that I
should live, they had saved this dwelling for me. Enough is it, yea,
and more than enough, that once I have seen this city taken, and
lived. Bid me, then, farewell as though I were dead. Death will I find
for myself. And truly I have long lingered here a useless stock and
hated of the Gods since Jupiter smote me with the blast of his
thunder."

Nor could the old man be moved from his purpose, though his son and
his son's wife, and even the child Ascanius, besought him with many
tears that he should not make yet heavier the doom that was upon them.
Then was Aeneas minded to go back to the battle and die. For what hope
was left? "Thoughtest thou, my father," he cried, "that I should flee
and leave thee behind? What evil word is this that has fallen from thy
lips? If the Gods will have it that nought of Troy should be left, and
thou be minded that thou and thine should perish with the city, be it
so. The way is easy; soon will Pyrrhus be here; Pyrrhus, red with
Priam's blood; Pyrrhus, who slays the son before the face of the
father, and the father at the altar. Was it for this, kind Mother
Venus, that thou broughtest me safe through fire and sword, to see
the enemy in my home, and my father and my wife and my son lying
slaughtered together? Comrades, give me my arms, and take me back to
the battle. At the least I will die avenged."

But as he girded on his arms and would have departed from the house,
his wife Creusa caught his feet upon the threshold, staying him, and
held out the little Ascanius, saying, "If thou goest to thy death,
take wife and child with thee; but if thou hopest aught from arms,
guard first the house where thou hast father and wife and child."

And lo! as she spake there befell a mighty marvel, for before the face
of father and mother there was seen to shine a light on the head of
the boy Ascanius, and to play upon his waving hair and glitter on his
temples. And when they feared to see this thing, and would have
stifled the flame or quenched it with water, the old man Anchises in
great joy raised his eyes to heaven, and cried aloud, "O Father
Jupiter, if prayer move thee at all, give thine aid and make this omen
sure." And even as he spake the thunder rolled on his left hand, and a
star shot through the skies, leaving a long trail of light behind,
and passed over the house-tops till it was hidden in the woods of Ida.
Then the old man lifted himself up and did obeisance to the star, and
said, "I delay no more: whithersoever ye lead I will follow. Gods of
my country, save my house and my grandson. This omen is of you. And
now, my son, I refuse not to go."

Then said Aeneas, and as he spake the fire came nearer, and the light
was clearer to see, and the heat more fierce, "Climb, dear father, on
my shoulders; I will bear thee, nor grow weary with the weight. We
will be saved or perish together. The little Ascanius shall go with
me, and my wife follow behind, not over near. And ye, servants of my
house, hearken to me; ye mind how that to one who passes out of the
city there is a tomb and a temple of Ceres in a lonely place, and an
ancient cypress-tree hard by. There will we gather by divers ways. And
do thou, my father, take the holy images in thy hands, for as for me,
who have but newly come from battle, I may not touch them till I have
washed me in the running stream."

  [Illustration: AENEAS AND THE SHADE OF CREUSA.]

And as he spake he put a cloak of lion's skin upon his shoulders, and
the old man sat thereon. Ascanius also laid hold of his hand, and
Creusa followed behind. So he went in much dread and trembling. For
indeed before sword and spear of the enemy he had not feared, but now
he feared for them that were with him. But when he was come nigh unto
the gates, and the journey was well-nigh finished, there befell a
grievous mischance, for there was heard a sound as of many feet
through the darkness; and the old man cried to him, "Fly, my son, fly;
they are coming. I see the flashing of shields and swords." But as
Aeneas hasted to go, Creusa his wife was severed from him. But whether
she wandered from the way or sat down in weariness, no man may say.
Only he saw her no more, nor knew her to be lost till, all his company
being met at the temple of Ceres, she only was found wanting. Very
grievous did the thing seem to him, nor did he cease to cry out in his
wrath against Gods and men. Also he bade his comrades have a care of
his father and his son, and of the household Gods, and girded him
again with arms, and so passed into the city. And first he went to the
wall, and to the gate by which he had come forth, and then to his
house, if haply she had returned thither. But there indeed the men
of Greece were come, and the fire had well-nigh mastered it. And after
that he went to the citadel and to the palace of King Priam. And lo!
in the porch of Juno's temple, Phoenix and Ulysses were keeping guard
over the spoil, even the treasure of the temples, tables of the Gods,
and solid cups of gold, and raiment, and a long array of them that had
been taken captive, children and women. But not the less did he seek
his wife through all the streets of the city, yea, and called her
aloud by name. But lo! as he called, the image of her whom he sought
seemed to stand before him, only greater than she had been while she
was yet alive. And the spirit spake, saying, "Why art thou vainly
troubled? These things have not befallen us against the pleasure of
the Gods. The ruler of Olympus willeth not that Creusa should bear
thee company in thy journey. For thou hast a long journey to take, and
many seas to cross, till thou come to the Hesperian shore, where
Lydian Tiber flows softly through a good land and a fertile. There
shalt thou have great prosperity, and take to thyself a wife of royal
race. Weep not then for Creusa, whom thou lovest, nor think that I
shall be carried away to be a bond-slave to some Grecian woman. Such
fate befits not a daughter of Dardanus and daughter-in-law of Venus.
The mighty Mother of the Gods keepeth me in this land to serve her.
And now, farewell, and love the young Ascanius, even thy son and
mine."

So spake the spirit, and, when Aeneas wept and would have spoken,
vanished out of his sight. Thrice he would have cast his arms about
her neck, and thrice the image mocked him, being thin as air and
fleeting as a dream. Then, the night being now spent, he sought his
comrades, and found with much joy and wonder that a great company of
men and women were gathered together, and were willing, all of them,
to follow him whithersoever he went. And now the morning star rose
over Mount Ida, and Aeneas, seeing that the Greeks held the city, and
that there was no longer any hope of succour, went his way to the
mountains, taking with him his father.




CHAPTER IV.

POLYDORUS--DELOS--CRETE--THE HARPIES.


Now for what remained of that year (for it was the time of summer when
Troy was taken), Aeneas, and they that were gathered to him, builded
themselves ships for the voyage, dwelling the while under Mount Ida;
and when the summer was well-nigh come again the work was finished,
and the old man Anchises commanded that they should tarry no longer.
Whereupon they sailed, taking also their Gods with them.

There was a certain land of Thrace, which the god Mars loved beyond
all other lands, whereof in time past the fierce Lycurgus, who would
have slain Bacchus, was king. Here, therefore, for the men of the land
were friendly, or, at the least, had been before evil days came upon
Troy, Aeneas builded him a city, and called it after his own name. But,
after awhile, as he did sacrifice on a certain day to his mother,
even Venus, that he might have a blessing on his work, slaying also a
white bull to Jupiter, there befell a certain horrible thing. For hard
by the place where he did sacrifice there was a little hill, with much
cornel and myrtle upon it, whereto Aeneas coming would have plucked
wands having leaves upon them, that he might cover therewith the
altars. But lo! when he plucked a wand there dropped drops of blood
therefrom. Whereupon great fear came on him, and wonder also. And when
seeking to know the cause of the thing he plucked other wands also,
there dropped blood even as before. Then, having prayed to the nymphs
of the land and to Father Mars that they would turn all evil from him,
he essayed the third time with all his might, setting his knee against
the ground, to pluck forth a wand. Whereupon there issued from the
hill a lamentable voice, saying, "Aeneas, why doest thou me such cruel
hurt, nor leavest me in peace in my grave? For indeed I am no stranger
to thee, nor strange is this blood which thou seest. Fly, for the land
is cruel, and the shore greedy of gain. I am Polydorus. Here was I
pierced through with spears, which have grown into these wands that
thou seest."

But Aeneas when he heard the voice was sore dismayed, and he remembered
him how King Priam, thinking that it might fare ill with him and the
great city of Troy, had sent his son, Polydorus, by stealth, and much
gold with him, to Polymestor, who was king of Thrace, and how the
king, when Troy had now perished, slew the boy, and took the gold to
himself. For of a truth the love of gold is the root of all evil. And
Aeneas told the thing to his father and to the chiefs; and the sentence
of all was that they should depart from the evil land. But first they
made a great funeral for Polydorus, making a high mound of earth, and
building thereon an altar to the dead. This also they bound about with
garlands of sad-coloured wool and cypress, and the women of Troy stood
about it with their hair loosened, as is the use of them that mourn.
They offered also bowls of warm milk and blood, and laid the spirit in
the tomb, bidding him farewell three times with a loud voice.

After this, when the time for voyaging was come, and the south wind
blew softly, they launched the ships and set sail. And first they came
to the island of Delos, which, having been used to wander over the
sea, the Lord of the Silver Bow made fast, binding it to Myconos and
Gyaros, and found there quiet anchorage. And when they landed to
worship, there met them Anius, who was priest and king of the place,
having a crown of bay-leaves about his head, who knew Anchises for a
friend in time past, and used to them much hospitality. Then did they
pray to the god, saying, "Give us, we beseech thee, a home where we
may dwell, and a name upon the earth, and a city that shall abide,
even a second Troy for them that have escaped from the hands of
Achilles and the Greeks. And do thou answer us, and incline our hearts
that we may know."

But when Aeneas had ended these words, straightway the place was
shaken, even the gates of the temple and the bay-trees that were hard
by. And when they were all fallen to the ground there came a voice,
saying, "Son of Dardanus, the land that first bare you shall receive
you again. Seek, then, your ancient mother. Thence shall the children
of Aeneas bear rule over all lands, yea, and their children's children
to many generations." Which when they had heard, they greatly
rejoiced, and would fain know what was the city whither Phoebus would
have them go, that they might cease from their wanderings. Then
Anchises, pondering in his heart the things which he had learnt from
men of old time, spake thus: "There lieth in mid-ocean a certain
island of Crete, wherein is a mountain, Ida. There was the first
beginning of our nation. Thence came Teucer, our first father, to the
land of Troy. Let us go, then, whither the Gods would send us, first
doing sacrifice to the Winds; and, indeed, if but Jupiter help us,
'tis but a three days' journey for our ships."

So they offered sacrifice, a bull to Neptune and a bull to the
beautiful Apollo, and a black sheep to the Storm and a white sheep to
the West Wind. There came also a rumour that Idomeneus the Cretan had
fled from his father's kingdom, and that the land was ready for him
who should take it. Whereupon the men of Troy set sail with a good
heart, and passing among the islands that are called Cyclades, the
wind blowing favourably behind them, so came to Crete. There they
builded a city, and called its name Pergamea, after Pergama, which was
the citadel of Troy. And for a while they tilled the soil; also they
married and were given in marriage, as purposing to abide in the land.
But there came a wasting sickness on the men, and a blight also on the
trees and harvests, filling the year with death. The fields likewise
were parched with drought, and the staff of bread was broken. Then the
old Anchises bade them go yet again to the oracle at Delos, and
inquire of the god what end there should be of these troubles, whence
they should seek for help, and whither they should go.

But as Aeneas slept there appeared to him the household Gods, which he
had carried out of the burning of Troy, very clear to see in the light
of the moon, which shone through the window of his chamber. And they
spake unto him, saying, "Apollo bids us tell thee here that which he
will tell thee if thou goest to Delos. We who have followed thee over
many seas, even we will bring thy children's children to great
honour, and make their city ruler over many nations. Faint not,
therefore, at thy long wandering. Thou must seek yet another home. For
it was not in Crete that Apollo bade thee dwell. There is a land which
the Greeks call Hesperia; an ancient land, whose inhabitants are
mighty men of valour; a land of vineyards and wheat. There is our
proper home, and thence came Dardanus our father. Do thou, therefore,
tell these things to the old man Anchises. Seek ye for the land of
Hesperia, which men also call Italy; but as for Crete, Jupiter willeth
not that ye should dwell there."

And for a while Aeneas lay in great fear, with a cold sweat upon him,
so clear was the vision of those whom he saw, nor in anywise like unto
a dream. Then he rose up from his bed, and after prayer and sacrifice
told the thing to Anchises. And the old man saw that he had been
deceived in this matter, and he said, "O my son, now do I remember how
Cassandra was wont to prophesy these things to me, and would speak of
Hesperia and of the land of Italy. But, indeed, no man thought in
those days that the men of Troy should voyage to Hesperia, nor did any
take account of the words of Cassandra. But now let us heed the oracle
of Apollo, and depart."

  [Illustration: THE HARPIES.]

So the men of Troy made their ships ready and departed. And after a
while, when they could no more see the land, there fell a great storm
upon them, with a strong wind and great rolling waves, and much
lightning also. Thus were they driven out of their course, and for
three days and nights saw neither the sun nor the stars. But on the
fourth day they came to a land where they saw hills, and smoke rising
therefrom. Then did the men ply their oars amain, and soon came to the
shore. Now this place they found to be one of certain islands which
men name the Strophades. And upon these islands dwell creatures which
are called Harpies, very evil indeed, having the countenances of women
and wings like unto the wings of birds and long claws. Also their
faces are pale as with much hunger. Now when the men of Troy were come
to this land, they saw many herds of oxen and flocks of goats thereon,
nor any one to watch them. Of these they slew such as they needed,
and, not forgetting to give due share to the Gods, made a great feast
upon the shore. But lo! even while they made merry, there came a great
rushing of wings, and the Harpies came upon them, making great havoc
of the meat and fouling all things most horribly. And when they had
departed, the men of Troy sought another place where they might do
sacrifice and eat their meat in peace. But when the Harpies had come
thither also and done in the same fashion, Aeneas commanded that the
men should draw their swords and do battle with the beasts. Therefore,
the Harpies coming yet again, Misenus with his trumpet gave the sound
for battle. But lo! they fought as those that beat the air, seeing
that neither sword nor spear availed to wound the beasts. Then again
these departed, one only remaining, by name Celaeno, who, sitting on a
rock, spake after this fashion: "Do ye purpose, sons of Laomedon, to
fight for these cattle that ye have wrongfully taken, or to drive the
Harpies from their kingdom and inheritance? Hear, therefore, my words,
which indeed the almighty Father told to Phoebus, and Phoebus told to
me. Ye journey to Italy, and to Italy shall ye come. Only ye shall
not build a city, and wall it about with walls, till dreadful hunger
shall cause you to eat the very tables whereon ye sup."

So saying, she departed. But when great fear was fallen upon all,
Anchises lifted up his hands to heaven and prayed to the Gods that
they would keep that evil from them.




CHAPTER V.

KING HELENUS--THE CYCLOPS.


Then they set sail, and, the south wind blowing, passed by Zacynthus
and Dulichium, and also Ithaca, which they cursed as they passed,
because it was the land of the hateful Ulysses, and so came to Actium,
where they landed. There also they did sacrifice to the Gods, and had
games of wrestling and others, rejoicing that they had passed safely
through so many cities of their enemies. And there they wintered, and
Aeneas fixed on the doors of the temple of Apollo a shield of bronze
which he had won in battle from the valiant Abas, writing thereon
these words, "AENEAS DEDICATES THESE ARMS WON FROM THE VICTORIOUS
GREEKS."

But when the spring was come they set sail, and, leaving behind them
the land of Phaeacia, came to Buthrotum that is in Epirus. There indeed
they heard a marvellous thing, even that Helenus, the son of Priam,
was king in these parts, in the room of Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles,
having also to wife Andromache, who was the widow of Hector. And when
Aeneas, wishing to know whether these things were so, journeyed towards
the city, lo! in a grove hard by, by a river which also was called
Simois, there stood this same Andromache, and made offerings to the
spirit of Hector not without many tears. And at the first when she saw
Aeneas, and that he wore such arms as the men of Troy were used to
wear, she swooned with fear, but after a while spake thus: "Is this
indeed a real thing that I see? Art thou alive? or, if thou art dead,
tell me, where is my Hector?" So she cried and wept aloud. And Aeneas
answered her: "Yes, lady, this is flesh and blood, and not a spirit,
that thou seest. But as for thee, what fortune has befallen thee? Art
thou still wedded to Pyrrhus?"

And she, casting down her eyes, made answer, "O daughter of Priam,
happy beyond thy sisters in that thou wast slain at the tomb of
Achilles, nor wast taken to be a prey of the conqueror! But as for me
I was borne across the sea, to be slave of the haughty son of
Achilles. And when he took to wife Hermione, who was the daughter of
Helen, he gave me to Helenus, as a slave is given to a slave. But
Pyrrhus, after awhile, Orestes slew, taking him unawares, even by the
altar of his father. And when he was dead, part of his kingdom came to
Helenus, who hath called the land Chaonia, after Chaon of Troy; and
hath also builded a citadel, a new Pergama, upon the hills. But tell
me, was it some storm that drave thee hither, or chance, or, lastly,
some sending of the Gods? And is Ascanius yet alive--the boy whom I
remember? Does he yet think of his mother that is dead? And is he
stout and of a good courage, as befits the son of Aeneas and sister's
son to Hector?"

And while she spake there came Helenus from the city with a great
company, and bade welcome to his friends with much joy. And Aeneas saw
how that all things were ordered and named even as they had been at
Troy, only the things at Troy had been great, and these were very
small. And afterwards King Helenus made a feast to them in his house,
and they drank together and were merry.

But after certain days were passed, Aeneas, seeing that the wind
favoured them, spake to Helenus, knowing him also to be a prophet of
the Gods: "Tell me now, seeing that thou art wise in all manner of
divination and prophecy, how it will fare with us. For indeed all
things have seemed to favour us, and we go not on this journey against
the will of the Gods, yet did the Harpy Celaeno prophesy evil things,
that we should endure great extremity of hunger. Say, then, of what
things I should most beware, and how I shall best prosper."

Then Helenus, after due sacrifice, led Aeneas to the temple of Phoebus.
And when they were come thither, and the god had breathed into the
seer, even into Helenus, the spirit of prophecy, he spake, saying,
"Son of Venus, that thou takest thy journey across the sea with favour
of the Gods, is manifest. Hearken, therefore, and I will inform thee
of certain things, though indeed they be few out of many, by which
thou mayest more safely cross unknown seas and get thee to thy haven
in Italy. Much indeed the Fates suffer me not to know, and much Juno
forbids me to speak. Know then, first of all, that Italy, which thou
ignorantly thinkest to be close at hand, is yet far away across many
seas. And let this be a sign to thee that thou art indeed come to the
place where thou wouldst be. When thou shalt see a white sow and
thirty pigs at her teats, then hast thou found the place of thy city
that shall be. And as to the devouring of thy tables for famine, heed
it not: Apollo will help thee at need. But seek not to find a
dwelling-place on this shore of Italy which is near at hand, seeing
that it is inhabited by the accursed sons of Greece. And when thou
hast passed it by, and art come to the land of Sicily, and shalt see
the strait of Pelorus open before thee, do thou keep to thy left hand
and avoid the way that is on thy right. For here in days past was the
land rent asunder, so that the waters of the sea flow between cities
and fields that of old time were joined together. And on the right
hand is Scylla, and on the left Charybdis the whirlpool. But Scylla
dwelleth in her cave, a monster dreadful to behold; for to the middle
she is a fair woman, but a beast of the sea below, even the belly of a
dolphin, with heads as of a wolf. Wherefore it will be better for
thee to fetch a compass round the whole land of Sicily than to come
nigh these things, or to see them with thine eyes. Do thou also
remember this, at all places and times, before all other Gods to
worship Juno, that thou mayest persuade her, and so make thy way
safely to Italy. And when thou art come thither, seek the Sibyl that
dwelleth at Cumae, the mad prophetess that writeth the sayings of Fate
upon the leaves of a tree. For these indeed at the first abide in
their places, but, the gate being opened, the wind blows them hither
and thither. And when they are scattered she careth not to join them
again, so that they who would inquire of her depart without an answer.
Refuse not to tarry awhile, that thou mayest take counsel of her,
though all things seem to prosper thy journey and thy comrades chide
thy delay. For she shall tell thee all that shall befall thee in
Italy--what wars thou shalt wage, and what perils thou must endure,
and what avoid. So much, and no more, is it lawful for me to utter. Do
thou depart, and magnify our country of Troy even to the heaven."

And when the seer had ended these sayings he commanded his people
that they should carry to the ships gifts: gold, and carvings of
ivory, and much silver, and caldrons that had been wrought at Dodona;
also a coat of chain mail, and a helmet with a fair plume, which
Pyrrhus had worn. Also he gave gifts to the old man Anchises. Horses,
too, he gave, and guides for the journey, and tackling for the ships,
and arms for the whole company. Then did he bid farewell to the old
Anchises. Andromache also came, bringing broidered robes, and for
Ascanius a Phrygian cloak, and many like things, which she gave him,
saying, "Take these works of my hands, that they may witness to thee
of the abiding love of her that was once Hector's wife. For indeed
thou art the very image of my Astyanax; so like are thy eyes and face
and hands. And indeed he would now be of an age with thee." Then Aeneas
also said farewell, weeping the while. "Be ye happy, whose wanderings
are over and rest already won; ye have no seas to cross, nor fields of
Italy, still flying as we advance, to seek. Rather ye have the
likeness of Troy before your eyes. And be sure that if ever I come to
this land of Italy which I seek, there shall be friendship between you
and me, and between your children and my children, for ever."

Then they set sail, and at eventide drew their ships to the land and
slept on the beach. But at midnight Palinurus, the pilot, rising from
his bed, took note of the winds and of the stars, even of Arcturus,
and the Greater Bear and the Less, and Orion with his belt of gold.
Seeing therefore that all things boded fair weather to come, he blew
loud the signal that they should depart; which they did forthwith. And
when the morning was now growing red in the east, behold a land with
hills dimly seen and shores lying low in the sea. And, first of all,
the old man Anchises cried, "Lo! there is Italy," and after him all
the company. Then took Anchises a mighty cup, and filled it with wine,
and, standing on the stern, said, "Gods of sea and land, and ye that
have power of the air, give us an easy journey, and send such winds as
may favour us." And even as he spake the wind blew more strongly
behind. Also the harbour mouth grew wider to behold, and on the hills
was seen a temple of Minerva. And lo! upon the shore four horses white
as snow, which the old man seeing, said, "Thou speakest of war, land
of the stranger; for the horse signifieth war, yet doth he also use
himself to run in the chariot, and to bear the bit in company;
therefore also will we hope for peace." Then did they sacrifice to
Minerva, and to Juno also, which rites the seer Helenus had chiefly
commanded. And this being done they trimmed their sails and departed
from the shore, fearing lest some enemy, the Greeks being in that
place, should set upon them. So did they pass by Tarentum, which
Hercules builded, also the hills of Caulon, and Scylacium, where many
ships are broken. And from Scylacium they beheld Aetna, and heard a
great roaring of the sea, and saw also the waves rising up to heaven.
Then said Anchises, "Lo! this is that Charybdis whereof the seer
Helenus spake to us. Ply your oars, my comrades, and let us fly
therefrom." So they strove amain in rowing, and Palinurus also steered
to the left, all the other ships following him. And many times the
waves lifted them to the heaven, and many times caused them to go
down to the deep. But at the last, at setting of the sun, they came to
the land of the Cyclops.

There, indeed, they lay in a harbour, well sheltered from all winds
that blow, but all the night Aetna thundered dreadfully, sending forth
a cloud with smoke of pitch, and ashes fiery hot, and also balls of
fire, and rocks withal that had been melted with heat. For indeed men
say that the giant Enceladus lieth under this mountain, being scorched
with the lightning of Jupiter, and that from him cometh forth this
flame; also that when, being weary, he turneth from one side to the
other, the whole land of the Three Capes is shaken. All that night
they lay in much fear, nor knew what the cause of this uproar might
be, for indeed the sky was cloudy, nor could the moon be seen.

And when it was morning, lo! there came forth from the woods a
stranger, very miserable to behold, in filthy garments fastened with
thorns, and with beard unshaven, who stretched out to them his hands
as one who prayed. And the men of Troy knew him to be a Greek. But he,
seeing them, and knowing of what country they were, stood awhile in
great fear, but afterwards ran very swiftly towards them, and used to
them many prayers, weeping also the while. "I pray you, men of Troy,
by the stars and by the Gods, and by this air which we breathe, to
take me away from this land, whithersoever ye will. And indeed I ask
not whither. That I am a Greek, I confess, and also that I bare arms
against Troy. Wherefore drown me, if ye will, in the sea. For gladly
will I die, if die I must, by the hands of men."

And he clung to their knees. Then Aeneas bade him tell who he was, and
how he came to be in this plight. And the man made answer, "I am a man
of Ithaca, and a comrade of the unhappy Ulysses. My name is
Achaemenides, and my father was Adamastus. And when my comrades fled
from this accursed shore they left me in the Cyclops' cave. Hideous is
he to see, and savage, and of exceeding great stature, and he feeds on
the flesh of men. I myself saw with these eyes how he lay and caught
two of my companions and brake them on the stone; aye, and I saw their
limbs quiver between his teeth. Yet did he not do such things
unpunished, for Ulysses endured not to behold these deeds, and when
the giant lay asleep, being overcome with wine, we, after prayer made
to the Gods and lots cast what each should do, bored out his eye, for
one eye he had, huge as a round shield of Argos, or as the circle of
the sun, and so did we avenge our comrades' death. Do ye then fly with
all the speed ye may. For know that as this shepherd Polyphemus--a
shepherd he is by trade--so are a hundred other Cyclopes, huge and
savage as he, who dwell on these shores and wander over the hills. And
now for three months have I dwelt in these woods, eating berries and
cornels and herbs of the field. And when I saw your ships I hastened
to meet them. Do ye with me, therefore, as ye will, so that I flee
from this accursed race."

And even while he spake the men of Troy saw the shepherd Polyphemus
among his flocks, and that he made as if he would come to the shore.
Horrible to behold was he, huge and shapeless and blind. And when he
came to the sea he washed the blood from the wound, grinding his
teeth the while, and though he went far into the sea, yet did not the
waves touch his middle. And the men of Troy, having taken the
suppliant on board, fled with all their might; and he hearing their
rowing would have reached to them, but could not. Therefore did he
shout aloud, and the Cyclopes hearing him hasted to the shore. Then
did the men of Troy behold them, a horrid company, tall as a grove of
oaks or cypresses. Nor knew they in their fear what they should do,
seeing that on the one hand was the land of the Cyclopes, and on the
other Scylla and Charybdis, of which the seer Helenus had bidden them
beware. But while they doubted, there blew a north wind from Pelorus,
wherewith they sailed onwards, and Achaemenides with them. So they came
to Ortygia, whither, as men say, the river Alpheus floweth under the
sea from the land of Pelops, and so mingleth with Arethusa; and
afterwards they passed the promontory of Pachynus, Camarina also, and
Gela, and other cities likewise, till they came to Lilybaeum, and so at
last to Drepanum. There the old man Anchises died, and was buried.




CHAPTER VI.

THE SHIPWRECK.


Not many days after Aeneas and his companions set sail. But scarce were
they out of sight of the land of Sicily when Juno espied them. Very
wroth was she that they should be now drawing near to the end of their
journey, and she said to herself, "Shall I be baulked of my purpose,
nor be able to keep these men of Troy from Italy? Minerva, indeed,
because one man sinned, even Ajax Oileus, burned the fleet of the
Greeks, and drowned the men in the sea. For the ships she smote with
the thunderbolts of Jupiter; and as for Ajax, him she caught up with a
whirlwind, and dashed him upon the rocks, piercing him through. Only
I, though I be both sister and wife to Jupiter, avail nothing against
this people. And who that heareth this in after time shall pay me due
honour and sacrifice?"

Then she went, thinking these things in her heart, to the land of
Aeolia, where King Aeolus keepeth the winds under bolt and bar. Mightily
do they roar within the mountain, but their king restraineth them and
keepeth them in bounds, being indeed set to do this very thing, lest
they should carry both the heavens and the earth before them in their
great fury. To him said Juno, "O Aeolus, whom Jupiter hath made king of
the winds, a nation which I hate is sailing over the Tuscan sea. Loose
now thy storms against them, and drown their ships in the sea. And
hearken what I will do for thee. Twelve maidens I have that wait on me
continually, who are passing fair, and the fairest of all, even
Deiopeia, I will give thee to wife."

To whom answered King Aeolus, "It is for thee, O Queen, to order what
thou wilt, it being of thy gift that I hold this sovereignty and eat
at the table of the Gods."

So saying he drave in with his spear the folding-doors of the prison
of the winds, and these straightway in a great host rushed forth, even
all the winds together, and rolled great waves upon the shore. And
straightway there arose a great shouting of men and straining of
cables; nor could the sky nor the light of the day be seen any more,
but a darkness as of night came down upon the sea, and there were
thunders and lightnings over the whole heavens.

Then did Aeneas grow cold with fear, and stretching out his hands to
heaven he cried, "Happy they who fell under the walls of Troy, before
their fathers' eyes! Would to the Gods that thou hadst slain me,
Diomed, bravest of the Greeks, even as Hector fell by the spear of
Achilles, or tall Sarpedon, or all the brave warriors whose dead
bodies Simois rolled down to the sea!"

But as he spake a blast of wind struck his sails from before, and his
ship was turned broadside to the waves. Three others also were tossed
upon the rocks which men call the "Altars," and three into the
quicksands of the Syrtis. And another, in which sailed the men of
Lycia, with Orontes, their chief, was struck upon the stern by a great
sea and sunk. And when Aeneas looked, lo! there were some swimming in
the waves, and broken planks also, and arms and treasures of Troy.
Others also were shattered by the waves, as those of Ilioneus and
Achates, and of Abas and the old man Alethes.

  [Illustration: JUNO AND AEOLUS.]

But King Neptune was aware of the tumult where he sat at the bottom of
the sea, and raising his head above the waves, looked forth and saw
how the ships were scattered abroad and the men of Troy were in sore
peril. Also he knew his sister's wrath and her craft. Then he called
to him the winds and said, "What is this, ye winds, that ye trouble
heaven and earth without leave of me? Now will I--but I must first bid
the waves be still, only be sure that ye shall not thus escape
hereafter. Begone, and tell your king that the dominion over the sea
belongeth unto me, and bid him keep him to his rocks."

Then he bade the waves be still; also he scattered the clouds and
brought back the sun. And Cymothea and Triton, gods of the sea, drew
the ships from the rocks, Neptune also lifting them with his trident.
Likewise he opened the quicksands, and delivered the ships that were
therein. And this being done he crossed the sea in his chariot, and
the waves beholding him sank to rest, even as it befalls when there is
sedition in the city, and the people are wroth, and men throw stones
and firebrands, till lo! of a sudden there cometh forth a reverend
sire, a good man and true, and all men are silent and hearken to him;
and the uproar is stayed. So was the sea stilled, beholding its king.

Then Aeneas and his companions, being sore wearied with the storm, made
for the nearest shore, even Africa, where they found a haven running
far into the land, into which the waves come not till their force be
spent. On either side thereof are cliffs very high, and shining woods
over them. Also at the harbour's head is a cave and a spring of sweet
water within, a dwelling-place of the Nymphs. Hither came Aeneas, with
seven ships. Right glad were the men of Troy to stand upon the dry
land again. Then Achates struck a spark out of flint, and they lighted
a fire with leaves and the like; also they took of the wheat which had
been in the ships, and made ready to parch and to bruise it, that they
might eat. Meanwhile Aeneas had climbed the cliff, if haply he might
see some of his companions' ships. These indeed he saw not, but he
espied three great stags upon the shore and a herd following them.
Wherefore, taking the arrows and the bow which Achates bare with him,
he let fly, slaying the leaders and others also, till he had gotten
seven, one for each ship. Then made he his way to the landing-place,
and divided the prey. Also he made distribution of the wine which
Acestes, their host in Sicily, had given them as they were about to
depart, and spake comfortable words to them, saying, "O my friends, be
ye sure that there will be an end to these troubles; and indeed ye
have suffered worse things before. Be ye of good cheer therefore.
Haply ye shall one day have pleasure in thinking of these things. For
be sure that the Gods have prepared a dwelling-place for us in Italy,
where we shall build a new Troy, in great peace and happiness.
Wherefore endure unto the day of prosperity."

  [Illustration: NEPTUNE STILLING THE WAVES.]

Then they made ready the feast, and roasted of the meat upon spits,
and boiled other in water. Also they drank of the wine and were
comforted. And after supper they talked much of them that were absent,
doubting whether they were alive or dead.




CHAPTER VII.

CARTHAGE.


All these things did Jupiter behold; and even as he beheld them there
came to him Venus, having a sad countenance and her shining eyes dim
with tears, and spake: "O great Father, that rulest all things, what
have Aeneas and the men of Troy sinned against thee, that the whole
world is shut against them? Didst not thou promise that they should
rule over land and sea? Why, then, art thou turned back from thy
purpose? With this I was wont to comfort myself for the evil fate of
Troy, but lo! this same fate follows them still, nor is there any end
to their troubles. And yet it was granted to Antenor, himself also a
man of Troy, that he should escape from the Greeks, and coming to the
Liburnian land, where Timavus flows with much noise into the sea,
build a city and find rest for himself. But we, who are thy children,
are kept far from the land which thou hast sworn to give us."

Then her father kissed her once and again, and answered smiling,
"Fear not, my daughter, the fate of thy children changeth not. Thou
shalt see this city for which thou lookest, and shalt receive thy son,
the great-hearted Aeneas, into the heavens. Hearken, therefore, and I
will tell thee things to come. Aeneas shall war with the nations of
Italy, and shall subdue them, and build a city, and rule therein for
three years. And after the space of thirty years shall the boy
Ascanius, who shall hereafter be called Iulus also, change the place
of his throne from Lavinium unto Alba; and for three hundred years
shall there be kings in Alba of the kindred of Hector. Then shall a
priestess bear to Mars twin sons, whom a she-wolf shall suckle; of
whom the one, even Romulus, shall build a city, dedicating it to Mars,
and call it Rome, after his own name. To which city have I given
empire without bound or end. And Juno also shall repent her of her
wrath, and join counsel with me, cherishing the men of Rome, so that
they shall bear rule even over Argos and Mycenae."

And when he had said this, he sent down his messenger, even Mercury,
to turn the heart of Dido and her people, where they dwelt in the city
of Carthage, which they had builded, so that they should deal kindly
with the strangers.

Now it came to pass on the next day that Aeneas, having first hidden
his ships in a bay that was well covered with trees, went forth to spy
out the new land whither he was come, and Achates only went with him.
And Aeneas had in each hand a broad-pointed spear. And as he went there
met him in the middle of the wood his mother, but habited as a Spartan
virgin, for she had hung a bow from her shoulders after the fashion of
a huntress, and her hair was loose, and her tunic short to the knees,
and her garments gathered in a knot upon her breast. Then first the
false huntress spake, "If perchance ye have seen one of my sisters
wandering hereabouts, make known to me the place. She is girded with a
quiver, and is clothed with the skin of a spotted lynx, or, may be,
she hunts a wild boar with horn and hound."

To whom Aeneas, "I have not seen nor heard sister of thine, O
virgin--for what shall I call thee? for, of a surety, neither is thy
look as of a mortal woman, nor yet thy voice. A goddess certainly
thou art, sister of Phoebus, or, haply, one of the nymphs. But
whosoever thou art, look favourably upon us and help us. Tell us in
what land we be, for the winds have driven us hither, and we know not
aught of place or people."

And Venus said, "Nay, stranger, I am not such as ye think. We virgins
of Tyre are wont to carry a quiver and to wear a buskin of purple. For
indeed it is a Tyrian city that is hard by, though the land be Lybia.
And of this city Dido is queen, having come hither from Tyre, flying
from the wrong-doing of her brother. And indeed the story of the thing
is long, but I will recount the chief matter thereof to thee. The
husband of this Dido was one Sichaeus, richest among all the men of
Phoenicia, and greatly beloved of his wife, whom he married from a
virgin. Now the brother of this Sichaeus was Pygmalion, the king of the
country, and he exceeded all men in wickedness. And when there arose a
quarrel between them, the king, being exceedingly mad after gold, took
him unaware, even as he did sacrifice at the altar, and slew him. And
the king hid the matter many days from Dido, and cheated her with
false hopes. But at the last there came to her in her dreams the
likeness of the dead man, baring his wounds and showing the wickedness
which had been done. Also he bade her make haste and fly from that
land, and, that she might do this the more easily, told her of great
treasure, gold and silver, that was hidden in the earth. And Dido,
being much moved by these things, made ready for flight; also she
sought for companions, and there came together to her all as many as
hated the king or feared him. Then did they seize ships that chanced
to be ready, and laded them with gold, even the treasure of King
Pygmalion, and so fled across the sea. And in all this was a woman the
leader. Then came they to this place, where thou seest the walls and
citadel of Carthage, and bought so much land as they could cover with
a bull's hide. And now do ye answer me this, Whence come ye, and
whither do ye go?"

Then answered Aeneas, "Should I tell the whole story of our wanderings,
and thou have leisure to hear, evening would come ere I could make an
end. We are men of Troy, who, having journeyed over many seas, have
now been driven by storms to this shore of Lybia. And as for me, men
call me the prince Aeneas. The land I seek is Italy, and my race is
from Jupiter himself. With twenty ships did I set sail, going in the
way whereon the Gods sent me. And of these scarce seven are left. And
now, seeing that Europe and Asia endure me not, I wander over the
desert places of Africa."

But Venus suffered him not to speak more, but said, "Whoever thou art,
stranger, that art come to this Tyrian city, thou art surely beloved
by the Gods. And now go, show thyself to the queen. And as for thy
ships and thy companions, I tell that they are safe in the haven, if I
have not learnt augury in vain. See those twenty swans, how joyously
they fly! And now there cometh an eagle swooping down from the sky,
putting them to confusion, but now again they move in due order, and
some are settling on the earth and some preparing to settle. Even so
doth it fare with thy ships, for either are they already in the haven
or enter thereinto with sails full set."

And as she spake she turned away, and there shone a rosy light from
her neck, also there came from her hair a sweet savour as of ambrosia,
and her garments grew unto her feet; and Aeneas perceived that she was
his mother, and cried aloud,--

"O my mother, why dost thou mock me so often with false shows, nor
sufferest me to join my hand unto thy hand, and to speak with thee
face to face?"

And he went towards the walls of the city. But Venus covered him and
his companions with a mist, that no man might see them, or hinder
them, or inquire of their business, and then departed to Paphos, where
was her temple and also many altars of incense. Then the men hastened
on their way, and mounting a hill which hung over the city, marvelled
to behold it, for indeed it was very great and noble, with mighty
gates and streets, and a multitude that walked therein. For some built
the walls and the citadel, rolling great stones with their hands, and
others marked out places for houses. Also they chose those that should
give judgment and bear rule in the city. Some, too, digged out
harbours, and others laid the foundations of a theatre, and cut out
great pillars of stone. Like to bees they were, when, the summer being
newly come, the young swarms go forth, or when they labour filling the
cells with honey, and some receive the burdens of those that return
from the fields, and others keep off the drones from the hive. Even so
laboured the men of Tyre. And when Aeneas beheld them he cried, "Happy
ye, who even now have a city to dwell in!" And being yet hidden with
the mist, he went in at the gate and mingled with the men, being seen
of none.

Now in the midst of the city was a wood, very thick with trees, and
here the men of Carthage, first coming to the land from their voyage,
had digged out of the ground that which Juno had said should be a sign
to them, even a horse's head; for that, finding this, their city would
be mighty in war, and full of riches. Here, then, Dido was building a
temple to Juno, very splendid, with threshold of bronze, and many
steps thereunto; of bronze also were the door-posts and the gates. And
here befell a thing which gave much comfort and courage to Aeneas; for
as he stood and regarded the place, waiting also for the queen, he saw
set forth in order upon the walls the battles that had been fought at
Troy, the sons of Atreus also, and King Priam, and fierce Achilles.
Then said he, not without tears, "Is there any land, O Achates, that
is not filled with our sorrows? Seest thou Priam? Yet withal there is
a reward for virtue here also, and tears and pity for the troubles of
men. Fear not, therefore. Surely the fame of these things shall profit
us."

Then he looked, satisfying his soul with the paintings on the walls.
For there was the city of Troy. In this part of the field the Greeks
fled and the youth of Troy pursued them, and in that the men of Troy
fled, and Achilles followed hard upon them in his chariot. Also he saw
the white tents of Rhesus, King of Thrace, whom the fierce Diomed slew
in his sleep, when he was newly come to Troy, and drave his horses to
the camp before they ate of the grass of the fields of Troy or drank
the waters of Xanthus. There also Troilus was pictured, ill-matched in
battle with the great Achilles. His horses bare him along; but he lay
on his back in the chariot, yet holding the reins, and his neck and
head were dragged upon the earth, and the spear-point made a trail in
the dust. And in another place the women of Troy went suppliant-wise
to the temple of Minerva, bearing a great and beautiful robe, sad and
beating their breasts, and with hair unbound; but the goddess regarded
them not. Also Achilles dragged the body of Hector three times round
the walls of Troy, and was selling it for gold. And Aeneas groaned when
he saw the man whom he loved, and the old man Priam reaching out
helpless hands. Also he knew himself, fighting in the midst of the
Grecian chiefs; black Memnon also he knew, and the hosts of the East;
and Penthesilea leading the army of the Amazons with shields shaped as
the moon. Fierce she was to see, with one breast bared for battle, and
a golden girdle beneath it, a damsel daring to fight with men.




CHAPTER VIII.

DIDO.


But while Aeneas marvelled to see these things lo! there came, with a
great throng of youths behind her, Dido, most beautiful of women, fair
as Diana, when, on the banks of Eurotas or on the hills of Cynthus,
she leads the dance with a thousand nymphs of the mountains about her.
On her shoulder she bears a quiver, and overtops them all, and her
mother, even Latona, silently rejoices to behold her. So fair and
seemly to see was Dido as she bare herself right nobly in the midst,
being busy in the work of her kingdom. Then she sat herself down on a
lofty throne in the gate of the temple, with many armed men about her.
And she did justice between man and man; also she divided the work of
the city, sharing it equally or parting it by lot.

Then of a sudden Aeneas heard a great clamour, and saw a company of
men come quickly to the place, among whom were Antheus and Sergestus
and Cloanthus, and others of the men of Troy that had been parted from
him in the storm. Right glad was he to behold them, yet was not
without fear; and though he would fain have come forth and caught them
by the hand, yet did he tarry, waiting to hear how the men had fared,
where they had left their ships, and wherefore they were come.

Then Ilioneus, leave being now given that he should speak, thus began:
"O Queen, whom Jupiter permits to build a new city in these lands, we
men of Troy, whom the winds have carried over many seas, pray thee
that thou save our ships from fire, and spare a people that serveth
the Gods. For, indeed, we are not come to waste the dwellings of this
land, or to carry off spoils to our ships. For, of a truth, they who
have suffered so much think not of such deeds. There is a land which
the Greeks call Hesperia, but the people themselves Italy, after the
name of their chief; an ancient land, mighty in arms and fertile of
corn. Hither were we journeying, when a storm arising scattered our
ships, and only these few that thou seest escaped to the land. And can
there be nation so savage that it receiveth not shipwrecked men on its
shore, but beareth arms against them, and forbiddeth them to land?
Nay, but if ye care not for men, yet regard the Gods, who forget
neither them that do righteously nor them that transgress. We had a
king, Aeneas, than whom there lived not a man more dutiful to Gods and
men, and greater in war. If indeed he be yet alive, then we fear not
at all. For of a truth it will not repent thee to have helped us. And
if not, other friends have we, as Acestes of Sicily. Grant us,
therefore, to shelter our ships from the wind; also to fit them with
fresh timber from the woods, and to make ready oars for rowing, so
that, finding again our king and our companions, we may gain the land
of Italy. But if he be dead, and Ascanius his son lost also, then
there is a dwelling ready for us in the land of Sicily, with Acestes,
who is our friend."

Then Dido, her eyes bent on the ground, thus spake, "Fear not, men of
Troy. If we have seemed to deal harshly with you, pardon us, seeing
that, being newly settled in this land, we must keep watch and ward
over our coasts. But as for the men of Troy, and their deeds in arms,
who knows them not? Think not that we in Carthage are so dull of
heart, or dwell so remote from man, that we are ignorant of these
things. Whether, therefore, ye will journey to Italy, or rather return
to Sicily and King Acestes, know that I will give you all help, and
protect you; or, if ye will, settle in this land of ours. Yours is
this city which I am building. I will make no difference between man
of Troy and man of Tyre. Would that your king also were here! Surely I
will send those that shall seek him in all parts of Libya, lest haply
he should be gone astray in any forest or strange city of the land."

And when Aeneas and Achates heard these things they were glad, and
would have come forth from the cloud, and Achates said, "What thinkest
thou? Lo, thy comrades are safe, saving him whom we saw with our own
eyes drowned in the waves; and all other things are according as thy
mother said."

And even as he spake the cloud parted from about them, and Aeneas stood
forth, very bright to behold, with face and breast as of a god, for
his mother had given to him hair beautiful to see, and cast about him
the purple light of youth, even as a workman sets ivory in some fair
ornament, or compasseth about silver or marble of Paros with gold.
Then spake he to the queen, "Lo! I am he whom ye seek, even Aeneas of
Troy, scarcely saved from the waters of the sea. And as for thee, O
Queen, seeing that thou only hast been found to pity the unspeakable
sorrows of Troy, and biddest us, though we be but poor exiles and
lacking all things, to share thy city and thy home, may the Gods do so
to thee as thou deservest. And, of a truth, so long as the rivers run
to the seas, and the shadows fall on the hollows of the hills, so long
will thy name and thy glory survive, whatever be the land to which the
Gods shall bring me." Then gave he his right hand to Ilioneus, and his
left hand to Sergestus, and greeted them with great joy.

And Dido, hearing these things, was silent for a while, but at the
last she spake: "What ill fortune brings thee into perils so great?
what power drave thee to these savage shores? Well do I mind me how
in days gone by there came to Sidon one Teucer, who, having been
banished from his country, sought help from Belus that he might find a
kingdom for himself. And it chanced that in those days Belus, my
father, had newly conquered the land of Cyprus. From that day did I
know the tale of Troy, and thy name also, and the chiefs of Greece.
Also I remember that Teucer spake honourably of the men of Troy,
saying that he was himself sprung of the old Teucrian stock. Come ye,
therefore, to my palace. I too have wandered far, even as you, and so
have come to this land, and having suffered much have learnt to
succour them that suffer."

So saying she led Aeneas into her palace; also she sent to his
companions in the ships great store of provisions, even twenty oxen
and a hundred bristly swine and a hundred ewe sheep with their lambs.
But in the palace a great feast was set forth, couches covered with
broidered purple, and silver vessels without end, and cups of gold,
whereon were embossed the mighty deeds of the men of old time.

And in the mean time Aeneas sent Achates in haste to the ships, that
he might fetch Ascanius to the feast. Also he bade that the boy should
bring with him gifts of such things as they had saved from the ruins
of Troy, a mantle stiff with broidery of gold and a veil bordered with
yellow acanthus, which the fair Helen had taken with her, flying from
her home; but Leda, her mother, had given them to Helen; a sceptre
likewise which Ilione, first-born of the daughters of Priam, had
carried, and a necklace of pearls and a double crown of jewels and
gold.

But Venus was troubled in heart, fearing evil to her son should the
men of Tyre be treacherous, after their wont, and Juno remember her
wrath. Wherefore, taking counsel with herself, she called to the
winged boy, even Love, that was her son, and spake, "My son, who art
all my power and strength, who laughest at the thunders of Jupiter,
thou knowest how Juno, being exceedingly wroth against thy brother
Aeneas, causeth him to wander out of the way over all lands. This day
Dido hath him in her palace, and speaketh him fair; but I fear me much
how these things may end. Wherefore hear thou that which I purpose.
Thy brother hath even now sent for the boy Ascanius, that he may come
to the palace, bringing with him gifts of such things as they saved
from the ruins of Troy. Him will I cause to fall into a deep sleep,
and hide in Cythera or Idalium, and do thou for one night take upon
thee his likeness. And when Queen Dido at the feast shall hold thee in
her lap, and kiss and embrace thee, do thou breathe by stealth thy
fire into her heart."

Then did Love as his mother bade him, and put off his wings, and took
upon him the shape of Ascanius, but on the boy Venus caused there to
fall a deep sleep, and carried him to the woods of Idalium, and lapped
him in sweet-smelling flowers. And in his stead Love carried the gifts
to the queen. And when he was come they sat down to the feast, the
queen being in the midst under a canopy. Aeneas also and the men of
Troy lay on coverlets of purple, to whom serving-men brought water and
bread in baskets and napkins; and within fifty handmaids were ready to
replenish the store of victual and to fan the fire; and a hundred
others, with pages as many, loaded the tables with dishes and
drinking-cups. Many men of Tyre also were bidden to the feast. Much
they marvelled at the gifts of Aeneas, and much at the false Ascanius.
Dido also could not satisfy herself with looking on him, nor knew what
trouble he was preparing for her in the time to come. And he, having
first embraced the father who was not his father, and clung about his
neck, addressed himself to Queen Dido, and she ever followed him with
her eyes, and sometimes would hold him on her lap. And still he worked
upon her that she should forget the dead Sichaeus and conceive a new
love in her heart.

  [Illustration: DIDO AND THE FALSE ASCANIUS.]

But when they first paused from the feast, lo! men set great bowls
upon the table and filled them to the brim with wine. Then did the
queen call for a great vessel of gold, with many jewels upon it, from
which Belus, and all the kings from Belus, had drunk, and called for
wine, and having filled it she cried, "O Jupiter, whom they call the
god of hosts and guests, cause that this be a day of joy for the men
of Troy and for them of Tyre, and that our children remember it for
ever. Also, Bacchus, giver of joy, be present, and kindly Juno."
And when she had touched the wine with her lips, she handed the great
cup to Prince Bitias, who drank thereout a mighty draught, and the
other princes after him. Then the minstrel Iopas, whom Atlas himself
had taught, sang to the harp, of the moon, how she goes on her way,
and of the sun, how his light is darkened. He sang also of men, and of
the beasts of the field, whence they come; and of the stars, Arcturus,
and the Greater Bear and the Less, and the Hyades; and of the winter
sun, why he hastens to dip himself in the ocean; and of the winter
nights, why they tarry so long. The queen also talked much of the
story of Troy, of Priam, and of Hector, asking many things, as of the
arms of Memnon, and of the horses of Diomed, and of Achilles, how
great he was. And at last she said to Aeneas, "Tell us now thy story,
how Troy was taken, and thy wanderings over land and sea." And Aeneas
made answer, "Nay, O Queen, but thou biddest me renew a sorrow
unspeakable. Yet, if thou art minded to hear these things, hearken."
And he told her all that had befallen him, even to the day when his
father Anchises died.




CHAPTER IX.

THE LOVE AND DEATH OF DIDO.


Much was Queen Dido moved by the story, and much did she marvel at him
that told it, and scarce could sleep for thinking of him. And the next
day she spake to Anna, her sister, "O my sister, I have been troubled
this night with ill dreams, and my heart is disquieted within me. What
a man is this stranger that hath come to our shores! How noble of
mien! How bold in war! Sure I am that he is of the sons of the Gods.
What fortunes have been his! Of what wars he told us! Surely were I
not steadfastly purposed that I would not yoke me again in marriage,
this were the man to whom I might yield. Only he--for I will tell thee
the truth, my sister--only he, since the day when Sichaeus died by his
brother's hand, hath moved my heart. But may the earth swallow me up,
or the almighty Father strike me with lightning, ere I stoop to such
baseness. The husband of my youth hath carried with him my love, and
he shall keep it in his grave."

So she spake, with many tears. And her sister made answer, "Why wilt
thou waste thy youth in sorrow, without child or husband? Thinkest
thou that there is care or remembrance of such things in the grave? No
suitors indeed have pleased thee here or in Tyre, but wilt thou also
contend with a love that is after thine own heart? Think too of the
nations among whom thou dwellest, how fierce they are, and of thy
brother at Tyre, what he threatens against thee. Surely it was by the
will of the Gods, and of Juno chiefly, that the ships of Troy came
hither. And this city, which thou buildest, to what greatness will it
grow if only thou wilt make for thyself such alliance! How great will
be the glory of Carthage if the strength of Troy be joined unto her!
Only do thou pray to the Gods and offer sacrifices; and, for the
present, seeing that the time of sailing is now past, make excuse that
these strangers tarry with thee awhile."

Thus did Anna comfort her sister and encourage her. And first the two
offered sacrifice to the Gods, chiefly to Juno, who careth for the
bond of marriage. Also, examining the entrails of slain beasts, they
sought to learn the things that should happen thereafter. And ever
Dido would company with Aeneas, leading him about the walls of the city
which she builded. And often she would begin to speak and stay in the
midst of her words. And when even was come, she would hear again and
again at the banquet the tale of Troy, and while others slept would
watch, and while he was far away would seem to see him and to hear
him. Ascanius, too, she would embrace for love of his father, if so
she might cheat her own heart. But the work of the city was stayed
meanwhile; nor did the towers rise in their places, nor the youth
practise themselves in arms.

Then Juno, seeing how it fared with the queen, spake to Venus, "Are ye
satisfied with your victory, thou and thy son, that ye have vanquished
the two of you one woman? Well I knew that thou fearedst lest this
Carthage should harm thy favourite. But why should there be war
between us? Thou hast what thou seekedst. Let us make alliance. Let
Dido obey a Phrygian husband, and bring the men of Tyre as her dowry."

But Venus knew that she spake with ill intent, to the end that the men
of Troy should not reign in the land of Italy. Nevertheless she
dissembled with her tongue, and spake, "Who would not rather have
peace with thee than war? Only I doubt whether this thing shall be to
the pleasure of Jupiter. This thou must learn, seeing that thou art
his wife, and where thou leadest I will follow."

So the two, taking counsel together, ordered things in this wise. The
next day a great hunting was prepared. For as soon as ever the sun was
risen upon the earth, the youth of the city assembled, with nets and
hunting spears and dogs that ran by scent. And the princes of Carthage
waited for the queen at the palace door, where her horse stood
champing the bit, with trappings of purple and gold. And after a while
she came forth, with many following her. And she had upon her a
Sidonian mantle, with a border wrought with divers colours; of gold
was her quiver, and of gold the knot of her hair, and of gold the
clasp to her mantle. Aeneas likewise came forth, beautiful as is Apollo
when he leaveth Lydia and the stream of Xanthus, coming to Delos, and
hath about his hair a wreath of bay-leaves and a circlet of gold. So
fair was Aeneas to see. And when the hunters came to the hills they
found great store of goats and stags, which they chased. And of all
the company Ascanius was the foremost, thinking scorn of such hunting,
and wishing that a wild boar or a lion out of the hills should come
forth to be his prey.

And now befell a great storm, with much thunder and hail, from which
the hunters sought shelter. But Aeneas and the queen, being left of all
their company, came together to the same cave. And there they plighted
their troth one to another. Nor did the queen after that make secret
of her love, but called Aeneas her husband.

Straightway went Rumour and told these things through the cities of
Libya. Now Rumour, men say, is the youngest daughter of Earth, a
marvellous creature, moving very swiftly with feet and wings, and
having many feathers upon her, and under every feather an eye and a
tongue and a mouth and an ear. In the night she flies between heaven
and earth, and sleepeth not; and in the day she sits on some house-top
or lofty tower, or spreads fear over mighty cities; and she loveth
that which is false even as she loveth that which is true. So now she
went telling through Libya how Aeneas of Troy was come, and Dido was
wedded to him, and how they lived careless and at ease, and thinking
not of the work to which they were called.

And first of all she went to Prince Iarbas, who himself had sought
Dido in marriage. And Iarbas was very wroth when he heard it, and,
coming to the temple of Jupiter, spread his grief before the god, how
that he had given a place on his coasts to this Dido, and would have
taken her to wife, but that she had married a stranger from Phrygia,
another Paris, whose dress and adornments were of a woman rather than
of a man.

And Jupiter saw that this was so, and he said to Mercury, who was his
messenger, "Go speak to Aeneas these words: 'Thus saith the King of
Gods and men. Is this what thy mother promised of thee, twice saving
thee from the spear of the Greeks? Art thou he that shall rule Italy
and its mighty men of war, and spread thy dominion to the ends of the
world? If thou thyself forgettest these things, dost thou grudge to
thy son the citadels of Rome? What doest thou here? Why lookest thou
not to Italy? Depart and tarry not.'"

Then Mercury fitted the winged sandals to his feet, and took the wand
with which he driveth the spirits of the dead, and came right soon to
Mount Atlas, which standeth bearing the heaven on his head, and having
always clouds about his top, and snow upon his shoulders, and a beard
that is stiff with ice. There Mercury stood awhile; then, as a bird
which seeks its prey in the sea, shot headlong down, and came to Aeneas
where he stood, with a yellow jasper in his sword-hilt, and a cloak of
purple shot with gold about his shoulders, and spake: "Buildest thou
Carthage, forgetting thine own work? The almighty Father saith to
thee, 'What meanest thou? Why tarriest thou here? If thou carest not
for thyself, yet think of thy son, and that the Fates have given to
him Italy and Rome.'"

And Aeneas saw him no more. And he stood stricken with fear and doubt.
Fain would he obey the voice, and go as the Gods commanded. But how
should he tell this purpose to the queen? But at the last it seemed
good to him to call certain of the chiefs, as Mnestheus, and
Sergestus, and Antheus, and bid them make ready the ships in silence,
and gather together the people, but dissemble the cause, and he
himself would watch a fitting time to speak and unfold the matter to
the queen.

Yet was not Dido deceived, for love is keen of sight. Rumour also told
her that they made ready the ships for sailing. Then, flying through
the city, even as one on whom has come the frenzy of Bacchus flies by
night over Mount Cithaeron, she came upon Aeneas, and spake: "Thoughtest
thou to hide thy crime, and to depart in silence from this land?
Carest thou not for her whom thou leavest to die? And hast thou no
fear of winter storms that vex the sea? By all that I have done for
thee and given thee, if there be yet any place for repentance, repent
thee of this purpose. For thy sake I suffer the wrath of the princes
of Libya and of my own people; and if thou leavest me, for what should
I live?--till my brother overthrow my city, or Iarbas carry me away
captive? If but I had a little Aeneas to play in my halls I should not
seem so altogether desolate."

But Aeneas, fearing the words of Jupiter, stood with eyes that relented
not. At the last he spake: "I deny not, O Queen, the benefits that
thou hast done unto me, nor ever, while I live, shall I forget Dido. I
sought not to fly by stealth; yet did I never promise that I would
abide in this place. Could I have chosen according to my will I had
built again the city of Troy where it stood; but the Gods command that
I should seek Italy. Thou hast thy Carthage: why dost thou grudge
Italy to us? Nor may I tarry. Night after night have I seen my father
Anchises warning me in dreams. Also even now the messenger of Jupiter
came to me--with these ears I heard him--and bade me depart."

Then, in great wrath, with eyes askance, did Dido break forth upon
him: "Surely no goddess was thy mother, nor art thou come of the race
of Dardanus. The rocks of Caucasus brought thee forth, and an
Hyrcanian tigress gave thee suck. For why should I dissemble? Was he
moved at all by tears? Did he pity my love? Nay, the very Gods are
against me. This man I took to myself when he was shipwrecked and
ready to perish. I brought back his ships, his companions from
destruction. And now forsooth comes the messenger of Jupiter with
dreadful commands from the Gods. As for thee, I keep thee not. Go,
seek thy Italy across the seas: only, if there is any vengeance in
heaven, thou wilt pay the penalty for this wrong, being wrecked on
some rock in their midst. Then wilt thou call on Dido in vain. Aye,
and wherever thou shalt go I will haunt thee, and rejoice in the
dwellings below to hear thy doom."

Then she turned, and hasted to go into the house. But her spirit left
her, so that her maidens bare her to her chamber and laid her on her
bed.

Then Aeneas, though indeed he was much troubled in heart, and would
fain have comforted the queen, was obedient to the heavenly word, and
departed to his ships. And the men of Troy busied themselves in making
them ready for the voyage. Even as the ants spoil a great heap of corn
and store it in their dwellings against winter, moving in a black line
across the field, and some carry the great grains, and some chide
those that linger, even so did the Trojans swarm along the ways and
labour at the work.

But when Dido saw it she called to Anna, her sister, and said, "Seest
thou how they hasten the work along the shore? Even now the sails are
ready for the winds, and the sailors have wreathed the ships with
garlands, as if for departure. Go thou--the deceiver always trusted
thee, and thou knowest how best to move him--go and entreat him. I
harmed not him nor his people; let him then grant me this only. Let
him wait for a fairer time for his journey. I ask not that he give up
his purpose; only that he grant me a short breathing space, till I may
learn how to bear this sorrow."

And Anna hearkened to her sister, and took the message to Aeneas, yet
profited nothing, for the Gods shut his ears that he should not hear.
Even as an oak stands firm when the north wind would root it up from
the earth--its leaves are scattered all around, yet doth it remain
firm, for its roots go down to the regions below, even as far as its
branches reach to heaven--so stood Aeneas firm, and, though he wept
many tears, changed not his purpose.

Then did Dido grow weary of her life. For when she did sacrifice the
pure water would grow black and the wine be changed into blood. Also
from the shrine of her husband, which was in the midst of her palace,
was heard a voice calling her, and the owl cried aloud from her
house-top. And in her dreams the cruel Aeneas seemed to drive her
before him; or she seemed to be going a long way with none to bear her
company, and be seeking her own people in a land that was desert.
Therefore, hiding the thing that was in her heart, she spake to her
sister, saying, "I have found a way, my sister, that shall bring him
back to me or set me free from him. Near the shore of the Great Sea,
where the Aethiopians dwell, is a priestess, who guards the temple of
the daughters of Hesperus, being wont to feed the dragons that kept
the apples of gold. She is able by her charms to loose the heart from
care or to bind it, and to stay rivers also, and to turn the courses
of the stars, and to call up the spirits of the dead. Do thou,
therefore--for this is what the priestess commands--build a pile in
the open court, and put thereon the sword which he left hanging in our
chamber, and the garments he wore, and the couch on which he lay, even
all that was his, so that they may perish together."

And when these things were done--for Anna knew not of her purpose--and
also an image of Aeneas was laid upon the pile, the priestess, with her
hair unbound, called upon all the gods that dwell below, sprinkling
thereon water that was drawn, she said, from the lake of Avernus, and
scattering evil herbs that had been cut at the full moon with a sickle
of bronze. Dido also, with one foot bare and her garments loosened,
threw meal upon the fire and called upon the Gods, if haply there be
any, that look upon those that love and suffer wrong.

In the mean time Aeneas lay asleep in the hind part of his ship, when
there appeared to him in a dream the god Mercury, even as he had seen
him when he brought the commandment of Jupiter. And Mercury spake,
saying, "Son of Venus, canst thou sleep? seest thou not what perils
surround thee, nor hearest how the favourable west wind calls? The
queen purposes evil against thee. If thou lingerest till the morning
come thou wilt see the shore covered with them that wish thee harm.
Fly, then, and tarry not; for a woman is ever of many minds."

Then did Aeneas in great fear start from his sleep, and call his
companions, saying, "Wake, and sit on the benches, and loose the
sails. 'Tis a god thus bids us fly." And even as he spake he cut the
cable with his sword. And all hasted to follow him, and sped over the
sea.

And now it was morning, and Queen Dido, from her watch-tower, saw the
ships upon the sea. Then she smote upon her breast and tore her hair,
and cried, "Shall this stranger mock us thus? Hasten to follow him.
Bring down the ships from the docks, make ready sword and fire. And
this was the man who bare upon his shoulders his aged father! Why did
I not tear him to pieces, and slay his companions with the sword, and
serve up the young Ascanius at his meal? And if I had perished, what
then? for I die to-day. O Sun, that regardest all the earth, and Juno,
that carest for marriage bonds, and Hecate, Queen of the dead, and ye
Furies that take vengeance on evildoers, hear me. If it be ordered
that he reach this land, yet grant that he suffer many things from his
enemies, and be driven from his city, and beg for help from strangers,
and see his people cruelly slain with the sword; and, when he shall
have made peace on ill conditions, that he enjoy not long his kingdom,
but die before his day, and lie unburied on the plain. And ye, men of
Tyre, hate his children and his people for ever. Let there be no love
or peace between you. And may some avenger arise from my grave who
shall persecute the race of Dardanus with fire and sword. So shall
there be war for ever between him and me."

Then she spake to old Barce, who had been nurse to her husband
Sichaeus, "Bid my sister bathe herself in water, and bring with her
beasts for sacrifice. And do thou also put a garland about thy head,
for I am minded to finish this sacrifice which I have begun, and to
burn the image of the man of Troy."

And when the old woman made haste to do her bidding, Queen Dido ran to
the court where the pile was made for the burning, and mounted on the
pile, and drew the sword of Aeneas from the scabbard. Then did she
throw herself upon the bed, and cry, "Now do I yield up my life. I
have finished my course. I have built a mighty city. I have avenged my
husband on him that slew him. Happy had I been, yea too happy! had the
ships of Troy never come to this land." Then she kissed the bed and
cried, "Shall I die unavenged? Nevertheless let me die. The man of
Troy shall see this fire from the sea whereon he journeys, and carry
with him an augury of death."

And when her maidens looked, lo! she had fallen upon the sword, and
the blood was upon her hands. And a great cry went up through the
palace, exceeding loud and bitter, even as if the enemy had taken
Carthage or ancient Tyre, and the fire were mounting over the
dwellings of men and of Gods. And Anna her sister heard it, and
rushing through the midst called her by name, "O my sister, was this
thy purpose? Were the pile and the sword and the fire for this? Why
wouldst thou not suffer that I should die with thee? For surely, my
sister, thou hast slain thyself, and me, and thy people, and thy city.
But give me water, ye maidens, that I may wash her wounds, and if
there be any breath left in her, we may yet stay it."

Then she climbed on to the pile, and caught her sister in her arms,
and sought to staunch the blood with her garments. Three times did
Dido strive to raise her eyes; three times did her spirit leave her.
Three times she would have raised herself upon her elbow; three times
she fell back upon the bed, looking with wandering eyes for the light,
and groaning that she yet beheld it.

  [Illustration: DIDO ON THE FUNERAL PILE.]

Then Juno, looking down from heaven, saw that her pain was long, and
pitied her, and sent down Iris, her messenger, that she might loose
the soul that struggled to be free. For, seeing that she died not by
nature, nor yet by the hand of man, but before her time and of her own
madness, Queen Proserpine had not shred the ringlet from her head
which she shreds from them that die. Wherefore Iris, flying down with
dewy wings from heaven, with a thousand colours about her from the
light of the sun, stood above her head and said, "I give thee to
death, even as I am bidden, and loose thee from thy body." Then she
shred the lock, and Queen Dido gave up the ghost.




CHAPTER X.

THE FUNERAL GAMES OF ANCHISES.


Now were Aeneas and the men of Troy far from land. And looking back
they saw a great light, nor knew what it might be; only they feared
some evil hap, knowing the rage that was in Dido's heart, and what a
woman in her madness may do. And indeed the people of the queen were
burning her body on the pile which she had made.

But lo! the sky grew dark overhead, and there were signs as of a great
storm. And Palinurus, the pilot, cried from the stern, where he stood
with the rudder in his hand, "What mean these clouds? What doest thou,
Father Neptune?" And he bade the men clear the decks and put out the
oars to row, and shift the sails to the wind. Then he spake to Aeneas,
saying, "Italy we may not hope to reach with this weather. No, not
though Jupiter himself promise it to us. But, if I remember me
aright, the havens of Sicily are at hand, wherefore let us turn our
course thither."

And Aeneas answered, "It is well: for I see that the winds are contrary
to us. And, of a truth, there is no land whither I would more gladly
go, seeing that my father Anchises is buried there."

Then they shifted their course, and let their ships run before the
wind, and so came with much speed to the land of Sicily. Now Acestes,
who was king of the land, was the son of a woman of Troy, and, seeing
them from a hilltop, he came to meet them, having the skin of a lion
on his shoulders and a javelin in his hand, and refreshed them with
food and drink.

The next day at dawn Aeneas called the men of Troy together, and spake,
saying, "It is a full year since we buried my father in this land, and
this, if I err not, is the very day: which I will that we keep holy
with festival; for such, indeed, would I do were I wandering in the
wilderness of Africa or shut up in Mycenae itself. Now, therefore,
seeing that we are in a land that is friendly to us, let us keep it
with solemnity. And let us vow also that we will keep it year by year
in the land of Italy, if so be that, having prosperous winds, we shall
come thereunto. Likewise, King Acestes gives to us oxen, for every
ship two: wherefore make merry and rejoice. And if the ninth day from
this be fair, I will that there be games of running in a race, and of
throwing the javelin, and of shooting with the bow, and of boxing, and
the like. And now make ready for the sacrifice."

Then he put upon his head a wreath of his mother's myrtle. And old
Acestes did the like, and the boy Ascanius, and the others. Then he
came near to the tomb of his father, and poured out two cups of wine
and two of new milk, and scattered flowers, and said, "Hail to thee,
my father, whom the Gods suffered not to enter with me into the land
of Italy."

And even as he spake there came forth a great snake from the depth of
the tomb. Seven coils he had, and on his body were spots of blue and
gold, and as many colours as are the colours of the rainbow in the
clouds. And when Aeneas stood astonied, lo! the snake passed between
the altars and tasted of the sacrifice and of that which had been
poured out. And Aeneas, doubting what this might be, made fresh
offerings, two sheep, and two swine, and two black oxen, calling on
the spirit of Anchises. And the men of Troy also brought gifts, and
slew oxen for sacrifice, and feasted on the flesh, roasting it with
fire.

And now the ninth day was come, and the sky was fair. Great was the
concourse of people, for the name of King Acestes was famous in the
land. Also many came to see the men of Troy, and some to strive in the
games. First were the prizes put in the midst, three-footed tables for
sacrifices, and crowns, and palms, and weapons, and purple garments,
and talents of gold and silver; and then the trumpet sounded and
called the people together.

And first of all was the race of ships. Four were they that strove
together, Mnestheus with the Sea-Horse, and Gyas with the Chimaera, and
Sergestus with the Centaur, and Cloanthus with the Scylla. Now far out
in the sea was a rock, which is covered by the waves when the sea is
rough, but stands above them if it be calm, and upon it the
cormorants love to bask. Here did Aeneas set a great branch of holm-oak
as a goal, that the ships should round it and so return. First they
cast lots for places, and the captains stood upon the sterns, in
purple and gold, and the rowers had garlands of honour about their
heads and were anointed with oil. Thus they sat upon the benches,
holding the oars for a stroke, and their hearts beat high with hope.
And when the trumpet sounded each ship leapt from its place, and the
sea foamed with the strokes of many oars. And all the people shouted
aloud, having favour for this or for that of the captains. And first
of all came Gyas with the Chimaera, and next to him Cloanthus with the
Scylla, for his men were indeed the stronger, but the ship more heavy.
And after the Scylla came the Sea-Horse and the Centaur at equal
speed, now this one being foremost and now that. But when they were
now come near the rock, Gyas, being in the first place, cried to his
helmsman Menoetes, "Why goest thou overmuch to the right? Keep thou
close to the rock. Let others choose the sea if they will." But
Menoetes, fearing the hidden rocks, turned ever the prow to the sea.
Then a second time cried Gyas, "Make for the rock, Menoetes." And as
he spake, the Scylla now came near, taking the inner course between
the rock and his ship, and passed him by. Then was he greatly wroth
and wept for rage; and laying hold of Menoetes he cast him into the
sea, and himself put his hand to the helm and turned it to the rock.
But Menoetes, being an old man and weighed down with his garments,
hardly climbed upon the rock, and sat thereon. Loud laughed the men to
see him fall, and swim, and vomit the salt water from his mouth. But
when Mnestheus with the Sea-Horse, and Sergestus with the Centaur, saw
what had befallen, they hoped to pass the Chimaera in the race. Eagerly
strove the two together, and Mnestheus, seeing that the Centaur was
yet before him in the race, ran among his men as they rowed, crying,
"O my friends whom I chose to be my comrades, quit ye like men, even
as ye did in the seas of Africa and the Ionian waves. The first place
I seek not, but last I would not return." And the men strove with all
their might, bending forward to the stroke. And even then chance gave
them that which they desired. For the Centaur, being steered too
close, struck on a jutting piece of the rock, and the oars were
broken, and the prow stuck fast. And while the men, with poles and the
like, were thrusting her forth, Mnestheus with the Sea-Horse had
gained the open sea. And first he overtakes Gyas in the Chimaera, and
vanquishes it, seeing that it had lost its helmsman. And now only
Cloanthus with the Scylla remains, and upon him also he presses hard.
Then did all the people cry aloud, bidding Mnestheus make good speed
that he might take the first place. And the one were loath to lose
that which they had gained, and the others having done much would do
yet more, and would give their lives so that they might prevail. And
now, perchance, had the two been equal for the first prize, but
Cloanthus stretched forth his hands to the sea and prayed to the Gods
that have power therein. "Gods of the sea, wherein I hold my course,
help me now, so will I slay a milk-white bull at your altars, and cast
the entrails into the waves, and pour clear wine therewith." And all
the band of the Nereids heard him, and the virgin Panopea; and
Portumnus himself with mighty hand drave the vessel forward swifter
than the south wind or an arrow from the bow, so that it first touched
the shore. Then a herald cried aloud that Cloanthus with the Scylla
had won the mastery in the race, and bound a garland of bay about his
head. Then to the rowers Aeneas gave three oxen, and jars of wine, and
a talent of silver; and to the captains gifts for themselves; to the
first a scarf broidered with gold with a double border of purple, and
on it was wrought the royal boy Ganymede, as he hunted on Mount Ida.
Eager was he, and as one that panted in the chase; but on the other
side the eagle bare him away, and the old men that had charge of him
stretched out their hands and the dogs barked fiercely to the sky. And
to the second Aeneas gave a hauberk of chain-mail with rings of gold,
which he had himself taken from Demoleon by the river of Simois.
Scarce could his two servants carry it, so heavy was it; yet Demoleon
had worn it, and chased the men of Troy, running at full speed. And
the third prize was two cauldrons of bronze and cups of silver
embossed. But when all had departed rejoicing with their gifts, lo!
Sergestus came creeping home with his ship, which he had scarce won
from the rocks, disabled, with one tier of rowers, even as a serpent
which a wheel has maimed upon the road, which with his fore part lifts
himself up and threatens, but his hind part trails upon the ground. So
came Sergestus back to the haven, and to him Aeneas gave also his
reward, seeing that he had brought back ship and crew, even a woman of
Crete, Pholoe by name, very skilful in the work of the loom.

After this Aeneas chose him out a level space, with woods about it, and
having sat down in the midst upon a throne, caused it to be proclaimed
that all should come who would contend together in running. And many
came, both men of Troy and Sicilians. First of all Euryalus, a comely
youth, and Nisus with him (now between these two was great love);
next, Diores, of the house of Priam, then Salius and Patron, Greeks
both of them; and two young hunters, Helymus and Panopes, who were of
Sicily and of the court of Acestes, and many others also. Then said
Aeneas, "To each will I give two javelins of Crete and an axe
ornamented with silver, so that none may depart without a gift. And
the first three shall have crowns of olive. Also to the first will I
give a horse with his furniture, and to the second a quiver after the
fashion of the Amazons, with arrows of Thrace, and to fasten it a belt
embossed with gold, and a jewel for a clasp thereon. And let the third
take this helmet of Greece, and be content."

Then, when they had ranged them in a line, and the sign was given,
they ran. And for a while all were near together. Then Nisus outran
the rest; and next to him was Salius, but with a great space between,
and the third Euryalus; and after him Helymus, and Diores pressing
close upon him, even leaning over his shoulder and ready to outrun him
had the course been longer. And now were they at the very end, when
Nisus slipped in the blood of an ox which chanced to have been slain
in the place, and kept not his feet, but fell, fouling himself with
blood and mire. Yet did he not forget Euryalus whom he loved, but
lifted himself from the ground and tripped Salius, so that he also
rolled upon the earth. So came Euryalus first to the post, and
Helymus next, and Diores the third. But Salius made loud complaint to
all the assembly, great and small, that he had been vanquished by
fraud; yet the people favoured Euryalus, for he was fair to look upon,
and fairness ever commendeth virtue. Also Diores was urgent, who else
had not won the third prize. Then said Father Aeneas, "I change not the
order; as each reached the goal so shall each take his prize. Yet may
I pity him who suffered wrongfully." And he gave to Salius the great
skin of an African lion, with shaggy hair and claws covered with gold.
Then said Nisus, "Yet, if thou givest such prizes to the vanquished
and hast such pity on them that fall, what hast thou for me? For
surely I had won the first reward but for the ill fortune which Salius
also accuseth." And he showed his face and body foul with mire. And
the kindly prince laughed, and gave him a shield, the work of
Didymaon.




CHAPTER XI.

THE FUNERAL GAMES (CONTINUED).


Then did Aeneas offer rewards for boxers: for the conqueror an ox with
gilded horns; for the vanquished a sword and helmet. Straightway rose
up the huge Dares, who only had dared to stand in the lists against
Prince Paris, and also at the funeral games of Hector had vanquished
Butes, hurting him so sore that he died. (This Butes was of the race
of Amycus, the great boxer whom Pollux slew, and no man had stood
before him.) But when they saw the broad shoulders of the man and his
might there was not found one to contend with him. Therefore Dares
came near to Aeneas, and, laying his left hand on the horns of the ox,
spake, saying, "If there be no man to stand against me, why do I
tarry? Bid them bring the prize." Thereupon Acestes rebuked Entellus,
who sat near him upon the grass: "Sufferest thou such gifts to be
taken without contest? What of Eryx, thy master? What of thy fame,
which hath gone through all the land of Sicily, and the spoils that
hang in thy house?"

Then said Entellus, "Think not, Acestes, that I am fearful, or
careless of honour. But I am old: my strength is gone from me. Were I
young, as that boaster yonder, I had not waited for gifts that I
should go forth to the battle."

Then cast he into the midst two gauntlets which Eryx, the great boxer,
had been wont to wear. And all men marvelled to see them, so huge were
they, and heavy with bull's hide and lead and iron. And Dares stood
astonied, nor would stand against such arms. And when Aeneas regarded
them and tried their weight, Entellus spake, saying, "What had the man
of Troy said had he seen the gauntlets of Hercules himself, and the
dreadful battle that befell on this very shore? These gauntlets Eryx,
who was my mother's son, was wont to wear: thou seest them stained yet
with blood and brains, and I also was wont to wear them in the days of
my youth. But if Dares liketh them not, be it so; I put them away, and
he shall do the like with his."

Then he threw his garment from his shoulders, showing his mighty arms
and sinews. And Aeneas gave the two equal gauntlets, and they stood
with heads thrown back, and began the battle. Dares indeed was swifter
to move, and vigorous, and young; and Entellus was huge of stature,
but slow and scant of breath. Many blows they aimed at each other:
many times one smote the other on his breast or his cheek, but struck
not home. And ever Entellus abode in the same place, swaying himself
hither and thither with watchful eyes. But Dares was as one who
besieges a city or a fort on the hills, and tries now this approach,
now that, and searches out all the place, and assails it in many ways.
But at the last Entellus lifted his right hand and dealt a mighty
blow, which the other, foreseeing it as it fell, avoided; so that the
old man wasted his strength in air, and fell with a great crash to the
earth, even as falls a pine torn up by the roots on Mount Erymanthus
or Mount Ida. Then the men of Troy and the men of Sicily rose up from
their places to see the thing; Acestes also ran forward and lifted up
the old man from the earth and would have comforted him. But he went
back in great wrath to the battle, anger and shame stirring him up.
And Dares fled before him over the plain, and he followed him, smiting
him now with the right hand, now with the left, and his blows were as
the hail that rattles upon the roof. But Aeneas bade him stay his
anger, and spake kindly to Dares, bidding him cease from the battle.
"Seest thou not that this day the victory is another's, and that the
Gods are against thee? Fight not against the Gods." Then he commanded
that the battle should cease. And the companions of Dares led him to
the ships, scarcely dragging his legs, and vomiting thick blood from
his mouth, and teeth in the blood. Also they took the shield and
helmet which were his reward, but the palm-branch and the ox they left
to Entellus. Then said the conqueror, "See, son of the goddess, and ye
men of Troy, what strength dwelt in this body while I was yet young,
and from what a death ye have saved this Dares." Then stood he over
against the ox and smote it with his gauntlet between the horns. And
it fell dead upon the earth. And Entellus cried aloud, "O Eryx, I
offer thee this life for the life of Dares, being indeed the better
for the worse. And I lay aside these gauntlets and this art."

  [Illustration: ENTELLUS KILLING THE BULL.]

Next Aeneas called for those who would shoot with the bow, setting up a
mast from the ship of Sergestus, and fastening thereto a dove by a
cord, at which mast were all to shoot. Then came the men together and
cast lots, drawing them from the helmet. And first came Hippocoon, son
of Hyrtacus; and next to him Mnestheus; and third Eurytion, brother of
Pandarus, who broke the treaty between the men of Troy and the Greeks,
shooting his arrow at Menelaus; but the lot of Acestes lingered in the
helmet and leapt not forth. Then first Hippocoon drew his bow and
smote the mast, so that it shook, and the bird fluttered his wings in
fear; and next Mnestheus shot his arrow, and the bird he touched not,
but the string which bound it he cut; and Eurytion let fly, calling
the while on his brother Pandarus, the mighty archer, to help him, and
smote the dove as she flew rejoicing through the air, so that she fell
to the earth and the arrow in her body. And only Acestes was left, not
having whereat he should aim; yet shot he into the air, for he would
show his skill and the might of his bow. Then lo! a marvel befell,
whereof in after days men knew the fulfilment; for the arrow burned as
it sped through the air, leaving a line of fire, till it was
altogether consumed, even as a star that shoots across the sky by
night. And men marvelled to see it, and prayed to the Gods that it
might be well. Then great Aeneas refused not the omen, but embraced
Acestes and gave him many gifts, saying, "Take these gifts, my father,
for Jupiter willeth that thou shouldst have especial honour in this
thing. I give thee, therefore, this bowl, embossed with figures of
men. Old Anchises had it, and to him Cisseus, who was the father of
Queen Hecuba, gave it." Also he put a crown of bay upon his head. Nor
did the good Eurytion murmur, though he had slain the bird; the others
also had their gifts and were content.

Not even now was the assembly dismissed, there remaining yet another
sight to behold. For Ascanius and the youths that were his companions
came riding on horses, and each had a wreath about his head. Each
also had two javelins of cornel wood, and some had quivers on their
shoulders, and each a collar of gold that lay on the top of his
breast. Three companies there were, and to each a leader and twelve
that followed. And one of the leaders was Priamus, son of Polites,
called by the name of his grandfather, on a horse that was black, with
pasterns of white and forehead of white; and another Atys, whom
Ascanius loved; and third, fairest of all to behold, Ascanius, on a
horse of Sidon, which Queen Dido had given him; but to the rest
Acestes had given horses of Sicily.

And when these came forth there was much shouting and clapping of
hands, and the men of Troy rejoiced to see the lads, so like were they
to the famous men their fathers. Then, a signal being given, the
companies were divided into bands, and these made as if they fought a
battle. For sometimes they would fly, and sometimes would pursue, and
sometimes would ride altogether this way or that. Many were their ways
and movements, even as are the paths of the Labyrinth in Crete. Swift
also were they and nimble, even as dolphins which sport among the
waves in the Carpathian Sea or African. This custom did Ascanius teach
to his people when he built the city of Alba, and the men of Alba
taught it to their children after them, and mighty Rome learnt it
also, and kept it in the time to come.




CHAPTER XII.

THE BURNING OF THE SHIPS--THE VOYAGE TO ITALY.


But while the men of Troy were busy with the games, Juno prepared
mischief against them in her heart, and sent down Iris, her messenger,
to accomplish it. Now the women sat apart on the shore, and lifted up
their voices and bewailed the old man Anchises. But when they looked
upon the sea they lamented for themselves that they had so much travel
to accomplish, for they were weary of the sea, and would fain have a
city to dwell in. Which when Iris perceived, laying aside the
semblance of a goddess, she took upon herself the form of Beroe, the
wife of Doryclus, and went among the women of Troy and spake, saying,
"O unhappy, that ye were not dragged to death by the hands of the
Greeks! For now the seventh summer is come, and yet we journey over
many lands and seas, and seek this Italy which ever flies before us.
Here we have friends and kindred. What forbids that we build here a
city? Shall I never see the walls of another Troy, nor find Xanthus
and Simois, rivers of Troy, in a strange land? Why burn we not these
accursed ships that carry us hither and thither. I saw in a dream the
seeress Cassandra, and she seemed to put a torch in my hand, and to
say, 'Here seek ye for Troy: here is your home.' And lo! here are
altars and fire."

Then she caught a brand from an altar, and cast it far from her at the
ships. Then cried out Pyrgo, who had been nurse to the sons of Priam,
"O mothers of Troy, this is not Beroe whom ye see. Mark ye her shining
eyes, and her voice, and her gait. But as for Beroe I left her long
since, sick and sore vexed that she was absent this day from our
solemnity."

And for a while the women stood in doubt regarding the ships, loving
indeed the land whereon they stood, yet knowing that the Fates called
them to another. But when the goddess rose on her wings, and passed up
by the path of the rainbow into the heavens, then a great fury fell
upon them, so that they caught brands from the altars and set fire to
the ships. And straightway the flames ran over the benches and the
oars and the stems of painted pine. Then ran Eumelus to the men of
Troy where they sat at the games, and told them how that the ships
were burning; also they themselves saw the black cloud of smoke
rolling before the wind. And Ascanius, in the midst of his
horsemanship, heard the matter and sped to the camp. And being come he
cried aloud, "What madness is this? Ye burn not the camp of the
Greeks, ye burn our own hopes. Lo! I am your Ascanius." And he threw
his helmet on the ground, that they should know him. Also Aeneas and
the men of Troy made haste to come up. Then were the women ashamed of
that which they had done, and would have hidden themselves, their fury
being past. But not the more did the flame cease to devour the ships;
and they who would have quenched the fire availed nothing. Then the
pious Aeneas rent his garments and prayed to the Gods, saying, "O
Jupiter, if thou dost not altogether hate us, save our ships from the
fire, and suffer us not to perish utterly; but if thou art angry, and
so it seem good to thee, slay me with thy thunderbolt."

And even as he spake there came up a great storm from the south, with
thunder and lightning and a great rain, and the fire was quenched, but
of the ships four were burnt altogether.

Now Aeneas was sore troubled at these things, and doubted much whether
he should still abide in the land of Sicily nor heed the Fates, or
should yet follow after Italy. Then the old man, Nautes, the priest of
Pallas, in whom more than in all men besides dwelt the wisdom of the
goddess, spake to him, saying, "Son of the goddess, it must needs be
that we go whither the Gods call us. Yet mayest thou devise something
for this present necessity, taking counsel with King Acestes, seeing
that he also is a son of Troy. For now, four ships being burned, the
people are over many for such as are left to us; some also faint at
this thing that we purpose; also there are old men and women, wearied
of the sea, and the weak and the fearful. Suffer, then, that he take
these to himself to be his people, and build a city for them, and call
it Acesta, after his own name."

And while Aeneas thought on these things he slept. And lo! in his
dream there came to him his father, Anchises, and spake, saying, "I
come, my son, at the bidding of Jupiter. Take thou heed to the counsel
which Nautes giveth thee, for it is good. Let the chosen youth of thy
people go with thee, for thou hast a mighty people and a fierce in
Latium with whom to do battle. But first must thou seek the dwellings
of the dead and hold converse with me. For indeed I dwell not in
Tartarus, with the evildoers, but in Elysium, with the companies of
the blessed. And thither shall the Sibyl guide thee, and thou shalt
learn all that shall befall thee and thy people after this. And now
farewell, for the morning cometh, and I must depart."

And the spirit of Anchises vanished out of his sight, even as smoke
into the air, nor heeded him when he would have stayed it; and Aeneas
arose and did sacrifice to the household gods and to Vesta. Then he
took counsel with his companions and with Acestes. And Acestes
hearkened to his words. And they separated such as would tarry in the
place, both men and women; but the others, few in number indeed, but
strong and of a good courage, made ready the ships to depart. And in
the mean time Aeneas marked the boundaries of the city with a
ploughshare, and Acestes set it in order with laws and government.
Also on the mountain of Eryx they built a temple to Venus, and they
consecrated a grove and a priest at the tomb of Anchises.

Then for nine days they feasted; and after, for it was fine weather,
and the south wind blew softly, they made ready to sail. There was
then a great weeping and embracing on the shore; and now were all fain
to go, willing not to be parted from kindred and friends. But Aeneas
comforted them, and, having sacrificed three calves to Eryx and a lamb
to the Storms, so departed.

And Venus spake to Neptune, saying, "It troubleth me sore that Juno
will not lay aside her wrath. For the city of Troy she overthrew, and,
it being overthrown, she pursueth them that are left with hatred that
cannot be appeased; and now I fear me much what she may do, for she
stirred up Aeolus that he loosed all the winds against them; and even
now she put into the hearts of the women this great madness that they
should burn the ships. Wherefore I pray thee that thou shouldest give
them now a safe voyage to Italy." And the King of the sea made answer,
"Thou doest well to put thy trust in my realms and me. For both have I
stilled the madness of the sea and also on the land have I taken
thought for thy Aeneas. Mindest thou not the day when Achilles pursued
the men of Troy to their city, and filled the rivers with dead bodies,
so that Xanthus could not make his way to the sea, and how Aeneas would
have met him in battle, being weaker, and I snatched him away in a
cloud, yea though I desired from my heart to overthrow the city of
Troy, even the works of my own hands? Fear not, therefore: he shall
come safe to the haven of Avernus. One only of his company must
perish, even one life for many."

Then did he pass over the sea in his chariot, and there was a great
calm as he went, and the clouds flew from the sky, and the great
beasts of the sea went with him; also the gods and goddesses of the
sea, as Glaucus and Palaemon, and the company of the Tritons and
Thetis and the virgin Panopea.

And the men of Troy loosed the sheets, and spread all the sails to the
wind; and the foremost of the fleet was the ship of Aeneas, Palinurus
being the helmsman. And in the night Sleep came down from the sky, and
taking the shape of Phorbas, spake to Palinurus, saying, "All things
are quiet; rest awhile: it is the hour of rest. I will take thy office
for thee." But Palinurus, scarce lifting his eyes, made answer: "Dost
thou bid me trust calm seas and gentle winds? Not so. Too often have I
been deceived." Nor did he loose his hold upon the rudder, or take his
eyes from the stars. Then did Sleep wave over him a bough that had
been dipped in the water of Lethe; and when he slept, as he must needs
do, thrust him into the sea and a portion of the rudder with him; and
he fell, calling vainly for help.

And when the ships were close to the rocks of the Sirens, which in old
time were white with bones of men, but now with spray and broken
waves, Aeneas perceived that the ship strayed from its course. For
indeed, seeing that the helmsman had perished, the winds and the waves
had their will of it. Then did he lay hold on the rudder himself, but
it grieved him much that such mischance had befallen his friend.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE SIBYL.


So Aeneas came to the land of Italy, nigh unto Cumae, which was the
dwelling-place of the Sibyl. And the men turned the forepart of the
ships to the sea, and made them fast with anchors. Then they leapt
forth upon the shore, and kindled a fire; and some cut wood in the
forest, or fetched water from the stream. But Aeneas went up to the
great cave of the Sibyl, where, by the inspiration of Apollo, she
foretelleth things to come.

Now the temple was a marvellous place to look upon. For Daedalus, when
he fled from Minos, King of Crete, flying through the air upon wings,
came northwards to the land of Cumae, and tarried there. Also he
dedicated his wings in the temple. On the doors thereof was set forth,
graven in stone, the death of Androgeos, and the men of Attica
choosing by lot seven of their children who should be given as a
ransom yearly; and, rising from the sea upon the other side, the land
of Crete. Likewise the Labyrinth was there and its winding ways; but
Icarus they saw not, for when his father would have wrought the manner
of his death in gold his hands failed him: twice he strove and twice
they failed. And when Aeneas would have looked further, the priestess
said, "Linger not with these things, but slay forthwith seven bullocks
from the herd, and seven sheep duly chosen out of the flock." And when
they came to the cave--now there are a hundred doors, and a voice
cometh forth from each--the Sibyl cried, "It is time. Lo! the god, the
god!" And even as she spake her look was changed and the colour of her
face; also her hair was loosened, and her breast panted, and she waxed
greater than is the stature of a man. Then she cried, "Delayest thou
to pray, Aeneas of Troy? delayest thou? for the doors open not but to
prayer." Nor said she more. Then Aeneas prayed, saying, "O Phoebus, who
didst always pity the sorrows of Troy, and didst guide the arrow of
Paris that it slew the great Achilles, I have followed thy bidding,
journeying over many lands, and now I lay hold on this shore of Italy,
which ever seemed to fly before me. Grant thou that our ill fortune
follow us no more. And all ye Gods and Goddesses who loved not Troy,
be merciful to us. And thou, O Prophetess, give, if it may be, such
answer as I would hear. So will I and my people honour thee for ever.
And write it not, I pray thee, upon leaves, lest the winds carry them
away, but speak with thy voice."

And for awhile the prophetess strove against the spirit; but at the
last it mastered her, and the doors flew open, and she spake, saying,
"The perils of the sea thou hast escaped, but there await thee yet
worse perils upon the land. The men of Troy shall come to the kingdom
of Lavinium. Fear not for that; yet will they fain not have come. I
see battles, and the Tiber foaming with blood, and a new Xanthus and
Simois, and another Achilles, himself also goddess-born. Juno also
shall be ever against thee. And thou shalt be a suppliant to many
cities. And the cause of all these woes shall be again a woman. Only
yield not thou, but go ever more boldly when occasion shall serve.
Little thinkest thou that thy first succour shall be from a city of
the Greeks."

And when she had ended these words, Aeneas made answer: "O Lady, no
toil or peril shall take me unawares; for I have thought over all
things in my heart. But one thing I ask of thee. Here is the door of
the dwellings of the dead. Fain would I pass thereby, that I may visit
my father. I carried him on my shoulders out of the fires of Troy, and
with me he endured many things by land and sea, more than befitted his
old age. Likewise he bade me ask this boon of thee. Do thou therefore
pity both father and son, for thou hast the power, if only thou wilt.
Did not Orpheus bring back his wife from the dead, having his harp
only? Also Pollux goeth many times this same path, redeeming his
brother from death. And why should I tell of Theseus and Hercules? And
I also am of the lineage of Jupiter."

Then the Sibyl spake, saying, "Son of Anchises, it is easy to go down
to hell. The door is open day and night. But to return, and struggle
to the upper air, that is the labour. Few only have done it, and
these of the lineage of the Gods and dear to Jupiter. Yet if thou wilt
attempt it, hearken unto me. There lieth hid in the forest a bough of
gold which is sacred to the Queen of hell. Nor may any man go on this
journey till he have plucked it, for the Queen will have it as a gift
for herself. And when the bough is plucked, there ever groweth
another; and if it be the pleasure of the Gods that thou go, it will
yield to thy hand. But know that one of thy companions lieth dead upon
the shore. First must thou bury him, and after offer due sacrifice,
even black sheep. So shalt thou approach the dwellings of the dead."

Then Aeneas departed from the cave, and Achates went with him, and much
they wondered who it might be that was dead. And when they came to the
shore, lo! Misenus lay there, than whom no man was more skilful to
call men to battle with the voice of the trumpet. Hector's companion
he had been in old time, and then followed Aeneas. And now, blowing his
trumpet on the shore, he had challenged the gods of the sea to compare
with him; wherefore a Triton caught him and plunged him into the sea,
so that he died. Then did Aeneas and his companions prepare for the
burial, cutting ilex and oak and mountain-ash from the wood. But when
Aeneas beheld the forest, how vast it was, he said, "Now may the Gods
grant that in this great forest the bough of gold discover itself."
And as he spake, lo! two doves flew before his face, and settled on
the grass, and he knew them to be the birds of his mother, and cried,
saying, "Guide me now to the bough of gold, and thou, my mother, help
me as before." Then the birds flew so that he could still see them
with his eyes, and he followed after them. But when they came to the
mouth of Avernus, they sat both of them on the tree. And lo! the bough
of gold glittered among the branches and rustled in the wind. Right
gladly did Aeneas break it off, and carry it to the dwelling of the
Sibyl.

In the mean time the men of Troy made a great burial for Misenus on
the shore, building a pile of wood, and washing and anointing the
body. Also they laid the body on a bier, and on it the garments which
he had worn being yet alive. Then others, with faces turned away,
held a torch to the wood, whereon also were burned incense and
offerings of oil. And when the burning was ended they quenched the
ashes with wine. And Corynaeus gathered the bones into an urn of
bronze, and purified the people, sprinkling them with water with a
bough of an olive-tree. Then Aeneas made a great mound, and put thereon
the trumpet of the man and his bow; and the mountain is called
Misenus, after him, to this day.

But when the burial was ended he did as the Sibyl had commanded. A
great cavern there is, from which cometh so evil a stench that no bird
may fly across. There they brought four black oxen, and the priestess
poured wine upon their heads and cut hairs from between the horns. And
when they had burned these they slew the oxen, holding dishes for the
blood. And Aeneas offered a black lamb to the Furies and a barren
heifer to the Queen of hell, smiting them with his sword. Then they
burned the entrails with fire, pouring oil upon them. Then did the
ground give a hollow sound beneath them, and the dogs howled, for the
goddess was at hand. And the priestess cried, "Go ye who may not take
part in this matter. And thou, Aeneas, draw thy sword from its sheath
and follow. Now hast thou need of all thy strength and courage." Then
she plunged into the cave, and Aeneas went with her.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE DWELLINGS OF THE DEAD.


So they went together through the land of shadows, like unto men who
walk through a wood in a doubtful light, when the moon indeed hath
risen, but there are clouds over the sky. And first they came to
where, in front of the gates of hell, dwell Sorrow and Remorse, and
pale Disease and Fear, and Hunger that tempteth men to sin, and Want,
and Death, and Toil, and Slumber, that is Death's kinsman, and deadly
War; also they saw the chambers of the Furies, and Discord, whose hair
is of snakes that drip with blood. And in this region there is an
ancient elm, in the boughs whereof dwell all manner of dreams, and
shapes of evil monsters, as many as have been, such as were the
Centaurs, half man half horse, and Briareus with the hundred hands,
and others also. These Aeneas, when he saw them, sought to slay,
rushing upon them with the sword, but his guide warned him that they
were shadows only.

After this they came to the river of hell, whereon plies the Boatman
Charon. A long white beard hath he and unkempt; and his eyes are fixed
in a fiery stare, and a scarf is knotted upon his shoulder, as is a
pilot's wont. An old man he seemeth to be, but hale and ruddy. Now
there was ever rushing to the bank a great crowd, wives and mothers,
and valiant men of war, boys, and girls dead before they were given in
marriage, and young men laid on the funeral pile before their parents'
eyes. Thick they were as the leaves that fall to the earth at the
first frost of autumn, or as the swallows, when they gather themselves
together, making ready to fly across the sea to the lands of the sun.
And of these Charon would take some into his boat; but others he would
forbid, and drive from the shore. This when Aeneas saw, he marvelled,
and said, "O Lady, what meaneth this concourse at the river? What seek
these souls? Why be some driven from the bank and some ferried
across?"

And the Sibyl made answer: "This river that thou seest is the Styx, by
which the Gods in heaven swear, and fear to break their oath. Those
whom thou seest to be driven from the bank are such as have lacked
burial, but those who are ferried across have been buried duly; for
none pass this stream till their bodies have been laid in the grave,
otherwise they wander for a hundred years, and so at last may cross
over."

Much did Aeneas pity their ill fortune, and the more when he beheld
Orontes and his Lycians, whom the sea had swallowed up alive before
his eyes. Here likewise there met him his pilot Palinurus, to whom,
when he knew him, for indeed he scarce could see him in the darkness,
he said, "What god took thee from us and drowned thee in the sea?
Surely, in this one matter, Apollo hath deceived me, saying that thou
shouldst escape the sea and come to the land of Italy."

  [Illustration: CHARON AND THE GHOSTS.]

Then answered Palinurus, "Not so, great Aeneas. For indeed to the land
of Italy I came. Three nights the south wind carried me over the sea,
and on the fourth day I saw the land of Italy from the top of a wave.
And when I swam to the shore, and was now clinging to the rocks, my
garments being heavy with water, the savage people came upon me,
and took me for a prey, and slew me. And now the winds and waves bear
me about as they will. Wherefore I pray thee, by thy father, and
Iulus, the hope of thy house, that thou deliver me from these woes.
Go, therefore, I pray thee, to the haven of Velia, and cast earth upon
me for burial; or give me now thy hand, and take me with thee across
this river."

Then said the priestess, "O Palinurus, what madness is this? Wilt thou
without due burial cross the river, and look upon the awful faces of
the Furies? Think not that the Fates can be changed by prayers. Yet
hear this, and be comforted. They that slew thee, being sore troubled
by many plagues, shall make due expiation to thee, and build a tomb,
and make offerings thereon year by year; and the place where they slew
thee shall be called after thy name."

Then he took comfort and departed. But when they came near to the
river, the Boatman beheld them, and cried, "Stay thou, whoever thou
art, that comest armed to this river, and tell me what thou seekest.
This is the land of Shadows, of Sleep, and of Night. The living may
not be ferried in this boat. An evil day it was when I carried
Hercules, and Theseus, and Pirithous, though they were children of the
Gods. For Hercules chained the Watch-dog of hell, and dragged him
trembling from his master's seat. And Theseus and his friend sought to
carry away the Queen even from the chamber of her husband."

Then the Sibyl made answer: "Be not troubled. We came not hither with
evil thoughts. Let the Watch-dog of hell make the pale ghosts afraid;
let your Queen abide in her husband's palace; we will not harm them.
Aeneas of Troy cometh down to hell that he may speak with his father.
And if thou takest no account of such piety, yet thou wilt know this
token."

And she showed him the bough of gold. And when he saw it he laid aside
his anger, rejoicing to behold, now after many years, the marvellous
gift. Then he brought near his boat to the bank, and drave out the
souls that were therein, and took on board Aeneas and the priestess.
Much did it groan with the weight, and the water poured apace
through the seams thereof. Yet did they come safe across.

  [Illustration: CERBERUS.]

Then they saw Cerberus, the Watch-dog, in his cave. And to him the
Sibyl gave a cake of honey and poppy-seed, causing sleep. And this he
swallowed, opening wide his three ravenous mouths, and straightway
stretched himself out asleep across the cave.

After this they heard a great wailing of infants, even the voices of
such as are taken away before they have had lot or part in life. And
near to these were such as have died by false accusation; yet lack
they not justice, for Minos trieth their cause. And yet beyond, they
that, being guiltless, have laid hands upon themselves. Fain would
they now endure hardships, being yet alive, but may not, for the river
keeps them in with its unlovely stream as in a prison. Not far from
these are the Mourning Fields, where dwell the souls of those that
have died of love, as Procris, whom Cephalus slew in error, and
Laodamia, who died of grief for her husband. And among these was Dido,
fresh from the wound wherewith she slew herself. And when Aeneas saw
her darkly through the shadows, even as one who sees, or thinketh
that he sees, the new moon lately risen, he wept, and said, "O Dido,
it was truth, then, that they told me, saying that thou hadst slain
thyself with the sword. Tell me, Was I the cause of thy death? Loath
was I, O Queen--I swear it by all that is most holy in heaven or
hell--to leave thy land. But the Gods, at whose bidding I come hither
this day, constrained me; nor did I think that thou wouldst take such
sorrow from my departure. But stay; depart not; for never again may I
speak to thee but this once only."

So he spake, and would fain have appeased her wrath. But she cast her
eyes to the ground, and her heart was hard against him, even as a
rock. And she departed into a grove that was hard by, wherein was her
first husband, Sichaeus, who loved her even as he was loved. After this
they came to the land where the heroes dwell. And there they saw
Tydeus, who died before Thebes; and Adrastus, and also many men of
Troy, as the three sons of Antenor, and Idaeus, who was the
armour-bearer of King Priam, and bare the arms and drave the chariot
yet. All these gathered about him, and would fain know wherefore he
had come. But when the hosts of Agamemnon saw his shining arms through
the darkness, they fled, as in old days they had fled to the ships;
and some would have cried aloud, but could not, so thin are the voices
of the dead.

  [Illustration: AENEAS AND THE SHADE OF DIDO.]

Among these he saw Deiphobus, son of Priam. Cruelly mangled was he,
for his hands had been cut off, and his ears and his nostrils
likewise. Scarce did Aeneas know him, and he himself in shame would
have hidden his wounds; but the son of Anchises spake to him, saying,
"Who hath dealt so foully with thee, great Deiphobus? Men told me that
on the last night of Troy thou didst fall dead on a heap of Greeks
whom thou hadst slain. Wherefore I built thee a tomb by the sea, and
thrice called aloud thy name. But thee I found not, that I might lay
thee therein."

Then Deiphobus made answer: "Thou hast left nothing undone, but hast
paid me all due honour. But my ill fate and the accursed wickedness of
the Spartan woman have destroyed me. How we spent that last night in
idle rejoicings thou knowest. And she, while the women of Troy danced
before the Gods, stood holding a torch on the citadel, as though she
were their leader, yet in truth she called therewith the Greeks from
Tenedos. But I lay overcome with weariness in my chamber. Then did
she, a noble wife, forsooth! take all the arms out of the house, and
my trusty sword also from under my head; and after brought thereunto
Menelaus, so hoping to do away her sin against him; and Ulysses also,
always ready with evil counsels. What need of more? May the Gods do so
and more also to them. But tell me why hast thou come hither?"

And it was now past noonday, and the two had spent in talk all the
allotted time. Therefore the Sibyl spake: "Night cometh, Aeneas, and we
waste the day in tears. Lo! here are two roads. This on the right hand
leadeth to the palace of Pluto and to the Elysian plains; and that on
the left to Tartarus, the abode of the wicked." And Deiphobus
answered: "Be not wroth, great priestess; I depart to my own place. Do
thou, my friend, go on and prosper."

But as Aeneas looked round he saw a great building, and a three-fold
wall about it, and round the wall a river of fire. Great gates there
were, and a tower of brass, and the fury Tisiphone sat as warder. Also
he heard the sound of those that smote upon an anvil, and the clanking
of chains. And he stood, and said, "What mean these things that I see
and hear?" Then the Sibyl made answer: "The foot of the righteous may
not pass that threshold. But when the Queen of hell gave me this
office she herself led me through the place and told me all. There
sits Rhadamanthus the Cretan, and judges the dead. And them that be
condemned Tisiphone taketh, and the gate which thou seest openeth to
receive them. And within is a great pit, and the depth thereof is as
the height of heaven. Herein lie the Titans, the sons of Earth, whom
Jupiter smote with the thunder; and herein the sons of Aloeus, who
strove to thrust the Gods from heaven; and Salmoneus, who would have
mocked the thunder of Jupiter, riding in his chariot through the
cities of Elis, and shaking a torch, and giving himself out to be a
god. But the lightning smote him in his pride. Also I saw Tityos,
spread over nine acres of ground, and the vulture feeding on his
heart. And over some hangs a great stone ready to fall; and some sit
at the banquet, but when they would eat, the Fury at their side
forbids, and rises and shakes her torch and thunders in their ears.
These are they who while they were yet alive hated their brothers, or
struck father or mother, or deceived one that trusted to them, or kept
their riches for themselves, nor cared for those of their own
household (a great multitude are they), or stirred up civil strife.
And of these some roll a great stone and cease not, and some are bound
to wheels, and some sit for ever crying, 'Learn to do righteousness
and to fear the Gods.'"

  [Illustration: THE FURY AT THE FEAST.]

And when the priestess had finished these words they hastened on their
way. And, after a while, she said, "Lo! here is the palace which the
Cyclopes built for Pluto and the Queen of hell. Here must we offer the
gift of the bough of gold." And this being accomplished, they came to
the dwellings of the righteous. Here are green spaces, with woods
about them; and the light of their heaven is fuller and brighter
than that which men behold. Another sun they have and other stars.
Some of them contend together in wrestling and running; and some dance
in measure, singing the while a pleasant song; and Orpheus, clad in a
long robe, makes music, touching his harp, now with his fingers and
now with an ivory bow. Here did Aeneas marvel to see the mighty men of
old, such as were Ilus, and Dardanus, builder of Troy. Their spears
stood fixed in the earth, and their horses fed about the plain; for
they love spear and chariot and horses, even as they loved them upon
earth. And others sat and feasted, sitting on the grass in a
sweet-smelling grove of bay, whence flows the river which men upon the
earth call the Po. Here were they who had died for their country, and
holy priests, and poets who had uttered nothing base, and such as had
found out witty inventions, or had done great good to men. All these
had snow-white garlands on their heads. Then spake the Sibyl to
Musaeus, who stood in the midst, surpassing them all in stature: "Tell
me, happy souls, where shall we find Anchises." And Musaeus answered,
"We have no certain dwelling-place: but climb this hill, and ye can
see the whole plain below, and doubtless him whom ye seek."

Then they beheld Anchises where he sat in a green valley, regarding
the spirits of those who should be born in after-time of his race. And
when he beheld Aeneas coming, he stretched out his hands and cried,
"Comest thou, my son? Hast thou won thy way hither to me? Even so I
thought that it would be, and lo! my hope hath not failed me."

And Aeneas made answer, "Yea, I have come a long way to see thee, even
as thy spirit bade me. And now let me embrace thee with my arms."

But when he would have embraced him it was as if he clasped the air.

Then Aeneas looked and beheld a river, and a great company of souls
thereby, thick as the bees on a calm summer day in a garden of lilies.
And when he would know the meaning of the concourse, Anchises said,
"These are souls which have yet to live again in a mortal body, and
they are constrained to drink of the water of forgetfulness." And
Aeneas said, "Nay, my father, can any desire to take again upon them
the body of death?" Then Anchises made reply: "Listen, my son, and I
will tell thee all. There is one soul in heaven and earth and the
stars and the shining orb of the moon and the great sun himself; from
which soul also cometh the life of man and of beast, and of the birds
of the air, and of the fishes of the sea. And this soul is of a divine
nature, but the mortal body maketh it slow and dull. Hence come fear
and desire, and grief and joy, so that, being as it were shut in a
prison, the spirit beholdeth not any more the light that is without.
And when the mortal life is ended yet are not men quit of all the
evils of the body, seeing that these must needs be put away in many
marvellous ways. For some are hung up to the winds, and with some
their wickedness is washed out by water, or burnt out with fire. But a
ghostly pain we all endure. Then we that are found worthy are sent
unto Elysium and the plains of the blest. And when, after many days,
the soul is wholly pure, it is called to the river of forgetfulness,
that it may drink thereof, and so return to the world that is above."

Then he led Aeneas and the Sibyl to a hill, whence they could see the
whole company, and regard their faces as they came; and he said,
"Come, and I will show thee them that shall come after thee. That
youth who leans upon a pointless spear is Silvius, thy youngest child,
whom Lavinia shall bear to thee in thy old age. He shall reign in
Alba, and shall be the father of kings. And many other kings are there
who shall build cities great and famous. Lo! there is Romulus, whom
Ilia shall bear to Mars. He shall build Rome, whose empire shall reach
to the ends of the earth and its glory to the heaven. Seest thou him
with the olive crown about his head and the white beard? That is he
who shall first give laws to Rome. And next to him is Tullus, the
warrior. And there are the Tarquins; and Brutus, who shall set the
people free, aye, and shall slay his own sons when they would be false
to their country. See also the Decii; and Torquatus, with the cruel
axe; and Camillus winning back the standards of Rome. There standeth
one who shall subdue Corinth; and there another who shall avenge the
blood of Troy upon the race of Achilles. There, too, thou mayest see
the Scipios, thunderbolts of war, whom the land of Africa shall fear;
and there Regulus, busy in the furrows; and there the Fabii, chiefly
him, greatest of the name, who shall save thy country by wise delay.
Such, my son, shall be thy children's children. Others with softer
touch shall carve the face of man in marble or mould the bronze; some
more skilfully shall plead, or map the skies, or tell the rising of
the stars. 'Tis thine, man of Rome, to subdue the world. This is thy
work, to set the rule of peace over the vanquished, to spare the
humble, and to subdue the proud."

Then he spake again: "Regard him who is the first of all the company
of conquerors. He is Marcellus; he shall save the state in the day of
trouble, and put to flight Carthaginian and Gaul."

Then said Aeneas, for he chanced to see by his side a youth clad in
shining armour, and very fair to look upon, but sad, and with downcast
eyes, "Tell me, father, who is this? How noble is he! What a company
is about him! but there is a shadow of darkness round his head."

And Anchises made answer, "O my son, seek not to know the greatest
sorrow that shall befall thy children after thee. This youth the
Fates shall only show for a brief space to man. Rome would seem too
mighty to the Gods should he but live! What mourning shall there be
for him! What a funeral shalt thou see, O river of Tiber, as thou
flowest by the new-made tomb! No youth of the race of Troy shall
promise so much as he. Alas! for his righteousness, and truth, and
valour unsurpassed! O luckless boy, if thou canst haply break thy evil
doom thou shalt be a Marcellus. Give handfuls of lilies. I will
scatter the bright flowers and pay the idle honours to my grandson's
shade."

Thus did Anchises show his son things to be, and kindled his soul with
desire of glory. Also he showed him what wars he must wage, and how he
should endure, or, if it might be, avoid the evils to come.

There are two gates of Sleep, of horn the one, by which true dreams go
forth; of ivory the other, by which the false. Then did Anchises send
forth his son and the Sibyl by the ivory gate. And Aeneas returned to
the ships, and making sail came to the cape which was afterwards
called Caieta.




CHAPTER XV.

KING LATINUS.


While they tarried at Cumae, Caieta, who was the nurse of Aeneas, died
and was buried; and they called the cape after her name. And
afterwards they set sail, and passed by the island wherein dwelt
Circe, who is the daughter of the Sun. Pleasantly doth she sing,
sitting at the loom, and burneth torches of sweet-smelling cedar to
give her light by night. And round about her dwelling you may hear the
growling of lions and wild boars and bears and wolves, which are men
whom the goddess with her enchantments hath changed into the shapes of
beasts. But Neptune would not that the men of Troy, being fearers of
the Gods, should suffer such things. Therefore did he send them
favourable winds, so that they passed quickly by that land.

Now when it was dawn, the wind being now lulled, they came to a great
wood upon the shore, and in the midst of the wood the river Tiber,
yellow with much abundance of sand, flowing into the sea. And on the
shore and in the wood were many birds. Thither the men of Troy brought
their ships safe to land.

Of this country Latinus was king, who was the son of Faunus, who was
the son of Picus, who was the son of Saturn. And King Latinus had not
a son, but a daughter only, Lavinia by name, who was now of an age to
be married. Many chiefs of Latium, and of all Italy, desired to have
her to wife; of whom the first was Turnus, a very comely youth, and of
a royal house. Now the queen, the mother of the virgin, loved him, and
would fain have married her daughter to him, but the Gods hindered the
marriage with ill omens and marvels. In the midst of the palace was a
great bay-tree, which the king who builded the house had dedicated to
Phoebus. On this there lighted a great swarm of bees, and hung like
unto a cluster of grapes from a bough thereof. And the seers,
beholding the thing, cried, "There cometh a stranger who shall be
husband to Lavinia, and a strange people who shall bear rule in this
place." Also when Lavinia lighted the fire upon the altar, standing by
her father, a flame leapt therefrom upon her hair, and burned the
ornament that was upon her head and the crown of jewels and gold, and
spread with smoke and fire over the whole palace. Whereupon the
prophets spake, saying, "The virgin indeed shall be famous and great,
but there cometh a dreadful war upon her people." And King Latinus,
fearing what these things might mean, inquired of the oracle of
Faunus, his father, which is by the grove of Albunea. Now the custom
is that the priest offereth sacrifice in the grove and lieth down to
sleep on the skins of the sheep that he hath slain; and it cometh to
pass that he seeth visions in the night and heareth the voice of the
Gods. So King Latinus, being himself a priest, made a great sacrifice,
even of a hundred sheep, and lay down to sleep upon the skins thereof.
And when he was laid down, straightway there came a voice from the
grove, saying, "Seek not, my son, to marry thy daughter to a chief of
this land. There shall come a son-in-law from beyond the sea, who
shall exalt our name from the one end of heaven to the other." Nor did
the king hide these things, but noised them abroad, and the fame
thereof was great in these days when Aeneas and his company came to the
land of Italy.

Now it so chanced that Aeneas and Iulus his son, and others of the
princes, sat down to eat under a tree; and they had platters of dough
whereon to eat their meat. And when they had ended, and were not
satisfied, they ate their platters also, not thinking what they did.
Then said Iulus, making sport, "What! do we eat even our tables?" And
Aeneas was right glad to hear this thing, and embraced the boy, and
said, "Now know I that we are come to the land which the Gods have
promised to me and to my people, that they would give us. For my
father, Anchises, spake to me, saying, 'My son, when thou shalt come
to a land that thou knowest not, and hunger shall constrain thee to
eat thy tables, then know that thou hast found thee a home.' Now,
therefore, seeing that these things have an accomplishment, let us
pour out libations to Jupiter, and make our prayers also to my father,
Anchises, and make merry. And in the morning we will search out the
country, and see who they be that dwell herein."

Then he bound a garland of leaves about his head, and made his prayers
to Mother Earth, and to the gods of the land, of whom indeed he knew
not who they were, and to Father Jupiter, and to the other gods also.
And when he had ended his prayer, Jupiter thundered thrice from the
sky. Then was it noised abroad among the men of Troy that now indeed
were they come to the land where they should build them a city; and
they ate and drank and made merry.

The next day those who should search out the country went forth. And
when it was told Aeneas, saying that this river was the Tiber, and that
the people who dwelt in the land were the Latins, valiant men of war,
he chose out a hundred men who should go, with crowns of olive upon
their heads, to the city of the king, having also gifts in their
hands, and should pray that there might be peace between the men of
Troy and his people. And the men made haste to depart; and in the
meanwhile Aeneas marked out for himself a camp, and bade that they
should make a rampart and a ditch.

Now when they that were sent came nigh to the city, they saw the young
men in the plain that was before it, riding upon horses and driving
chariots. Others shot with the bow or cast javelins, and some
contended in running or boxing. And one rode on horseback and told the
king, saying that certain men in strange raiment were come. Then the
king commanded that they should be brought into the palace, and sat
upon the throne of his fathers, and gave audience to them.

Now the palace stood on the hill that was in the midst of the city,
where King Picus had builded it, having woods about it very sacred.
Here did the kings first receive the sceptre, that they should bear
rule over the people. A senate-house also it was, and a
banqueting-house, where the princes sat feasting. Very great was it
and magnificent, having a hundred pillars; and in the halls were the
statues of ancient kings, carven in cedar, even Italus, and Sabinus
the vine-dresser, and Father Saturn, and Janus with the two faces.
Also on the wall hung trophies of war, chariots, and battle-axes, and
helmets, and javelins, and the beaks of ships. And sitting on a throne
was the image of King Picus, clad in royal apparel, bearing a shield
on his left arm. But the king himself his wife Circe had changed into
a bird.

And King Latinus spake, saying, "Tell me, men of Troy, for I know you
who you are, what seek ye? For what cause are ye come to the land of
Italy? Have ye gone astray in your journey? or have the storms driven
you out of the way, as ofttimes befalleth men that sail upon the sea?
Ye are welcome. And know that we be of the race of Saturn, who do
righteously, not by constraint, but of our own will. From hence also,
even from Corythus, which is a city of the Etrurians, went forth
Dardanus, and abode in the land of Troy."

Then Ilioneus made answer, saying, "Great King, we have not gone
astray in our journey, nor have storms driven us out of the way. Of
set purpose are we come to this land. For we were driven away by
ill-fortune from our country, of which things we doubt not, O King,
that thou knowest the certainty. For who is there under the whole
heaven who knoweth not what a storm of destruction came forth from the
land of Greece and overthrew the great city of Troy, Europe and Asia
setting themselves in arms against each other? And now are we come to
ask for a parcel of land whereon we may dwell; and for air and water,
which indeed are common to all men. Nor shall we do dishonour to this
realm, nor be unthankful for these benefits. And be sure, O king, that
it will not repent thee that thou hast received us. For indeed many
nations and lands would fain have joined us to themselves. But the
Gods laid a command upon us that we should come to this country of
Italy. For indeed, as thou sayest, Dardanus came forth from hence, and
thither his children, Apollo bidding them, would return. And now,
behold, Aeneas sends thee these gifts of the things which remain to us
of the riches which we had aforetime. This sceptre King Priam held
when he did justice among his people; here is a crown also, and
garments which the women of Troy have worked with their hands."

Then for awhile King Latinus kept silence, fixing his eyes upon the
ground. Deeply did he ponder in his heart upon the marriage of his
daughter, and upon the oracles of Faunus his father, whether indeed
this stranger that was now come to his land might haply be the
son-in-law of whom the prophets had spoken. At the last he spake,
saying, "May the Gods prosper this matter between you and me. We
grant, men of Troy, that which ye ask. Also we regard these your
gifts. Know ye that while we reign in this land ye shall not want for
riches, even unto the measure of the riches of Troy. And for your
king, Aeneas, if he desire, as ye say, to join himself with us, let him
come and look upon us, face to face. And also take ye back this
message to your king. I have a daughter, whom the Gods suffer me not
to marry to a husband of this land. For they say that there shall come
a stranger who shall be my son-in-law, and that from his loins shall
come forth those who shall raise our name even unto the stars."

Then the king commanded that they should bring forth horses from the
stalls. Now there stood in the stalls three hundred horses, very fleet
of foot. And of these they brought forth one hundred, one for each
man of Troy; and they were decked with trappings of purple, and
champed on bits of gold. And for Aeneas himself he sent a chariot, and
two horses breathing fire from their nostrils, which were of the breed
of the horses of the Sun. So the men of Troy went back riding on
horses, and took to Aeneas the gifts and the message of peace.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE WRATH OF JUNO.


Now Juno beheld how the men of Troy were come to the land of Italy,
and were now building them houses to dwell in; and great wrath came
into her heart, and she spake to herself, saying, "Of a truth this
accursed race hath vanquished me. For the flames of Troy burned them
not, neither hath the sea devoured them. And, lo! they are come to the
place where they would be, even to the river of Tiber. Yet could Mars
destroy the whole nation of the Lapithae, when he was wroth with them;
and Jupiter suffered Diana to prevail against the land of Calydon. Yet
had not the Lapithae or Calydon done so great wickedness as hath this
nation of Troy. And I, who am the wife of Jupiter, am vanquished by
Aeneas! Yet have I means yet remaining to me, for if the Gods of heaven
will not help me, then will I betake me to the powers of hell. From
the kingdom of Latium I may not keep him, and the Gods decree that he
shall have Lavinia to wife. Yet may I hinder the matter. Surely at a
great price shall they buy this alliance; and thy dowry, O virgin,
shall be the blood of Italy and of Troy."

Then Juno descended to the lower parts of the earth, and called to
Alecto from the dwellings of her sisters the Furies--Alecto who loveth
war and anger and treachery, and all evil deeds. Even Pluto hateth
her, aye, and her sisters likewise, so dreadful is she to behold. And
Juno spake to her, saying, "Now would I have thee help me, Daughter of
Night, that I lose not my proper honour. I will not that Aeneas should
have the daughter of Latinus to wife, or dwell in the land of Italy.
Seeing therefore that thou canst set brother against brother, and
bring enmity into houses and kingdoms, that they should fall, break
this peace that they have made, and bring to pass some occasion of
war."

Then straightway Alecto betook herself to the dwelling of King
Latinus. There found she Amata, the queen, in great trouble and wrath,
for she loved not the men of Troy, and would have Turnus for her
son-in-law. And the Fury took a snake from her hair, and thrust it
into the bosom of the queen. About her breast it glided unfelt, and
breathed poisonous breath into her heart. And now it became a collar
of twisted gold about her neck, and now a crown about her head,
binding her hair. At the first indeed, when the poison began to work,
and her whole heart was not as yet filled with the fever, she spake
gently and after the wont of a mother, weeping much the while over her
daughter. "Art thou then ready, my husband, to give thy daughter to
this exile of Troy? Hast thou no pity for thyself, or thy daughter, or
me? Well know I that with the first north wind he will fly and carry
her away over the sea. And what of thy word, and of the faith that
thou hast pledged so many times to Turnus thy kinsman? If thou must
seek a son-in-law from the land of the stranger, I hold that they all
be strangers who obey not thy rule, and that the Gods mean not other
than this. And Turnus, if thou wilt inquire more deeply into his
descent, is of the lineage of Inachus, and cometh in the beginning
from the land of Mycenae."

But when she perceived that her husband heeded not these words, and
when also the poison of the serpent had now altogether prevailed over
her, she ran through the city like to one that is mad. Nay, she
feigned that the frenzy of Bacchus was upon her, and fled into the
woods, taking her daughter with her, to the end that she might hinder
the marriage. Many other women also, when they heard this thing, went
forth, leaving their homes. With bare necks and hair unbound they
went, crying aloud the while; and in their hands they held staves of
pine, and were clad in the skins of wild beasts. And in the midst of
them stood the queen, holding a great pine torch in her hand, and
singing the marriage song of her daughter and Turnus; and her eyes
were red as blood.

Next after this the Fury, deeming that she had overthrown the counsels
of Latinus, sped to the city of Turnus the Rutulian. Now the name of
the city was called Ardea, and Danae builded it in old time; Ardea is
it called to this day, but its glory hath departed. Now Turnus was
asleep in his palace, and Alecto took upon her the shape of an old
woman, even of Chalybe, who was the priestess of Juno; and she spake,
saying, "Turnus, wilt thou suffer all thy toil to be in vain, and thy
kingdom to be given to another? King Latinus taketh from thee thy
betrothed wife, and chooses a stranger that he should inherit his
kingdom. Juno commanded that I should tell thee this in thy sleep.
Rise, therefore, and arm thy people. Consume these strangers and their
ships with fire. And if King Latinus yet will not abide by his
promise, let him know for himself what Turnus can do in the day of
battle."

But Turnus laughed her to scorn. "That the ships of the stranger have
come to the Tiber, I know full well. But tell me not these tales.
Queen Juno forgetteth me not, therefore I am not afraid; but thou,
mother, art old, and wanderest from the truth, and troublest thyself
for nought, and art mocked with idle fear. Thy business it is to tend
the temples of the Gods and their images, but as for war, leave that
to men, seeing that it is their care."

Greatly wroth was Alecto to hear such words. And even while he spake
the young man shuddered and stared with his eyes, for the Fury hissed
before him with a thousand snakes. And when he would have spoken more,
she thrust him back, and caught two snakes from her hair, and lashed
him therewith, and cried aloud, "Old am I! and wander from the truth!
and am mocked with idle fears! Nay, but I come from the dwelling of
the Furies, and war and death are in my hand!"

And she cast a torch at the youth, and fixed it smoking with baleful
light in his heart. Then, in great fear, he woke, and a cold sweat
burst forth upon him, and he cried aloud for his arms, and was
exceedingly mad for battle. Also he bade the youth arm themselves,
saying that he would thrust the men of Troy out of Italy, aye, and
fight, if need were, with the Latins also. And the people hearkened
unto him, so fair was he, and of noble birth, and great renown in war.

Then Alecto hied her to the place where Iulus was hunting the beasts
of the forest. Now there was a stag, very stately, with exceeding
great horns, which Tyrrheus and his children had brought up from a
fawn. And Silvia, a fair virgin who was his daughter, was wont to
adorn it with garlands, and to comb it, and to wash it with water. By
day it would wander in the woods, and at nightfall come back to the
house. This stag, then, the dogs of Iulus having scented pursued, and
indeed Alecto brought it to pass that this mischief shall befall; and
Iulus also, following hard upon his dogs, shot an arrow at it, nor
missed (for the Fury would have it so), but pierced it through. Then
the wounded beast fled back to the house which it knew, being covered
with blood, and filled it with a lamentable voice, as one that crieth
for help. And Silvia heard it, and cried to the country folk for aid,
who came forthwith, Alecto urging them (for the accursed thing lay hid
in the woods). And one had a charred firebrand and another a knotted
stick, each such weapon as came to his hand. And Tyrrheus, who chanced
to be splitting a tall oak with wedges, led the way, having a great
axe in his hand.

Then did Alecto climb upon the roof, and, sounding with hellish voice
through a clarion, sent abroad the shepherds' signal. And all the
forest trembled at the sound, and Trivia's lake and Nar, with his
white sulphurous wave, and the fountains of Velia; and trembling
mothers pressed their children to their breasts.

Then ran together all the country folk, and the youth of Troy hasted
also to the help of Iulus. And now they fought not with clubs and
charred stakes, but with swords and spears in battle array. Then Almo
fell, the eldest of the sons of Tyrrheus, stricken in the throat, with
many others round him, and among them the old man Galaesus, even as he
offered himself to be a mediator between the two. Most righteous of
men was he, and richest likewise, for he had five flocks of sheep and
five herds of cattle, and tilled the earth with a hundred ploughs.

But Alecto, when she had accomplished these things, hasted to Juno,
and spake, saying, "I have done thy bidding; and now, if thou wilt, I
will to the neighbouring cities, spreading among them rumours of
wars." But Juno answered, "It is enough; there hath been the shedding
of blood. It were not well that the Father should see thee wandering
in the upper air, wherefore depart, and if aught remain to be done, I
will see to it."




CHAPTER XVII.

THE GATHERING OF THE CHIEFS.


After this the shepherds hasted back to the city, and bare with them
the dead, even the youth Almo and the old man Galaesus, and cried for
vengeance to the Gods and to the king. And fiercest of all was Turnus,
complaining that men of Troy were called to reign over them, and that
he himself was banished. And all the multitude was urgent with the
king that he should make war against the strangers; neither did any
man regard the commands of the Gods. But the king stood firm, even as
a great rock in the sea is not moved though the waves roar about it
and the seaweed is dashed upon its sides. But when he saw that he
could not prevail against these evil counsels, he called the Gods to
witness, crying, "The storm strikes upon me, and I may not stand
against it. O foolish Latins, ye shall pay for this madness with your
blood, and thou, Turnus, shalt suffer the worst punishment of all; and
when thou shalt turn to the Gods they shall not hear thee. But as for
me, my rest is at hand; I lose but the honours of my funeral."

It was a custom in Latium, which Alba kept in after time, and mighty
Rome yet keepeth to this day, that when she beginneth to make war, be
it on the men of Thrace or the men of the East, Arab, or Indian, or
Parthian, they open the great gates of the temple (double they are,
and made strong with bolts of brass and iron), on the threshold
whereof sitteth Janus, the guardian. For the Consul himself, with robe
and girdle, so soon as the fathers give their sentence for war, throws
them wide, and the people follow the Consul, and the horns blow a
great blast together. Even so they bade King Latinus, after the custom
of his country, declare war against the men of Troy, and open the
gates of slaughter; but he would not, flying and hiding himself in
darkness. Then did great Juno herself come down and burst asunder the
iron-bound gates of war.

  [Illustration: TURNUS OVER THE BODIES OF ALMO AND GALAESUS.]

Then through the land of Italy men prepared themselves for battle,
making bright shield and spear and sharpening the axe upon the
whetstone. And in five cities did they set up anvils to make arms
thereon, head-pieces, and shields of wicker, and breast-plates of
bronze, and greaves of silver. Nor did men regard any more the
reaping-hook nor the plough, making new for battle the swords of their
fathers.

Now the greatest of the chiefs were these:

First, Prince Mezentius, the Tuscan, who regarded not the Gods; and
with him Lausus his son, than whom was none fairer in the host but
Turnus only. A thousand men followed him from Agylla. Worthy was he of
a better father.

Next came, with horses that none might surpass, Aventinus, son of
Hercules; and on his shield was the emblem of his father, the Hydra,
with its hundred snakes. Long swords had his men and Sabine spears;
and he himself had about his head and shoulders a great lion's skin,
with terrible mane and great white teeth.

And from Tibur came two youths of Argos, twin brothers, Catillus and
Coras, swift and strong as two Centaurs from the hills. And Caeculus,
who builded Praeneste, was there, son of Vulcan, and a great company
of country folk with him, whereof many bare not shield nor spear, but
slings with bullets of lead, and javelins in either hand, and helmets
of wolf's skin upon their heads.

After him marched Messapus, tamer of horses, Neptune's son, whom no
man might lay low with fire or sword; and the people followed, singing
a war-song of their king, like to a great flock of swans, which flies
with many cries across the Asian marsh. And next Clausus the Sabine,
from whom is sprung the great Claudian house; and Halesus, companion
of Agamemnon, and enemy of Troy from of old, with many nations behind
him; clubs had they, fastened with thongs of leather, and wicker
shields on their left arms, and their swords were shaped as
reaping-hooks. After these came Oebalus, son of Telon, with the men of
Campania, wearing helmets of cork, and having shields and swords of
bronze; also Ufens, of Nersae, with his robber bands; and Umbro, the
Marsian priest, a mighty wizard and charmer of serpents, who also
could heal their bite; but the wound of the Trojan spears he could not
heal, nor did all his charms and mighty herbs avail him.

With them also came Virbius, son of Hippolytus, from Egeria. For men
say that Hippolytus, when the curse of his father had fallen upon him,
and he had perished by the madness of his horses, was made alive by
the skill of Aesculapius, and that Jupiter, being wroth that a mortal
should return from the dead, slew the healer, the son of Phoebus, with
his thunderbolt; but that Hippolytus Diana hid in the grove of Aricia,
that he might spend the rest of his days obscure and without offence.
And therefore do they yet hinder horses from coming near to the temple
of Diana. Nevertheless the youth Virbius drave horses in his chariot.

But chief among them all was Turnus, who moved in the midst, clad in
armour, and overtopping them all by his head. And he had a helmet with
three crests, and the Chimaera thereon for a sign; and on his shield
was Io, with her horns lifted to heaven, and Argus the herdsman, and
Inachus pouring a river from his urn. A great multitude of footmen
followed him, Rutulians and Sicanians, and they that dwelt about the
Tiber, and about Anxur, and about the green woods of Feronia.

Last of all came Camilla the Volscian, with a great company on
horses, clad in armour of bronze. She loved neither distaff nor the
basket of Minerva, but rather to fight and to outstrip the winds in
running. And a mighty runner was she, for she would run over the
harvest-field nor harm the corn, and when she sped across the waves of
the sea she wetted not her foot therein. All the youth marvelled to
behold her, and the women stood gazing upon her as she went. For a
robe of royal purple was about her shoulders, and a snood of gold
about her hair; and she carried a Syrian quiver and a pike of
myrtle-wood, as the shepherds are wont.




CHAPTER XVIII.

KING EVANDER.


So the chiefs were gathered together, and much people with them,
Mezentius, and Ufens, and Messapus being their leaders. They sent an
embassy likewise to Diomed (for Diomed had built him a city in Italy,
even Arpi), to tell him that Aeneas and the men of Troy were setting up
a kingdom in these parts, and to bid him take counsel for himself.

But Aeneas was much troubled at these things, and cast about in his
mind where he should look for help. And while he meditated thereon he
slept. And lo! in his dreams the god of the river, even Father Tiber,
appeared to him. An old man was he, and clad in a blue linen robe, and
having a crown of reeds upon his head. And he spake, saying, "Thou art
welcome to this land, to which thou hast brought the Gods of Troy. Be
not dismayed at wars and rumours of wars, nor cease from thy
enterprise. And this shall be a sign unto thee. Thou shalt find upon
the shore a white sow with thirty young, white also, about her teats.
And it shall come to pass that after thirty years Iulus shall build
him the White City. And now I will tell thee how thou shalt have
victory in this war. Certain men of Arcadia, following their king,
Evander, have built a city in this land, and called its name
Pallantium. These wage war continually with the Latins. To them
therefore thou must go, making thy way up the stream of the river.
Rise therefore, and offer sacrifice to Juno, appeasing her wrath. And
to me thou shalt perform thy vows when thou shalt have prevailed. For
know that I am Tiber the river, and that of all the rivers on earth
none is dearer to the Gods."

  [Illustration: AENEAS AND TIBER.]

Then Aeneas roused him from sleep, and made his supplications to the
Nymphs and the river god, that they would be favourable to him. And
when he looked, lo! upon the shore a white sow with thirty young,
white also, about her teats. Of these he made a sacrifice to Juno. And
after this he commanded that they should make ready two ships, and
so went on his way. And Tiber stayed his stream so that the men might
not toil in rowing. Quickly they sped, and many trees were above their
heads, and the image thereof in the water beneath. And at noonday they
beheld a city with walls, and a citadel, and a few houses round about.

Now it chanced that Evander and his people were holding a sacrifice
that day to Hercules before the city. But when they saw through the
trees the ships approaching, they were astonished, and rose all from
the feast. But Pallas, who was the son of the king, commanded that
they should not interrupt the sacrifice, and, snatching a spear, he
cried from the mound whereon the altar stood: "Strangers, why come ye?
what seek ye? Do ye bring peace or war?"

Then Aeneas cried from the stern of his ship, holding out the while an
olive branch: "We be men of Troy, enemies of the Latins, and we seek
King Evander. Say, therefore, to him that Aeneas, prince of Troy, is
come, seeking alliance with him."

Much did Pallas marvel to hear this name, and said, "Approach thou,
whoever thou art, and hold converse with my father;" and he caught him
by the hand.

And when Aeneas was set before King Evander he spake, saying, "I come
to thee, O King, not unwilling or fearful, though indeed thou art a
Greek and akin to the sons of Atreus. For between thee and me also
there is kindred. For Dardanus, builder of Troy, was the son of
Electra, who was the daughter of Atlas. And ye come from Mercurius,
who was the son of Cyllene, who was also the daughter of Atlas.
Wherefore, I sent not ambassadors to thee, but came myself, fearing
nothing. Know thou that the Daunian race, which warreth against thee,
pursueth us also; against whom if they prevail, without doubt they
shall rule over Italy, from the one sea even to the other. I would,
therefore, that we make alliance together."

And as he spake, Evander ceased not to regard him, and, when he had
ended, spake, saying, "Welcome, great son of Troy. Gladly do I
recognise the voice and face of Anchises. For I remember how Priam
came of old time to the kingdom of his sister Hesione, who was the
wife of Telamon; and many princes were with him, but the mightiest of
them was Anchises. Much did I love the man, and took him with me to
Pheneus. And he gave me when he departed a quiver and arrows of Lycia,
and a cloak with threads of gold, and two bridles of gold, which my
son Pallas hath to this day. The alliance that thou seekest I grant.
To-morrow shalt thou depart with such help as I can give. But now,
since ye be come at such good time, join us in our sacrifice and
feast."

So they feasted together on the flesh of oxen, and drank wine, and
were merry. And when they had made an end of eating and drinking, King
Evander spake, saying, "This great feast, my friend, we hold not
without good reason, which thou shalt now hear from me. Seest thou
this great ruin of rocks? Here in old time was a cave, running very
deep into the cliff, wherein Cacus dwelt, a monster but half man,
whose father was Vulcan. The ground thereof reeked with blood, and at
the mouth were fixed the heads of dead men. Very great of stature was
he, and breathed out fire from his mouth. To this land came Hercules,
driving before him the oxen of Geryon, whom he had slain. And when he
had left these to feed in the valley by the river, Cacus, that he
might fill up the measure of his wickedness, stole four bulls and four
heifers, the very chiefest of the herd. And that he might conceal the
thing, he dragged them by the tails backwards, so that the tracks led
not to the cave. But it chanced that the herd made a great bellowing
when Hercules would have driven them away in the morning. And one of
the heifers which Cacus had hidden in the cave bellowed also, making
answer. Then was Hercules very wroth, and caught up in his hand his
great knotted club, and climbed to the top of the hill. Then was Cacus
sore afraid, and fled to his cave swift as the wind, fear giving wings
to his feet. And when he was come thither, he shut himself therein,
letting fall a great stone which he had caused to hang over the mouth
thereof by cunning devices that he had learned from his father. And
when Hercules was come he sought to find entrance and could not; but
at the last he saw one of the rocks that it was very high and leaned
to the river. This he pushed from the other side, so that it fell
with a great crash into the water. Then did the whole cave of Cacus
lie open to view, horrible to behold, as though the earth were to open
her mouth and show the regions of the dead. And first Hercules shot at
the monster with arrows, and cast boughs and great stones at him; and
Cacus vomited forth from his mouth fire and smoke, filling the whole
cave. And Hercules endured not to be so baffled, but plunged into the
cave, even where the smoke was thickest, and caught him, twining his
arms and legs about him, and strangled him that he died. Of which
deed, O my friends, we keep the remembrance year by year. Do ye,
therefore, join in our feast, putting first wreaths of poplar about
your heads, for the poplar is the tree of Hercules."

  [Illustration: HERCULES AND CACUS.]

So they feasted; and the priests, even the Salii, being in two
companies, young and old, sang the great deeds of Hercules: how, being
yet an infant, he strangled the snakes that Juno sent to slay him, and
overthrew mighty cities, and endured many grievous labours, slaying
the Centaurs and the lion of Nemea; and how he went down to hell, and
dragged the dog Cerberus therefrom, and many other things likewise.

And at even they went back to the city, and as they went Evander told
Aeneas many things concerning the country: how of old a savage race
dwelt therein, living even as the beasts, whom Saturn, flying from his
son Jupiter, first taught, giving them customs and laws; and how other
kings also had borne rule over them, and how he himself had come to
the land at the bidding of Apollo. Also he showed him the city which
he had founded, and the places thereof: very famous were they in
after-time, when mighty Rome was builded, even on the selfsame ground.
And when they came to his palace he said, "Hercules entered this
dwelling, though indeed it be small and lowly. Think not, then,
overmuch of riches, and so make thyself worthy to ascend to heaven, as
he also ascended."

Then he led him within the palace, and bade him rest on a couch,
whereon was spread the skin of an African bear.




CHAPTER XIX.

THE ARMS OF AENEAS.


Very early the next morning the old man Evander rose up from his bed,
and donned his tunic, and bound his Tuscan sandals on his feet, and
girt his Tegean sword to his side, flinging a panther's hide over his
left shoulder. Pallas, his son, also went with him. And two hounds,
which lay by his chamber, followed him. For he would fain have speech
with Aeneas, whom, indeed, he found astir, and Achates with him. Then
spake Evander: "Great chief of Troy, good will have we, but scanty
means; for our folk are few and our bounds narrow. But I will tell
thee of a great people and a wealthy, with whom thou mayest make
alliance. Nigh to this place is the famous city Agylla, which the men
of Lydia, settling in this land of Etruria, builded aforetime. Now of
this Agylla Mezentius was king, who surpassed all men in wickedness.
For he would join a living man to a dead corpse, and so leave him to
perish miserably. But after awhile the citizens rebelled, saying that
he should not reign over them, and slew his guards and burnt his
palace. But on him they laid not hands, for he fled to Prince Turnus.
Therefore there is war between Turnus and Agylla. Now in this war thou
shalt be leader; for as yet, when they would have gone forth to
battle, the soothsayers have hindered them, saying, 'Though your wrath
against Mezentius be just, yet must no man of Italy lead this people;
but look you for a stranger.' And they would fain have had me for
their leader, but I am old and feeble. And my son Pallas also is akin
to them, seeing that he was born of a Sabine mother. But thou art in
thy prime, and altogether a stranger in race. Wherefore take this
office upon thyself. Pallas also shall go with thee, and learn from
thee to bear himself as a warrior. Also I will send with thee two
hundred chosen horsemen, and Pallas will give thee as many."

And even before he had made an end of speaking, Venus gave them a
sign, even thunder in a clear sky; and there was heard a voice as of
a Tuscan trumpet, and when they looked to the heavens, lo! there was a
flashing of arms.

And Aeneas knew the sign and the intepretation thereof, even that he
should prosper in that to which he set his hand. Therefore he bade
Evander be of good cheer. Then again they did sacrifice, and
afterwards Aeneas returned to his companions, of whom he chose some,
and them the bravest, who should go with him to Agylla, and the rest
he bade return to Iulus, to the camp.

But when he was now ready to depart, Evander took him by the hand,
saying, "O that Jupiter would give me back the years that are gone,
when I slew, under Praeneste, King Erulus, to whom at his birth his
mother, Feronia, gave three lives. Thrice must he needs be slain, and
thrice I slew him. Then had I not been parted from thee, my son, nor
had the wicked Mezentius slain so many of my people. And now, may the
Gods hear my prayer: If it be their pleasure that Pallas should come
back, may I live to see it; but if not, may I die even now while I
hold thee in my arms, my son, my one and only joy."

And his spirit left the old man, and they carried him into the palace.
Then the horsemen rode out from the gates, with Pallas in the midst,
adorned with mantle and blazoned arms, fair as the Morning Star, which
Venus loves beyond all others in the sky. The women stood watching
them from the walls, while they shouted aloud and galloped across the
plain. And after a while they came to a grove, near to which the
Etruscans and Tarchon, their leader, had pitched their camp.

Now in the mean time Venus had bestirred herself for her son, for
while he slept in the palace of Evander she spake to her husband, even
Vulcan, saying, "While the Greeks were fighting against Troy, I sought
not thy help, for I would not that thou shouldst labour in vain; but
now that Aeneas is come to Italy by the command of the Gods, I ask thee
that thou shouldst make arms and armour for my son. This Aurora asked
for Memnon; this Thetis for Achilles, and thou grantedst it to them.
And now thou seest how the nations join themselves to destroy him.
Wherefore I pray thee to help me." And he hearkened to her voice.
Therefore when the morning was come, very early, even as a woman who
maketh her living by the distaff riseth and kindleth her fire, and
giveth tasks to her maidens, that she may provide for her husband and
her children, even so Vulcan rose betimes to his work. Now there is an
island, Lipare, nigh unto the shore of Sicily, and there the god had
set up his furnace and anvil, and the Cyclopes were at work, forging
thunderbolts for Jupiter, whereof one remained half wrought. Three
parts of hail had they used, and three of rain-cloud, and three of red
fire and the south wind; and now they were adding to it lightning, and
noise, and fear, and wrath, with avenging flames. And elsewhere they
wrought a chariot for Mars, and a shirt of mail for Minerva, even the
Aegis, with golden scales as of a serpent, and in the midst the
Gorgon's head, lopped at the nape, with rolling eyes. But the god
cried, "Cease ye your toils. Ye must make arms for a hero." Then they
all bent them to their toil. Then bronze, and gold, and iron flowed in
streams; and some plied the bellows, and others dipped the hissing
mass in water, and a third turned the ore in griping pincers.

  [Illustration: VULCAN AND THE CYCLOPES.]

A helmet they made with nodding crest, that blazed like fire, and a
sword, and a cuirass of ruddy bronze, and greaves of gold molten many
times, and a spear, and a shield whereon was wrought a marvellous
story of things to come. For the god had set forth all the story of
Rome. There lay the she-wolf in the cave of Mars, suckling the twin
babes that feared her not--and she, bending back her neck, licked them
with her tongue; and there the men of Rome carried off the Sabine
virgins to be their wives; and hard by the battle raged, and there
again the kings made peace together, with offerings and sacrifice.
Also there were wrought the chariots that tore asunder Mettus of Alba
for his treachery, and Porsenna bidding the Romans take back their
king, besieging the city, but the men of Rome stood in arms against
him. Angry and threatening stood the king to see how Cocles broke down
the bridge, and Cloelia burst her bonds to swim across the river.
There Manlius stood to guard the Capitol, and a goose of silver
flapped his wings in arcades of gold, and showed the Gauls at hand.
And they, under cover of the darkness, were climbing through the
thickets even to the ridge of the hill. Their hair was wrought in
gold, in gold their raiment; and their cloaks were of divers colours
crossed; milk-white their necks and clasped with gold; two spears had
each and an oblong shield. Likewise he wrought the dwellings of the
dead, of the just and of the unjust. Here Catiline hung from the rock
while the Furies pursued him; there Cato gave the people laws. And all
about was the sea wrought in gold; but the waves were blue, and white
the foam, and therein sported dolphins of silver. But in the midst was
wrought a great battle of ships at the cape of Actium. On the one side
Augustus led the men of Italy to battle, standing very high on the
stern of the ship. From either temple of his head blazed forth a fire.
And Agrippa also led on his array with a naval crown about his head.
And on the other side stood Antony, having with him barbarous soldiers
arrayed in divers fashions, and leading to battle Egypt and Persia and
the armies of the East; and lo! behind him--a shameful sight--his
Egyptian wife. But in another part the battle raged, and all the sea
was in a foam with oars and triple beaks. It seemed as though islands
were torn from their places, or mountain clashed against mountain, so
great was the shock of the ships. And all about flew javelins with
burning tow, and the sea was red with blood. In the midst stood Queen
Cleopatra, with a timbrel in her hand, and called her armies to the
battle: behind her you might see the snakes by whose bite she should
die. And on one side the dog Anubis, with other monstrous shapes of
gods, and over against them Neptune, and Venus, and Minerva. And in
the midst Mars was seen to rage, embossed in steel; and the Furies
hovered above, and Discord stalked with garment rent, while high above
Apollo stretched his bow, and Egyptian and Indian and Arab fled before
him. And in a third place great Caesar rode through Rome in triumph,
and the city was full of joy, and the matrons were gathered in the
temples; and through the street there passed a long array of nations
that he had conquered, from the east, and from the west, and from the
north, and from the south. Such was the shield which Vulcan wrought.

And Venus, when she saw her son that none was with him,--for he had
wandered apart from his companions,--brought the arms and laid them
down before him, saying, "See the arms that I promised I would give
thee. These my husband, the Fire-god, hath wrought for thee. With
these thou needst shun no enemy; no, not Turnus himself." Right glad
was he to see them, and fitted them upon him, and swung the shield
upon his shoulder, nor knew what mighty fates of his children he bare
thereon.




CHAPTER XX.

NISUS AND EURYALUS.


But Juno, ever seeking occasion against the men of Troy, sent Iris,
the messenger of the Gods, to Turnus, as he sat in the grove of
Pilumnus his father. Iris said, "That which none of the Gods had dared
to promise thee, lo! time itself hath brought. Aeneas hath left his
companions and his ship, seeking the city of Evander, yea, and the
Tuscans also. Do thou, therefore, take the occasion and surprise the
camp while he is yet absent."

And she spread her wings and mounted to heaven by the arch of the
rainbow, and Turnus cried, "I know thee, goddess, and follow thy
sign." And having first washed his hands, he prayed and vowed his vows
to the Gods.

  [Illustration: IRIS APPEARING TO TURNUS.]

So the army went forth to the battle. Messapus led the first line, and
the sons of Tyrrheus the rear; and in the midst was Turnus. And the
men of Troy saw a great cloud of dust upon the plain, and Caicus
cried from the walls, "What meaneth this cloud that I see? To arms, my
friends. Climb the walls. The enemy is at hand." Then did the men of
Troy shut the gates and man the walls. For so had Aeneas commanded
them, saying, "Fight not, whatever befall, in battle, nor trust
yourselves to the plain, but defend your walls." Therefore they shut
their gates, and waited till the enemy should come near. And Turnus,
on a horse of Thrace, rode first, and twenty youths with him; and he
cried, "Is there a man who will first venture the attack?" and he
threw his javelin, making a beginning of battle, and his companions
shouted aloud. Much they marvelled that the men of Troy kept them
within the walls and came not forth to the battle. And Turnus ever
regarded the walls, how he might enter therein. Even as a wolf
prowleth round the fold at midnight, while the lambs within bleat,
being safe by their mothers, but he rageth without to hear them, being
mad with wrath and hunger, and his tongue is athirst for blood, even
so did Turnus rage round the camp, and cast about how he might draw
forth the men of Troy into the plain. And at the last he bethought him
of the ships, which lay at the camp's side, and called for torches of
pine, and the people followed him with a shout, and the smoke rose up
to the heavens.

Then did a marvellous thing befall. Now in the days when Aeneas was
building his ships upon Mount Ida, Cybele, mother of the Gods, spake
to Jupiter, saying "Grant, my son, that these ships, which Aeneas
buildeth of my pine-trees,--for these have I given to him freely,--may
be safe from winds and waves." But Jupiter answered, "What is this
that thou askest, my mother? Wouldst thou have immortality for mortal
ships? Not so. But this I grant: that whichsoever of these shall come
safe to the land of Italy shall become Nymphs of the sea." And now the
day was come. Wherefore there was heard an awful voice, saying, "Fear
not, men of Troy; nor care to defend your ships;" and to the ships,
"Go! henceforth ye are Nymphs of the sea." And lo! straightway the
cables brake, and where the ships had been were the shapes of women,
for each ship a woman.

Much did the Latins wonder to behold the thing, and Tiber stayed his
stream to see it. But Turnus trembled not, crying, "This marvel
meaneth evil for the men of Troy. Their ships abide not our attack.
Nor have they any longer that wherewith they may flee from us. And as
for fate, I heed it not. It was the fate of the men of Troy that they
should touch the land of Italy. It is my fate that I should destroy
the accursed race. They rob me of my wife. That wrong toucheth others
besides Menelaus. Surely, it had been enough to perish once. But why,
then, will they sin again? It had been well had they loathed
thereafter all womankind. Or do they think that this rampart shall
protect them? Did they not see the walls which Neptune builded settle
down in the fire? And now, who cometh with me to storm their camp? I
need not arms from Vulcan's forge, or a thousand ships. Deeds of
darkness and of stealth they need not fear. We will not hide us in a
Horse of wood. In daylight will we burn their walls. For surely the
youth of Italy is not as the youth of Greece, whom Hector kept at bay
for ten years." Then he commanded that they should lay siege to the
camp; and Messapus he set to watch the gate, and fourteen Rutulian
chiefs, with each a hundred youths, kept guard on the walls. So all
the night they watched, and feasted, and drank, and made merry.

But the men of Troy laboured meanwhile, making strong the gates and
the towers of the walls. And Mnestheus and Sergestus were instant with
command and exhortation, for Aeneas had appointed them to this thing
should any need arise, he being absent.

Now the keeper of the gate was Nisus, a valiant man of war, and with
him Euryalus, the goodliest youth among the men of Troy; and great
love was between them. And as they watched, Nisus said, "Whether it be
a bidding of the Gods, or prompting of my own heart, I know not, but I
have a great desire to do somewhat this night. Seest thou how the
enemy lie asleep and drunken? Can I not win some honour hence, and
carry the tidings of these things to Aeneas? For yonder by the hill
lieth the way to the city of Evander."

Then Euryalus made answer: "Nay, but thou goest not alone, Nisus, nor
leavest me. My father Opheltes trained me not to such baseness, nor
have I so borne myself in thy company. And truly I should count life
well lost for such honour."

Then said Nisus: "I thought not so ill of thee. So may Jupiter bring
me back in safety and honour. Yet should some mischance befall I would
that thou yet shouldst live, to buy my body back, or, if that may not
be, to pay due honour to my spirit. Think, too, of thy mother, who,
alone of all the mothers of Troy, hath, for love of thee, come to this
land of Italy."

But Euryalus said: "Thou makest idle excuses, for I am steadfastly
purposed to go. Let us hasten, therefore." So they woke those who
should take their places at the gate, and sought speech of the chiefs.
These indeed were holding counsel, and stood leaning on their spears
in the midst of the camp. And Nisus said that he had somewhat to say,
and that the matter pressed. Then Iulus bade him speak; and he made
answer: "The enemy lie sleeping and drunken about the walls, and the
fires are extinguished. If fortune favour us we will win a way to
Aeneas, to the city of Evander, and slay many, and take much spoil
likewise. The way indeed we know, having learnt it while we hunted in
these parts." Then the old man Aletes said: "Surely, Troy hath not
altogether perished, having yet such hearts as yours." And he threw
his arms about them, weeping. And Iulus said, "Bring back my father,
and all shall be well. And I will give you two cups of silver embossed
with figures of men, which my father took from the city of Arisba. And
if we subdue this land of Italy, thou, Nisus, shalt have the horses
and the arms of Turnus, and twelve women-captives likewise, and twelve
men with their arms, and the domain of King Latinus. And thou,
Euryalus, who art nearer of age to me, shalt be next to myself in all
things."

Then Euryalus made answer: "One thing I ask thee more. I have a
mother, of the lineage of Priam. To her I say not farewell, not being
able to endure her tears. Do thou care for her, if she be bereaved of
me." And Iulus said: "She shall be as my mother to me."

Then he gave him his own sword, with its scabbard of ivory, and
Mnestheus gave to Nisus a lion's skin, and Aletes a helmet. And all
went with them to the gates, with many prayers and vows; also Iulus,
being wise beyond his years, sent many messages to his father.

Then they crossed the moat, and came upon the enemy as they slept,
Nisus being before, and Euryalus keeping watch lest any should assail
them from behind. And first Nisus slew Rhamnes as he slept: an augur
he was, whom Turnus most trusted, yet he knew not his own doom. Next
he slew the three servants and the armour-bearer and the charioteer of
Remus, and, after, Remus himself, cutting off his head. Others also he
slew, and among them Serranus, a fair youth, who had been foremost in
his sport that night. It had been well for him had he prolonged it
even unto dawn. Many also did Euryalus slay, all of them in their
sleep, save Rhoetus only, who, being awake, would fain have hidden
himself behind a great jar, but could not. But when he would have
assailed Messapus and his comrades, Nisus, seeing that he was mastered
by the love of slaughter, cried aloud, "Cease: the day approacheth.
It is enough that we have made us a way through the enemy." Much spoil
did they leave behind them; but Euryalus took a sword-belt with knobs
of gold from Rhamnes--Caedicus gave it to Remulus of Tibur, and he to
his grandson, from whom Rhamnes had won it in war--and put on his head
the helmet of Messapus. So they departed from the camp.

But it so chanced that three hundred horsemen, with Volscens their
leader, were riding to the camp from the city. And as they came nigh,
one of them espied, in the light of the moon, the helmet which
Euryalus, being but a youth and unwary, had put on him. And Volscens
cried, "Who are ye? Whither do ye go?"

  [Illustration: NISUS AND EURYALUS.]

But they answered nothing, making haste to fly. Then Volscens
commanded that they should keep the wood on every side. Very thick it
was with dark ilex-trees and brambles. And Euryalus, indeed, being
laden with his spoil and fearful, wandered from the way, but Nisus got
himself clear. But when he came to the stalls where they kept the
cattle of King Latinus, he knew himself to be alone, and looked
round for his companion, but saw him not. Then returning he searched
through the wood till he heard the sound of horsemen approaching; and
lo! Euryalus was in the midst, seeking to get free, but could not.
Forthwith, having first prayed to Diana that she would help him, if
perchance he might scatter this company, he cast his spear. It pierced
the back of Sulmo, and passed even through his heart. And while they
all looked, lo! another spear, and it pierced the head of Tagus from
temple to temple. Very wroth was Volscens to see such slaughter, and
know not how it befell; and he cried, "Thou at least shalt suffer for
these deeds," and flew upon Euryalus. This could not Nisus endure to
see, but rushed from his hiding-place, and cried, "Lo! I am the man
who wrought this slaughter. Turn your swords against me. He did not,
nay, he could not do such deeds. He did but follow his friend." But
not the less did the sword of Volscens pierce the side of Euryalus;
and the blood gushed out over his fair body, and his head drooped,
even as a flower, which the ploughshare cuts in the field, or a poppy
whose stalk is broken. Then rushed Nisus into the midst, thinking only
how he might slay Volscens; nor could the enemy stay him, but that he
thrust his sword into his mouth and slew him. And afterwards, being
pierced with many wounds, he fell dead upon the body of his friend.

But when the horsemen were come to the camp, they found the slaughter
that had been done. And when the day dawned they set the battle in
array against the men of Troy, and the heads of Nisus and Euryalus
they fixed upon poles, and showed them.

But when the report of these things came to the ears of the mother of
Euryalus, she threw down her distaff, and hasted through the camp; and
coming to the wall, she cried, "Is it thus I see thee, my son? Why was
it not granted to me to bid thee farewell? And now I may not close
thine eyes or wrap thee in the garments which I have made, solacing my
cares with the labours of the loom. Slay me with your spears, ye
Latins; or thou, great Jupiter, smite me with thy thunder, since I may
not rid me otherwise of this hateful life."

  [Illustration: THE MOTHER OF EURYALUS RECEIVING THE NEWS OF
    HIS DEATH.]

But when with her wailing she touched the hearts of the men so that
they forgat their valour, Ilioneus and Iulus commanded Idaeus and Actor
that they should lay hands upon her and carry her to her dwelling.




CHAPTER XXI.

THE BATTLE AT THE CAMP.


And now the trumpet gave the signal for battle. First the Volscians
drew near to the wall. These held their shields over their heads,
joining them in close array so that they were like unto the shell of a
tortoise, and they that bare them filled the moat and pulled down the
wall. And some would have mounted the walls on ladders; while the men
of Troy cast spears at them and thrust at them with poles, being
indeed well used to the manner of such a fight from walls. But on the
covering of shields they threw down a huge block, breaking it through
and scattering the men, who would not indeed fight any more in such
fashion, but cast all manner of javelins and the like against the men
of Troy. And Mezentius the Tuscan came on, shaking a lighted torch of
pine in his hand, and Messapus tore down the rampart and called for a
scaling-ladder, that he might mount up into the breach.

Now there was a tower upon the wall, which the Italians sought to
take, and the men of Troy to defend it cast stones and darts through
the loopholes thereof. On to this Turnus cast a torch, setting fire to
the wall, and the flame, the wind fanning it, climbed from story to
story. And when they that were therein fled to the part that was yet
unconsumed, lo! the whole tower fell forward, and all perished, two
only escaping, Helenor and Lycus. And Helenor was the elder, and when
he saw that the enemy was about him on every side, then, even as a
beast which the hunters compass about with a great ring waxeth
desperate and flingeth himself over the nets upon their spears, so he
threw himself on the ranks of the Latins where the spears were
thickest, and so died. But Lycus was very swift of foot, and won even
as far as the wall, and would fain have climbed thereon. But Turnus
caught him, crying, "Thinkest thou to escape me?" and he laid hands
upon him as he hung from the wall, dragging down much wall likewise:
even as an eagle seizes a swan or a wolf a lamb, so he seized him.
Then did the battle wax fiercer and fiercer, and many fell on this
side and on that. For Ilioneus smote Lucetius when he would have set
fire to the gates, and Capys slew Privernus, and Mezentius, having
cast away his spear, smote the son of Arcens with a bullet of lead
from his sling.

And now Iulus, having used his bow aforetime on beasts of the field
only, now first drew it against a man, even against Numanus, who had
to wife the sister of Turnus. For this Numanus, thinking himself to be
some great one, stood in the front rank, and defied the men of Troy,
saying, "Are ye not ashamed, ye that have already been twice
conquered, now to be besieged again? What madness brought you to
Italy? We are a hardy race, for our new-born babes are dipped in the
stream, and our boys are hunters in the woods; and when we be men our
hands are ever on the ploughshare or the sword, yea, and old age
subdues us not, for when our hair is white yet do we cover it with the
helmet. But ye with your mantles of purple and saffron, and sleeved
tunics, and ribboned mitres, lovers of sleep and of the dance, ye
men, nay rather ye women, of Phrygia, what do ye here?"

But the young Iulus endured not to hear such boasting. He fixed an
arrow in his bow and drew the string, which was of horsehair, and ere
he let fly, he cried to Jupiter, "Help me now, great Father, so will I
bring, year by year, to thy temple a steer with gilded horns." And
Jupiter heard, and thundered on the left hand. And now, together with
the thunder, clanged the bow-string, sending death, and the arrow
hissed in the air and smote Numanus through the head, even from temple
to temple. "This is the answer that the twice-conquered men of Troy
send thee." So cried the young Iulus, and all the people shouted for
joy. And Apollo, where he sat in heaven and regarded the battle,
spake, "Go thou on as thou beginnest, child and father of gods: 'tis
thus that the race of Troy shall hereafter bring all wars to an end."
Then he came down from heaven into the camp of Troy, and took upon
himself the shape of the old man Butes: he had been aforetime the
armour-bearer of Anchises, and now followed Iulus. And the god spake,
saying, "It is enough that thou hast slain the boaster Numanus. The
archer Apollo envieth thee not this glory. But tempt the battle no
more." So saying he vanished out of their sight. But the chiefs knew
him who he was, yea, and heard the rattle of his quiver as he
departed. And they suffered not Iulus to draw his bow again. But all
the more the battle raged along the walls.

Now there were two youths, sons of Alcanor of Mount Ida, tall as
pine-trees; and their names were Pandarus and Bitias. These having
charge of the gate opened it, and standing on the right hand and on
the left, even as towers, bade the enemy enter. And many of these,
seeing the open gate, rushed forward, but fell slain upon the
threshold. And now the men of Troy took heart, and pressed on beyond
the walls.

But when Turnus heard tidings of these things he made haste to the
gate. And first he slew Antiphates, who was a son of Sarpedon, and
others also, and Bitias himself with them. Not with a javelin did he
slay him (no javelin had done such deed), but with a great spear of
Saguntum, having a point of a cubit's length. Through two bulls' hides
it passed and two folds of his coat of mail. With a great crash he
fell, and his shield upon him, even as falls a great pile which men
set up in the bay of Baiae. So Bitias fell; and Pandarus, his brother,
seeing that things fared ill with the men of Troy, shut-to the gate,
thrusting it into its place with his broad shoulders. Many of his
companions he left without among their enemies, and many he shut in.
But being blind with haste and fear, he saw not that he shut in among
them Prince Turnus himself. But Turnus raged for blood, as a tiger
rageth among herds of cattle, and the men of Troy fled before him. But
Pandarus feared not to meet him, hoping also that he should have
vengeance for his brother. And he cried, "This is not thy city of
Ardea, but the camp of thy enemies. Hence thou goest not forth." But
Turnus made answer, "Begin, if thou hast any valour in thy heart. Thou
shalt find another Achilles here." Then Pandarus cast a great spear
with a knotted staff, whereon the bark was left; but Juno turned it
aside, so that it fixed itself in the gate. And Turnus said, "My
weapon thou escapest not thus, nor maketh my hand such error." And he
lifted his sword, rising to the blow, and cleft the man's head, so
that it fell divided upon his shoulders. Then, indeed, if only Turnus
had bethought him to open the gate that the Latins should come in,
there had come an end that day to the war and to the whole nation of
Troy. But he thought not of it, caring only to slay the enemy. Many
did he smite, some on the back as they fled, and some in front; among
them Amycus the hunter, and Clytius the singer, whom the Muses loved.

But now the chiefs of Troy, Mnestheus and Sergestus, began to gather
the people together, and to make head against Turnus. And Mnestheus
cried, "Whither will ye flee? Have ye any walls beside? Shall one man
work such slaughter in the city? Have you no thought, ye cowards, for
your king?" Then the men of Troy took heart again, and joined
themselves in close array, so that Turnus could not but give way
before them. Just so a lion is driven back by a crowd of men.
Frightened is he, yet fierce withal, and his courage suffereth him
not to flee, yet, so many are against him, he dareth not to stand.
Even thus did Turnus give way. Twice he turned and put the men of Troy
to flight, and twice they mastered him. For the helmet on his head
rang with the javelins, and was broken with stones; and the crest was
stricken off, and the shield was shattered with blows; and the sweat
poured off from him, and scarce could he breathe, till at the last,
having now come to the river, he plunged therein, and so returned to
his companions.

And still the battle grew fiercer and fiercer about the walls, and the
ring of them that defended the camp grew thinner and thinner. There
stood Asius, the son of Imbrasus, and Clarus and Themon, brothers of
Sarpedon the Lycian, and Acmon, the brother of Mnestheus, and others
with them. And in the midst stood the young Iulus, with his comely
head uncovered, like to a jewel that is set in gold or ivory, or that
is compassed about with boxwood or terebinth.




CHAPTER XXII.

THE BATTLE ON THE SHORE.


In the meanwhile Aeneas had made alliance with Tarchon and the Tuscans.
For when he had expounded all things to Tarchon their chief, telling
him withal whence he had come, the people, believing that all things
were now fulfilled as the Gods would have them, followed him
willingly. Now, therefore, he was returning to the camp, leading the
way in his ship, on the prow whereof were two lions, and above them
the image of the goddess Ida. Pallas also sat beside him, and asked
him, now concerning the stars by which men guide their ways at night,
and now concerning the things which he had himself endured by land and
sea.

After him came Massicus, in the Tiger, with whom were a thousand men
from Clusium and Cosae; and Abas, with six hundred from Populonia; and
from Ilva, rich in mines, three hundred more. Asilas also, the
soothsayer, came leading a thousand men from Pisa; and Astyr, the
fairest of men, with three hundred from Caere and from the corn-fields
of Minio and from Pyrgi.

Also the Ligurians came, with Cinyras, son of Cycnus, who had for his
crest swan feathers; and his ship was called the Centaur. And Ocnus
came from Mantua in the Mincius, and five hundred with him; and
Aulestes in the Triton; and the number of the ships was thirty in all.

And now the night had fallen, and as Aeneas sat at the helm, for care
suffered him not to sleep, lo! there appeared to him a troop of
Nymphs, which once had been his ships. And one of these, by name
Cymodocea, came behind and caught the stern of the ship with her right
hand, swimming meanwhile with the left. Then she spake, saying,
"Wakest thou, son of the goddess? We are pines of Mount Ida, once thy
ships, but now changed to Nymphs when Turnus would have burned us with
fire. Know that thy son is besieged in the camp. Arm thyself therefore
with the arms which Vulcan hath wrought for thee. To-morrow thou
shalt lay many Latins low in death." And as she spake she pushed the
ship with her hand, and it sped along through the waters and the rest
also with it.

And when the day was come, Aeneas commanded that all should make them
ready for battle. And now the camp was in his sight, as he stood on
the stern and lifted in his left hand a flashing shield. Much did the
men of Troy rejoice to see that sight, and shouted amain. And Turnus
and his companions marvelled, till they looked behind them, and lo!
the sea was covered with ships, and in the midst was Aeneas. And it was
as if a flame poured forth, from his helmet and his shield, bright as
is a comet when it shines in the night-time red as blood, or as the
Dog Star in the hot summer-tide with baleful light bringing fevers to
the race of men.

Yet did not Turnus lose heart, but would occupy the shore, and hinder
from landing those that came. Wherefore he cried, "Now have ye that
which ye wished for. Lo! the enemy hides not himself behind a wall,
but meets us face to face. Remember wife and child and home and the
great deeds of your fathers. Let us meet them on the shore ere yet
their footing is firm." And he thought within himself who should watch
the walls, and who should meet the enemy when he would gain the shore.

But in the meanwhile Aeneas landed his men on gangways from the ships.
And some leapt on shore, having watched for the ebb of the waves, and
some ran along the oars. Tarchon also, the Etrurian, having spied a
place where the sea broke not in waves, commanded his men that they
should beach the ships. Which indeed they did without harm. Only the
ship of Tarchon himself was caught upon a ridge and the men thrown
therefrom. Yet these also, after a while, got safe to the shore.

Then did Aeneas do great deeds against the enemy. For first he slew
Theron, who surpassed all men in stature, smiting through his coat of
mail; and Cisseus and Gyas, who wielded clubs after the manner of
Hercules. Sons were they of Melampus, who had borne Hercules company
in all his labours. Then the sons of Phorcus came against him, seven
in number; and they cast at him seven spears, whereof some rebounded
from his shield and some grazed his body, but harmed him not. Then
cried Aeneas to Achates, "Give me spears enough. Spears which have
slain the Greeks on the fields of Troy shall not be cast in vain
against these Latins." Then of the seven he slew Maeon and Alcanor, for
the spear pierced the breast-plate and heart of Maeon, and when Alcanor
would have held him up, passed through his arm and yet kept on its
way. And many others fell on this side and on that, for they fought
with equal fortune. On the very threshold of Italy they fought, and
neither would the Italians give place nor yet the men of Troy, for
foot was planted close to foot, and man stood fast by man.

In another part of the battle Pallas fought with his Arcadians. And
when he saw that they fled, not being wont to fight on foot (for by
reason of the ground they had sent away their horses), he cried, "Now,
by the name of your King Evander, and by my hope that I may win praise
like unto his, I beseech you that ye trust not to your feet. Ye must
make your way through the enemy with your swords. Where the crowd is
the thickest follow me. Nor have ye now gods against you. These are
but mortal men that ye see." And he rushed into the midst of the
enemy. First he smote Lagus with his spear, even as he was lifting a
great stone from the earth. In the back he smote him, and, having
smitten him, strove to draw forth the spear, and while he strove,
Hisbo would have slain him; but Pallas was aware of his coming, and
pierced him in the breast with his sword. Next he slew the twin
brothers, Larides and Thymber. Very like they were, and it pleased
father and mother that they knew not the one from the other; but
Pallas made a cruel difference between them, for from Thymber he
struck off the head, and from Larides the right hand. And after these
he slew Rhoetus, as he fled past him in his chariot. And now, even as
a shepherd sets fire to a wood, and the flames are borne along by the
wind, so Pallas, and his Arcadians following, raged through the
battle. And when Halaesus, the companion of Agamemnon, would have
stayed them, Pallas, first praying to Father Tiber, smote him through
the breast with a spear, that he died. Then came to the help of the
Latins Lausus, the son of King Mezentius, and slew Abas of Populonia,
and others also. Then the battle was equal for a space, for Pallas
supported it on the one side and Lausus on the other. Fair were they
both to behold and of equal age, and for both it was ordained that
they should not return to their native country. Yet they met not in
battle, seeing that the doom of each was that he should fall by a
greater hand.

And now the nymph Juturna, who was sister to Turnus, bade her brother
haste to the help of Lausus. And when he was come, he cried to the
Latins, "Give place: I only will deal with Pallas. I only would that
his father were here to see." Much did Pallas marvel to behold him and
to see the men give place. But, being no whit afraid, he went forth
into the space between the hosts, and the blood of the Arcadians ran
cold when they saw him go. Then Turnus leapt from his chariot, for he
would meet him on foot. And first Pallas prayed, saying, "O Hercules!
if thou wast indeed my father's guest, help me to-day!" And Hercules
heard him where he sat in heaven, and wept because he could avail
nothing. Then said Father Jupiter, "My son, the days of men are
numbered; yet may they live for ever by noble deeds. This at least can
valour do. Did not many sons of the gods fall at Troy? yea, and my own
Sarpedon. And for Turnus, too, the day of doom is at hand." And he
turned his eyes from the battle. Then Pallas cast his spear with all
his might. Through the shield of Turnus it passed, and through the
corslet, yea, and grazed the top of his shoulder. Then Turnus balanced
his spear awhile, and said, "This, methinks, shall better make its
way," and he cast it. Through the shield, through the stout bull's
hide, and through the folds of bronze it passed, and through the
corslet, and pierced the breast of Pallas from front to back. And
Pallas tore from the wound the reeking steel, and the blood gushed
out, and the life therewith. Then Turnus stood above the corpse, and
said, "Men of Arcadia, tell these my words to Evander: 'Pallas I send
him back, even as he deserved that I should send him. I grudge him not
due honours of burial. Yet of a truth the friendship of Aeneas hath
cost him dear.'" Then he put his foot upon the body and dragged
therefrom the belt. Great and heavy it was, and Clonius had wrought
thereon in gold the deed of the fifty daughters of Danaus, how they
slew their husbands in one night. But even then the time was very near
when Turnus would wish that he had left that spoil untouched. And
afterwards, with much groaning and weeping, the companions of Pallas
laid him upon a shield and bare him back.

And now tidings came to Aeneas that it fared ill with his men, and that
Pallas was slain. Across the field he sped, and all his heart was full
of wrath against Turnus and pity for the old man Evander; and first he
took alive eight youths, whom he should slay upon the tomb. Then he
cast his spear at Lagus; but Lagus avoided it by craft, and rushed
forward, and caught him by the knees, beseeching him by the spirit of
his father and the hopes of Iulus that he would spare him, and take a
ransom for his life. But Aeneas made answer, "Talk not of sparing nor
of ransom; for to all courtesy of war there is an end now that Turnus
hath slain Pallas." And he caught the man's helmet with his left
hand, and, bending back his neck, thrust in the sword up to the hilt.
And many other valiant chiefs he slew, as Haemonides, priest of
Phoebus and Diana, and Tarquitus, son of Faunus, and dark Camers, son
of Volscens. And now there met him two brethren on one chariot,
Lucagus and Liger. And Liger, who indeed drave the horses, cried
aloud, "These are not the horses of Diomed, nor this the chariot of
Achilles, from which thou mayest escape. Lo! the end of thy battles
and thy life is come." But Aeneas spake not, but cast his spear, and
even as Lucagus made himself ready for battle it sped through his
shield and pierced his thigh. Then he fell dying on the plain. And
Aeneas cried, mocking him, "Thy horses are not slow to flee, nor
frightened by a shadow. Of thine own will thou leavest thy chariot."
And he caught the horses by the head. Then Liger stretched out his
hands to him in supplication, saying, "I beseech thee, by thy parents,
have pity upon me." But Aeneas made answer, "Nay, but thou spakest not
thus before. Die! and desert not thy brother." And he thrust the sword
into his breast. Thus did Aeneas deal death through the host, even as
he had been the giant Typhoeus with the hundred hands. And when Iulus
and the men of Troy beheld him they broke forth from the camp.

And now Juno bethought her how she might save Turnus, whom she loved.
So she caused that there should pass before his eyes an image as of
Aeneas, which seemed to defy him to battle. And when Turnus would have
fought, lo! the false Aeneas fled, and Turnus followed him. Now there
chanced to be lying moored to a great rock a certain ship, on which
King Asinius had come from Clusium. Into this the false Aeneas fled,
and Turnus followed hard upon him, but found not the man. And when he
looked, Juno had burst the moorings of the ship, and the sea was about
him on every side. Then he cried, "What have I done, great Jupiter,
that I should suffer such shame? What think the Latins of my flight?
Drown me, ye winds and waves, or drive me where no man may see me
more." Thrice he would have cast himself into the sea; thrice would he
have slain himself with the sword; but Juno forbad, and brought him
safe to the city of Daunus, his father.

In the meanwhile King Mezentius joined the battle. Nor could the men
of Troy, nor yet the Tuscans, stay him. Many valiant men he slew, as
Mimas, whom his mother Theano bare the same night that Hecuba bare
Paris to King Priam; and Actor, a Greek, who had left his promised
wife, and carried her purple favour in his helmet; and tall Orodes.
Orodes, indeed, was flying, but the king deigned not to slay him in
his flight, but met him face to face and smote him. Also when Orodes
cried, "Whoever thou art, thou goest not long unpunished: a like doom
awaits thee; and in this land shalt thou find thy grave," Mezentius
laughed, and made answer, "Die thou, but let the king of Gods and men
see to me."

But after awhile Aeneas spied Mezentius as he fought, and made haste to
meet him. Nor did the king give place, but cried, "Now may this right
hand and the spear which I wield be my gods, and help me." And he cast
his spear. It smote the shield of Aeneas, but pierced it not. Yet did
it not fly in vain, for glancing off it smote Antores in the
side--Antores who once had been comrade to Hercules, and afterwards
followed Evander. Now he fell, and in his death remembered the city
which he loved, even Argos. Then in his turn Aeneas cast his spear.
Through the bull's-hide shield it passed, wounding the king in the
groin, but not to death. And Aeneas was right glad to see the blood
flow forth, and drew his sword and pressed on; and Mezentius, much
cumbered with the spear and the wound, gave place. But when Lausus,
his son, saw this, he groaned aloud and leapt forward, and took the
blow upon his sword; and his companions followed him with a shout, and
cast their spears at Aeneas, staying him till Mezentius had gotten
himself safe away. And Aeneas stood awhile under the shower of spears,
even as a traveller stands hiding himself from a storm. Then he cried
to Lausus, "What seekest thou, madman? Why venturest thou that which
thy strength may not endure?" But Lausus heeded him not at all, but
still pressed on. Then the heart of Aeneas was filled with wrath, and
the day was come for Lausus that he should die. For the king smote
him with his sword: through shield it passed and tunic woven with
gold, and was hidden to the hilt in his body. And Aeneas pitied him as
he lay dead, bethinking him how he, too, would fain have died for his
father, and spake, saying, "What shall Aeneas give thee, unhappy boy,
for this thy nobleness? Keep thy arms, in which thou hadst such
delight, and let thy father care as he will for thy body; and take
this comfort in thy death, that thou fallest by the hand of the great
Aeneas." Then he lifted him from the earth, and bade his companions
carry him away.

  [Illustration: AENEAS AND THE BODY OF LAUSUS.]

In the mean time his father tended his wounds, leaning on the trunk of
a tree by the Tiber bank. His helmet hung from a branch, and his arms
lay upon the ground, while his followers stood around. And ever he
asked tidings of Lausus, and sent those who should bid him return. But
when they brought back his body on a shield, his father knew it from
afar, and threw dust upon his white hair, and fell upon the body,
crying, "Had I such desire to live, my son, that I suffered thee to
meet in my stead the sword of the enemy? Am I saved by these wounds?
Do I live by thy death? And indeed, my son, I did dishonour to thee by
my misdeeds. Would that I had given my guilty life for thine! But
indeed I die; nevertheless not yet, for I have first somewhat that I
must do."

Then he raised himself on his thigh, and commanded that they should
bring his horse. His pride it was and comfort, and had borne him
conqueror from many fights. Very sad was the beast, and he spake to
it, saying, "O Rhoebus, thou and I have lived long enough, if indeed
aught on earth be long. To-day thou shalt bring back the head and the
arms of Aeneas, and so avenge my Lausus; or thou shalt die with me. For
a Trojan master thou wilt not, I know, endure."

Then he mounted the horse and took spears in both his hands, and so
hasted to meet Aeneas. Thrice he called him by name, and Aeneas rejoiced
to hear his voice, and cried, "Now may Jupiter and Apollo grant that
this be true. Begin the fight." And Mezentius made answer: "Seek not
to make afraid. Thou canst do me no harm now that thou hast slain my
son. I am come to die, but take thou first this gift;" and he cast his
spear, and then another, and yet another, as he rode in a great circle
about the enemy. But they brake not the boss of gold. And Aeneas stood
firm, bearing the forest of spears in his shield. But at last, issuing
forth in anger from behind his shield, he cast his spear and smote the
war-horse Rhoebus between his temples. Then the horse reared himself
and lashed the air with his feet, and fell with his rider beneath him.
And the men of Troy and the Latins sent up a great shout. Then Aeneas
hasted and drew his sword, and stood above him, crying, "Where is the
fierce Mezentius now?" And the king said, when he breathed again, "Why
threatenest thou me with death? Slay me; thou wrongest me not. I made
no covenant with thee for life, nor did my Lausus when he died for me.
Yet grant me this one thing. Thou knowest how my people hateth me.
Keep my body, I pray thee, from them, that they do it no wrong. And
let my son be buried with me in my grave." And he gave his throat to
the sword, and feared not.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE COUNCIL.


So the battle had an end. And the next day, early in the morning,
Aeneas paid his vows. For he took an oak-tree, and lopped the branches
round about, and set it on a mound. And thereon he hung, for a trophy
to Mars, the arms of King Mezentius, the crest dripping with blood,
and the headless spears, and the corslet pierced in twelve places.
Also he fastened on the left hand the shield, and hung about the neck
the ivory-hilted sword. And next, the chiefs being gathered about him,
he spake, saying, "We have wrought a great deed. Here ye see all that
remaineth of Mezentius. Now, therefore, let us make ready to carry the
war against the city of Latinus. This, therefore, will we do with the
first light to-morrow. And now let us bury the dead, doing such honour
to them as we may, for indeed they have purchased a country for us
with their own blood. But first will I send back Pallas to the city of
Evander."

Then he went to the tent where the dead body was laid, and old Acoetes
kept watch thereby--Acoetes, who had been armour-bearer to Evander,
and now had followed his son, but with evil fortune; and the women of
Troy, with their hair unbound, mourned about him. But when they saw
Aeneas they beat their breasts, and sent up a great cry even to heaven.
And when the king saw the pillowed head and the great wound in the
breast he wept, and said, "Ah! why did Fortune grudge me this, that
thou shouldst see my kingdom, and go back in triumph to thy father's
home? This is not what I promised to Evander when he gave thee to my
charge, and warned me that the men of Italy were valiant and fierce.
And now haply, old man, thou makest offerings and prayers for him who
now hath no part nor lot in the Gods of heaven. Yet, at least, thou
wilt see that he beareth an honourable wound. But what a son thou
losest, O Italy! and what a friend, thou, Iulus!"

Then he chose a thousand men who should go with the dead and share
the father's grief. After this they made a bier of arbutus boughs and
oak, and put also over it a canopy of branches, and laid the dead
thereon, like unto a flower of violet or hyacinth which a girl hath
plucked, which still hath beauty and colour, but the earth nourisheth
it no more. And Aeneas took two robes of purple, which Dido had woven
with thread of gold, and with one he wrapped the body and with the
other the head. And behind were carried the arms which Pallas had won
in fight; and they led the old man Acoetes, smiting on his breast and
tearing his cheeks, and throwing himself upon the ground; and the
war-horse Aethon walked beside, with the great tears rolling down his
cheeks. And also they bare behind him his helmet and shield, for all
else Turnus had taken; and then followed the whole company, the men of
Troy, the Arcadians, and the Tuscans, with arms reversed. And Aeneas
said, "The same cares and sorrows of war call me elsewhere. Farewell,
my Pallas, for ever!" And he departed to the camp.

And now there came ambassadors from the city, having olive-branches
about their heads, praying for a truce, that they might bury their
dead. Then Aeneas made answer, "Ye ask peace for the dead; fain would I
give it to the living. I had not come to this land but for the bidding
of the Fates. And if your king changeth from me and my friendship to
Turnus, I am blameless. Yet methinks Turnus should rather have taken
this danger upon himself. And even now, if he be willing to fight with
me, man to man, so be it. But now bury ye your dead."

Then they made a truce for twelve days. And the men of Troy and the
Latins laboured together, hewing wood upon the hills, pine and cedar
and mountain ash. And the men of Troy built great piles upon the shore
and burned the dead bodies of their companions thereon, and their arms
with them. And the Latins did likewise. Also they that had been chosen
to do this thing carried the body of Pallas to his city. And King
Evander and the Arcadians made a great mourning for him.

But when they had made an end of burning the dead there arose a great
tumult in the city, for many had lost husband, or brother, or son.
Wherefore they cried out that it was an evil war, and they cursed the
marriage of Turnus, and would have him fight with Aeneas, man to man,
that there might be an end of these troubles. And lo! in the midst of
the tumult there came back the ambassadors that had been sent to
Diomed, saying that their prayers and gifts had availed nothing. Then
King Latinus called a council of the chiefs, and sat him down upon his
throne, and bade the men say on. Then Venulus, who was the chiefest
among them, spake, saying, "We went to Arpi, to the city of King
Diomed. And the man received us, and asked us wherefore we had come,
and when we had told him, he spake, saying, 'Men of Italy, why will ye
thus tempt your fate? Know ye not that we, as many of us as lifted
hand against the men of Troy, have suffered grievous things? For the
Lesser Ajax perished on the rocks of Euboea; and Menelaus was driven
even to the island of Proteus, which is hard by the land of Egypt; and
Ulysses scarcely escaped from the Cyclops; and as for King Agamemnon,
an adulterer slew him in his palace. And us the Gods suffered not to
see wife or country again. But as for this which ye ask of me, I
fight not against men of Troy any more. These gifts which ye bring to
me, give rather to Aeneas. We have fought together, and I know how
mightily he rises to the stroke of his sword and casts his spear. I
tell you this: if there had been in Troy two others such as he, the
war had come to the gates of Argos, and Greece had suffered even what
she wrought. 'Twas he and Hector who for ten years bore up against our
arms: both valiant men and strong, and this man the dearer to the
Gods. Make peace with him, if ye may; but beware that ye meet him not
in war.'"

And when they had made an end of speaking, there was a murmur in the
council, some saying one thing, and some another. Then King Latinus
said from his throne, "This is an ill time for counsel when the enemy
is about our walls. Yet hearken to my words. Ye do ill to wage this
war: for the men of Troy are dear to the Gods, nor may any sword
prevail against them. Ye have heard what saith King Diomed; ye see
also how low our fortunes be brought. My sentence therefore is this: I
have a domain near to the Tiber, stretching far to the west, a land
of corn-fields and pasture. This, and the pine forests also on the
hills, will I give to the men of Troy, and I will divide also my
kingdom. But if they would rather seek some other land, let us build
them twelve ships, or more, if they be able to fill them, and let them
depart in peace. Now therefore let us send ambassadors, even a hundred
men, and let them carry gifts, talents of gold, and ivory, and also a
throne and a robe, which are the emblems of kingship."

Then spake Drances. (Now Drances had great jealousy of Turnus.
Bountiful was he, and eloquent, and skilful in counsel and debate, but
feeble in fight.) "This matter about which thou askest us, O King, is
manifest, and needeth not speech; for all men know what shall best
profit the people, yet fear to say it. 'Tis this man that hindereth us
from speech; this man for whose evil pride--aye, I will say it though
he threaten me with death--so many valiant chiefs have fallen, while
he makes a vain show of his valour. And now, O King, I would bid thee
add one more to thy gifts. Give thy daughter to this great son-in-law,
and make peace sure for ever. Yea, Turnus, yield thou this to thy
country. Lo! we all ask it of thee, even I, whom thou holdest to be
thine enemy. But if thou wilt not, counting a royal wife to be more
than thy country, call not on us to die for thee, but meet thy rival
face to face."

Then in great wrath Turnus made answer, "Thou hast always many words
at command, O Drances, and, when the senators are called, art ever the
first to come. But where is thy valour? Where are the trophies which
thy right hand hath set up? Wilt thou make trial of it now? Lo! the
enemy is at hand. Shall we go? Dost thou linger? Is all thy valour in
thy boasting tongue and coward feet? And thou doubtest, forsooth, of
my courage. What? hast thou not heard of Pallas slain, and Bitias and
Pandarus, and all whom I laid low when they shut me within their
walls? And now I would speak of thee and thy counsel, my father. If
thou thinkest that one defeat is enough, and that fortune may not
change, be it so: let us pray for peace. Happy then he who hath died
before he saw such foul disgrace! But if we have yet strength
remaining, and nations and cities that will yet help us; if these men
of Troy have won their victory dear, why faint we at the threshold,
and tremble before the trumpet sounds? Diomed will not help us. But we
have Messapus, and the augur Tolumnius, and all the chiefs of Italy,
yea and the Volscian Camilla, with her squadrons clad in bronze. And
if they would have me fight man to man, I refuse not in such a cause.
Let him be mighty as Achilles, and don the arms which Vulcan hath
made. I refuse not the battle, for my life is for you and for your
king."

But while they disputed there came a messenger unto the palace
bringing tidings of fear. For the men of Troy, he said, were marching
in battle line from their camp. Then there arose a great uproar, some
crying aloud for arms, and some weeping; loud was it as the clamour of
birds that settle in some deep wood, or of swans by the mouth of Po.
And Turnus cried, "Call your councils, my friends, speak of peace as
you sit. But the enemy is at the gate." And he made haste and rushed
forth from the senate-house.




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE BATTLE AT THE CITY.


Then Turnus commanded that of the chiefs some should set the battle in
array, and some should fortify the gates, and some should follow after
himself. And men dug trenches before the gates, and gathered store of
stones and stakes; and the women and children stood upon the walls.
But the queen and the chiefest of the matrons went to the temple of
Pallas, and with them was the virgin Lavinia, from whom all these
sorrows sprang, casting down her beautiful eyes to the ground. And
they offered incense and prayer to the goddess, that she would break
the Phrygian robber's spear, and lay him low before the walls of the
city. Then Turnus armed himself for the battle, and ran down from the
citadel, and lo! at the gate there met him Camilla, with a troop of
virgins riding on horses. And when they had lighted down therefrom,
the Queen spake, saying, "I promise thee, Turnus, to meet the horsemen
of Troy and of the Tuscans. Do thou abide here on foot and guard the
walls." And Turnus, steadfastly regarding her, made answer, "What
thanks shall I give thee for such service? But now hearken to me.
There lieth a valley whereby Aeneas purposeth to come against this
city: in the mouth thereof will I lay an ambush; do thou, therefore,
meet the Tuscan horsemen in battle, having with thee Messapus and the
horsemen of Tibur." And when he had said this he departed and laid the
ambush against Aeneas.

In the mean time Diana, where she sat in heaven, spake to Opis, who
was one of the nymphs that waited on her: "Camilla goeth forth to
battle, who is dearer to me than all virgins beside, and hath been so
even from a child. She is the daughter of King Metabus. Now Metabus,
being banished from his city, even Privernum, by reason of his
violence, fled, taking with him his daughter. Her he carried in his
bosom, and the Volscians pressed hard upon him as he fled. And he came
to the river Amasenus, and it chanced that the river was swollen with
abundance of rain, and overflowed his banks. And the king, when he
would have crossed it by swimming, feared for the child. Therefore he
took the great spear which he carried in his hand, and bound the girl
thereto with strips of bark, and balanced it in his hands, saying, 'I
vow this child to thee, daughter of Latona, to be thy servant for
ever.' And he cast the spear with all his might, so that it fell on
the other side of the river. Then did he throw himself into the
stream, and so escaped from the land of his enemies. Thereafter he
dwelt not in house or city, but lived on the hills with the shepherds.
And the child he nourished with mare's milk, and the like. And when
she could first put her feet upon the ground, he put a javelin in her
hand, and gave her a bow also and arrows. No gold had she on her hair,
nor wore she long garments such as women use, but was adorned with a
tiger-skin. Also from a child she would cast the javelin from her
hand, and whirl the sling above her head, and strike the crane or the
wild swan even in the midst of the clouds. Many Tuscan mothers would
have had her for their daughter-in-law, but marriage pleased her not.
I would she had not come to this war. Then had I made her one of my
companions. But seeing that her doom is upon her, I give thee this
charge concerning her. Pass thou down to the earth, to the Latin land,
where they begin even now this evil battle. And take from thy quiver
an avenging arrow, and whosoever shall harm the virgin, be he man of
Troy or Italian, shall pay the penalty. But her will I carry back to
her native country, neither shall any man spoil her of her arms."

In the meanwhile Aeneas and his army were come near to the walls. And
first the horsemen ran together against each other, holding their
spears forth in front. In this battle Tyrrhenus the Tuscan met
Aconteus, and drave him from his horse with the shock, as a
thunderbolt is driven from the sky or a stone from an engine; and the
ranks of the Latins were troubled and fled, and the men of Troy
pursued them; but when they came near to the gates the Latins turned
upon them, and the men of Troy fled in their turn. Even as a wave upon
the shore floweth and ebbeth, so twice they fled and twice they
pursued. But the third time they joined battle, and gave not place one
to the other. Then fell many men and horses dying to the ground.
Orsilochus smote the horse of Remulus between the temples, and the
beast reared and threw his rider to the earth. Next Catillus of Tibur
slew Iollas, and Herminius, who fought with breast and shoulders bare,
driving his spear through him from side to side. But fiercest of all
was the virgin Camilla. With one breast bare she fought; and now she
would shoot arrows from her bow, and now would ply the battle-axe. And
the virgins that were her fellows, as Larina and Tulla and Tarpeia,
followed close behind her. Like to the Amazons they were when, having
their shields shaped as is the moon, they throng around their Queen
Penthesilea or Hippolyte. Euneus she slew, a man of Troy; and Pagasus
and Liris, Etruscans; and others besides. With every arrow she slew a
man. And the hunter Ornytus came against her, having for helmet the
head of a wolf with white teeth, and in his hand a hunting spear. He
was of greater stature than other men, but she slew him, and mocked
him, saying, "Didst thou think, Tuscan, that thou wert hunting wild
beasts this day? Lo! a woman's arms have brought thy boasts to
nothing." Then she slew Orsilochus and Butes, mighty men of Troy.
Butes she smote as he fled from her, but from Orsilochus she made as
she would flee; then, wheeling round, met him face to face, and cleft
his head in twain. The son of Aunus, whose father dwelt amongst the
Apennines, trembled to see the deed, and was fain to escape her by
craft, after the fashion of his country, being a man of Liguria.
Therefore he said, "What glory is it if thou prevailest by reason of
the swiftness of thy horse? Fight with me now on foot, and let us see
who shall gain the victory." And when the virgin leapt to the ground,
giving her horse to her companions, he turned his horse to flee. But
the virgin cried, "Thinkest thou to escape me thus, thou fool? Never
shalt thou see thy father, the crafty Aunus, again." And she made
haste and outran the horse, and catching the reins in her hands, stood
before him and slew him.

  [Illustration: CAMILLA AND THE SON OF AUNUS.]

Then did Tarchon the Tuscan rebuke his horsemen, calling each by
his name, and saying, "What fear, what baseness, is this, ye Tuscans?
Shall a woman drive you before her? Ready enough are ye for the dance,
and the feast, and the sacrifice; but ye lag behind in war." And he
drave his horse at Venulus of Tibur, and caught him in his arms, and
carried him away. As an eagle carries a snake which he hath caught,
and the snake, winding his coils about the bird, struggles and hisses,
so did Tarchon carry him off, and spy out a place where he might smite
him, and Venulus strove amain to keep the sword from his throat. And
all the men of Troy and the Tuscans charged again when they saw their
chief do so valiantly.

But all the while Arruns watched the virgin Camilla, that he might
take her unawares. Now there was a certain Chloreus, priest of Cybele,
who rode through the battle, very splendid to behold. For his horse
was clad in bronze mail, that was clasped with gold; and he himself
was clad in purple from beyond the seas; his bow was of Lycia and his
arrows of Crete; of gold was his bow, and of gold the helmet; and his
saffron scarf was clasped with gold; and his tunic was embroidered
with needlework, and his trews were of divers colours. Him alone the
virgin followed, blind to all beside, with a woman's love of beautiful
spoil. And Arruns watched her from the ambush where he lay; and when
the time was come, he cried, "Apollo, lord of Soracte, help me now; if
ever I and my people have passed over the burning coals in thy honour,
help me now. I seek not spoil nor glory; let me return without honour
to my country, so but I slay this fury." And part of his prayer the
god heard, and part was scattered by the winds. Camilla, indeed, he
slew, but to his country he went not back. But when the bow twanged,
all the Volscians turned their eyes to the queen; but she was not
aware of the arrow, even till it smote her under her breast. Then her
companions ran together and caught her as she fell. And she would have
drawn forth the arrow, but it was deep in her side. Then did her eyes
swim cold in death, and the colour, that was as the colour of a rose,
faded from her cheek. And as she died, she said to Acca, who was
dearest to her of all her companions, "Acca, my sister, my strength
faileth me. Bid Turnus that he join the battle, and keep the men of
Troy from the city." And she loosed hold of the reins, and fell to the
earth; and the battle grew fiercer as she lay.

  [Illustration: THE DEATH OF CAMILLA.]

But when the nymph Opis saw that she was dead, she groaned, and cried,
"O Virgin, thou hast paid the penalty of thy deed, in that thou
defiedst the men of Troy. Neither hath it profited thee to be the
servant of Diana. Yet will she not have thee unhonoured in thy death;
for whosoever hath harmed thee shall surely die." Then she flew
through the air, and lighted on a mound that was the tomb of Laurens,
that had once been king of the land. And when she saw Arruns boasting
of his deed--for at first he had fled stricken with fear, but had now
taken heart again--she cried, "Come hither, that thou mayest suffer
thy doom, in that thou hast slain the virgin Camilla." And she drew
the bow till the ends thereof came close together, and her left hand
was on the arrowhead and her right hand on the string. And even as
Arruns heard the clang of the bow the arrow smote him that he died.

But when Camilla was dead her companions fled, and the Rutulians
also, and the chiefs were scattered and the battalions left desolate.
And there rose a great cloud of dust that rolled ever nearer the city;
and a dreadful shout went up to heaven. Then those that first came to
the gates were trodden down by the crowd behind them, that they died,
yea, even in the sight of their homes. And those that were within shut
the gates and drave back with arms such as would have entered. And
then was slaughter and confusion without end. And even the women upon
the walls cast javelins with their hands, and thrust with stakes of
wood that had been charred with fire, even as with spears.

But now there came ill tidings to Turnus as he lay in ambush in the
wood, even that Camilla was dead, and that the enemy had the mastery.
Wherefore he rose up from his place, and came out upon the plain; and
even as he rose up, Aeneas had won his way through the wood and
overpassed the ridge. Then did they both haste towards the walls. And
Aeneas saw Turnus, and knew him, and Turnus also saw Aeneas; but the
darkness hindered them that they should not fight together that day.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE BROKEN TREATY.


Prince Turnus, seeing that the Latins had fled in the battle, and that
men looked to him that he should perform that which he had promised,
even to meet Aeneas face to face, was filled with rage. Even as a lion
which a hunter hath wounded breaketh the arrow wherewith he hath been
stricken, and rouseth himself to battle, shaking his mane and roaring,
so Turnus arose. And first he spake to King Latinus, saying, "Not for
me, my father, shall these cowards of Troy go back from that which
they have covenanted. I will meet this man face to face, and slay him
while ye look on; or, if the Gods will that he vanquish me so, he
shall rule over you, and have Lavinia to wife."

But King Latinus made answer: "Yet think awhile, my son. Thou hast the
kingdom of thy father Daunus; and there are other noble virgins in
Latium whom thou mayest have to wife. Wilt thou not then be content?
For to give my daughter to any husband of this nation I was forbidden,
as thou knowest. Yet did I disobey, being moved by love of thee, my
wife also beseeching me with many tears. Thou seest what troubles I
and my people, and thou more than all, have suffered from that time.
Twice have we fled in the battle, and now the city only is left to us.
If I must yield me to these men, let me yield whilst thou art yet
alive. For what doth it profit me that thou shouldst die? Nay, but all
men would cry shame on me if I gave thee to death!"

Now for a space Turnus spake not for wrath. Then he said, "Be not
troubled for me, my father. For I, too, can smite with the spear; and
as for this Aeneas, his mother will not be at hand to snatch him in a
cloud from my sight."

Then Amata cried to him, saying, "Fight not, I beseech thee, with
these men of Troy, my son; for surely what thou sufferest I also shall
suffer. Nor will I live to see Aeneas my son-in-law."

And Lavinia heard the voice of her mother, and wept. As a man stains
ivory with crimson, or as roses are seen mixed with lilies, even so
the virgin's face burned with crimson. And Turnus, regarding her,
loved her exceedingly, and made answer: "Trouble me not with tears or
idle words, my mother, for to this battle I must go. And do thou,
Idmon the herald, say to the Phrygian king, 'To-morrow, when the sun
shall rise, let the people have peace, but we two will fight together.
And let him that prevaileth have Lavinia to wife.'"

Then first he went to the stalls of his horses. The wife of the North
Wind gave them to Pilumnus. Whiter than snow were they, and swifter
than the wind. Then he put the coat of mail about his shoulders, and
fitted a helmet on his head, and took the great sword which Vulcan had
made for Daunus his father, and had dipped it when it was white-hot in
the river of Styx. His spear also he took where it stood against a
pillar, saying, "Serve me well, my spear, that hast never failed me
before, that I may lay low this womanish robber of Phrygia, and soil
with dust his curled and perfumed hair."

The next day the men of Italy and the men of Troy measured out a
space for the battle. And in the midst they builded an altar of turf.
And the two armies sat on the one side and on the other, having fixed
their spears in the earth and laid down their shields. Also the women
and the old men stood on the towers and roofs of the city, that they
might see the fight.

But Queen Juno spake to Juturna, the sister of Turnus, saying, "Seest
thou how these two are now about to fight, face to face? And indeed
Turnus goeth to his death. As for me, I endure not to look upon this
covenant or this battle. But if thou canst do aught for thy brother,
lo! the time is at hand." And when the Nymph wept and beat her breast,
Juno said, "This is no time for tears. Save thy brother, if thou
canst, from death; or cause that they break this covenant."

After this came the kings, that they might make the covenant together.
And King Latinus rode in a chariot with four horses, and he had on his
head a crown with twelve rays of gold, for he was of the race of the
Sun; and Turnus came in a chariot with two white horses, having a
javelin in either hand; and Aeneas had donned the arms which Vulcan had
made, and with him was the young Iulus. And after due offering Aeneas
sware, calling on all the Gods, "If the victory shall fall this day to
Turnus, the men of Troy shall depart to the city of Evander, nor
trouble this land any more. But if it fall to me, I will not that the
Latins should serve the men of Troy. Let the nations be equal one with
the other. The gods that I bring we will worship together, but King
Latinus shall reign as before. A new city shall the men of Troy build
for me, and Lavinia shall call it after her own name."

Then King Latinus sware, calling on the Gods that are above and the
Gods that are below, saying, "This covenant shall stand for ever,
whatsoever may befall. As sure as this sceptre which I bear--once it
was a tree, but a cunning workman closed it in bronze, to be the glory
of Latium's kings--shall never again bear twig or leaf, so surely
shall this covenant be kept."

But the thing pleased not the Latins; for before, indeed, they judged
that the battle would not be equal between the two; and now were they
the more assured, seeing them when they came together, and that Turnus
walked with eyes cast to the ground, and was pale and wan. Wherefore
there arose a murmuring among the people, which when Juturna
perceived, she took upon herself the likeness of Camers, who was a
prince and a great warrior among them, and passed through the host,
saying, "Are ye not ashamed, men of Italy, that one man should do
battle for you all? For count these men: surely they are scarce one
against two. And if he be vanquished, what shame for you! As for him,
indeed, though he die, yet shall his glory reach to the heavens; but
ye shall suffer disgrace, serving these strangers for ever."

And when she saw that the people were moved, she gave also a sign from
heaven. For lo! an eagle that drave a crowd of sea-fowl before him,
swooped down to the water, and caught a great swan; and even while the
Italians looked, the birds that before had fled turned and pursued the
eagle, and drave him before them, so that he dropped the swan and fled
away. Which thing when the Italians perceived, they shouted, and made
them ready for battle. And the augur Tolumnius cried, "This is the
token that I have looked for. For this eagle is the stranger, and ye
are the birds, which before, indeed, have fled, but shall now make him
to flee."

And he ran forward and cast his spear, smiting a man of Arcadia below
the belt, upon the groin. One of nine brothers was he, sons of a
Tuscan mother, but their father was a Greek; and they, when they saw
him slain, caught swords and spears, and ran forward. And straightway
the battle was begun. First they brake down the altars, that they
might take firebrands therefrom; and King Latinus fled from the place.
Then did Messapus drive his horses against King Aulestes of Mantua,
who, being fain to fly, stumbled upon the altar and fell headlong on
the ground. And Messapus smote him with a spear that was like a
weaver's beam, saying, "This, of a truth, is a worthier victim." After
this Coryneus the Arcadian, when Ebysus would have smitten him,
snatched a brand from the altar and set fire to the beard of the man,
and, before he came to himself, caught him by the hair, and thrusting
him to the ground, so slew him. And when Podalirius pursued Alsus the
shepherd, and now held his sword over him ready to strike, the other
turned, and with a battle-axe cleft the man's head from forehead to
chin.

But all the while the righteous Aeneas, having his head bare, and
holding neither spear nor sword, cried to the people, "What seek ye?
what madness is this? The covenant is established, and I only have the
right to do battle." But even while he spake an arrow smote him,
wounding him. But who let it fly no man knoweth; for who, of a truth,
would boast that he had wounded Aeneas? And he departed from the
battle.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE DEATH OF TURNUS.


Now when Turnus saw that Aeneas had departed from the battle he called
for his chariot. And when he had mounted thereon he drave it through
the host of the enemy, slaying many valiant heroes, as Sthenelus and
Pholus, and the two sons of Imbrasus the Lycian, Glaucus and Lades.
Then he saw Eumedes, son of that Dolon who would have spied out the
camp of the Greeks, asking as his reward the horses of Achilles (but
Diomed slew him). Him Turnus smote with a javelin from afar, and, when
he fell, came near and put his foot upon him, and taking his sword
drave it into his neck, saying, "Lo! now thou hast the land which thou
soughtest. Lie there, and measure out Italy for thyself." Many others
he slew, for the army fled before him. Yet did one man, Phegeus by
name, stand against him, and would have stayed the chariot, catching
the bridles of the horses in his hand. But as he clung to the yoke and
was dragged along, Turnus broke his cuirass with his spear, and
wounded him. And when the man set his shield before him, and made at
Turnus with his sword, the wheels dashed him to the ground, and Turnus
struck him between the helmet and the breast-plate, and smote off his
head.

But in the meanwhile Mnestheus and Achates and Iulus led Aeneas to the
camp, leaning on his spear. Very wrath was he, and strove to draw
forth the arrow. And when he could not, he commanded that they should
open the wound with the knife, and so send him back to the battle.
Iapis also, the physician, ministered to him. Now this Iapis was
dearer than all other men to Apollo, and when the god would have given
him all his arts, even prophecy and music and archery, he chose rather
to know the virtues of herbs and the art of healing, that so he might
prolong the life of his father, who was even ready to die. This Iapis,
then, having his garments girt about him in healer's fashion, would
have drawn forth the arrow with the pincers, but could not. And while
he strove, the battle came nearer, and the sky was hidden by clouds of
dust, and javelins fell thick into the camp. But when Venus saw how
grievously her son was troubled, she brought from Ida, which is a
mountain of Crete, the herb dittany. A hairy stalk it hath and a
purple flower. The wild goats know it well if so be that they have
been wounded by arrows. This, then, Venus, having hidden her face,
brought and dipped into the water, and sprinkled there with ambrosia
and sweet-smelling panacea.

And Iapis, unawares, applied the water that had been healed; and lo!
the pain was stayed and the blood was staunched, and the arrow came
forth, though no man drew it, and Aeneas's strength came back to him as
before. Then said Iapis, "Art of mine hath not healed thee, my son.
The Gods call thee to thy work." Then did Aeneas arm himself again, and
when he had kissed Iulus and bidden him farewell, he went forth to the
battle. And all the chiefs went with him, and the men of Troy took
courage and drave back the Latins. Then befell a great slaughter, for
Gyas slew Ufens, who was the leader of the Aequians; also Tolumnius,
the great augur, was slain, who had first broken the covenant, slaying
a man with his spear. But Aeneas deigned not to turn his hand against
any man, seeking only for Turnus, that he might fight with him. But
when the nymph Juturna perceived this she was sore afraid. Therefore
she came near to the chariot of her brother, and thrust out Metiscus,
his charioteer, where he held the reins, and herself stood in his
room, having made herself like to him in shape and voice. Then as a
swallow flies through the halls and arcades of some rich man's house,
seeking food for its young, so Juturna drave the chariot of her
brother hither and thither. And ever Aeneas followed behind, and called
to him that he should stay; but whenever he espied the man, and would
have overtaken him by running, then again did Juturna turn the horses
about and flee. And as he sped Messapus cast a spear at him. But Aeneas
saw it coming, and put his shield over him, resting on his knee. Yet
did the spear smite him on the helmet-top and shear off the crest.
Then indeed was his wrath kindled, and he rushed into the army of the
enemy, slaying many as he went.

Then was there a great slaughter made on this side and on that. But
after a while Venus put it into the heart of Aeneas that he should lead
his army against the city. Therefore he called together the chiefs,
and, standing in the midst of them on a mound, spake, saying, "Hearken
now to my words, and delay not to fulfil them, for of a truth Jupiter
is on our side. I am purposed this day to lay this city of Latinus
even with the ground, if they still refuse to obey. For why should I
wait for Turnus till it please him to meet me in battle?"

Then did the whole array make for the walls of the city. And some
carried firebrands, and some scaling-ladders, and some slew the
warders at the gates, and cast javelins at them who stood on the
walls. And then there arose a great strife in the city, for some would
have opened the gates that the men of Troy might enter, and others
made haste to defend the walls. Hither and thither did they run with
much tumult, even as bees in a hive in a rock which a shepherd hath
filled with smoke, having first shut all the doors thereof.

Then also did other ill fortune befall the Latins, for when Queen
Amata saw from the roof of the palace that the enemy were come near to
the walls, and saw not anywhere the army of the Latins, she supposed
Turnus to have fallen in the battle. Whereupon, crying out that she
was the cause of all these woes, she made a noose of the purple
garment wherewith she was clad, and hanged herself from a beam of the
roof. Then did lamentation go through the city, for the women wailed
and tore their hair, and King Latinus rent his clothes and threw dust
upon his head.

But the cry that went up from the city came to the ears of Turnus
where he fought in the furthest part of the plain. And he caught the
reins and said, "What meaneth this sound of trouble and wailing that I
hear?" And the false Metiscus, who was in truth his sister, made
answer, "Let us fight, O Turnus, here where the Gods give us victory.
There are enough to defend the city." But Turnus spake, saying, "Nay,
my sister, for who thou art I have known even from the beginning, it
must not be so. Why camest thou down from heaven? Was it to see thy
brother die? And now what shall I do? Have I not seen Murranus die and
Ufens the Aequian? And shall I suffer this city to be destroyed? Shall
this land see Turnus flee before his enemies? Be ye kind to me, O Gods
of the dead, seeing that the Gods of heaven hate me. I come down to
you a righteous spirit, and not unworthy of my fathers."

And even as he spake came Saces, riding on a horse that was covered
with foam, and on his face was the wound of an arrow. And he cried, "O
Turnus, our last hopes are in thee. For Aeneas is about to destroy the
city, and the firebrands are cast upon the roofs. And King Latinus is
sore tried with doubt, and the Queen hath laid hands upon herself and
is dead. And now only Messapus and Atinas maintain the battle, and the
fight grows fierce around them, while thou drivest thy chariot about
these empty fields."

Then for a while Turnus stood speechless, and shame and grief and
madness were in his soul; and he looked to the city, and lo! the fire
went up even to the top of the tower which he himself had builded upon
the walls to be a defence against the enemy. And when he saw it, he
cried, "It is enough, my sister; I go whither the Gods call me. I will
meet with Aeneas face to face, and endure my doom."

And as he spake he leapt down from his chariot, and ran across the
plain till he came near to the city, even where the blood was deepest
upon the earth and the arrows were thickest in the air. And he
beckoned with the hand and called to the Italians, saying, "Stay now
your arrows. I am come to fight this battle for you all." And when
they heard it they left a space in the midst. Aeneas also, when he
heard the name of Turnus, left attacking the city, and came to meet
him, mighty as Athos, or Eryx, or Father Apenninus, that raiseth his
snowy head to the heavens. And the men of Troy and the Latins and King
Latinus marvelled to see them meet, so mighty they were.

First they cast their spears at each other, and then ran together, and
their shields struck one against the other with a crash that went up
to the sky. And Jupiter held the balance in heaven, weighing their
doom. Then Turnus, rising to the stroke, smote fiercely with his
sword. And the men of Troy and the Latins cried out when they saw him
strike. But the treacherous sword brake in the blow. And when he saw
the empty hilt in his hand he turned to flee. They say that when he
mounted his chariot that day to enter the battle, not heeding the
matter in his haste, he left his father's sword behind him, and took
the sword of Metiscus, which, indeed, served him well while the men of
Troy fled before him, but brake, even as ice breaks, when it came to
the shield which Vulcan had made. Thereupon Turnus fled, and Aeneas,
though the wound which the arrow had made hindered him, pursued. Even
as a hound follows a stag that is penned within some narrow space, for
the beast flees hither and thither, and the staunch Umbrian hound
follows close upon him, and almost holds him, and snaps his teeth, yet
bites him not, so did Aeneas follow hard on Turnus. And still Turnus
cried out that some one should give him his sword, and Aeneas
threatened that he would destroy the city if any should help him.
Five times about the space they ran; not for some prize they strove,
but for the life of Turnus. Now there stood in the plain the stump of
a wild olive-tree. The tree was sacred to Faunus, but the men of Troy
had cut it, and the stump only was left. Herein the spear of Aeneas was
fixed, and now he would have drawn it forth that he might slay Turnus
therewith, seeing that he could not overtake him by running. Which
when Turnus perceived, he cried to Faunus, saying, "O Faunus, if I
have kept holy for thee that which the men of Troy have profaned, hold
fast this spear." And the god heard him; nor could Aeneas draw it
forth. But while he strove, Juturna, taking again the form of
Metiscus, ran and gave to Turnus his sword. And Venus, perceiving it,
wrenched forth the spear from the stump. So the two stood again face
to face.

Then spake Jupiter to Juno, where she sat in a cloud watching the
battle, "How long wilt thou fight against fate? What purpose hast thou
now in thy heart? Was it well that Juturna--for what could she avail
without thy help?--should give back to Turnus his sword? Thou hast
driven the men of Troy over land and sea, and kindled a dreadful war,
and mingled the song of marriage with mourning. Further thou mayest
not go."

And Juno humbly made answer, "This is thy will, great Father; else had
I not sat here, but stood in the battle smiting the men of Troy. And
indeed I spake to Juturna that she should help her brother; but aught
else I know not. And now I yield. Yet grant me this. Suffer not that
the Latins should be called after the name of Troy, nor change their
speech nor their garb. Let Rome rule the world, but let Troy perish
for ever."

Then spake with a smile the Maker of all things, "Truly thou art a
daughter of Saturn, so fierce is the wrath of thy soul! And now what
thou prayest I give. The Italians shall not change name, nor speech,
nor garb. The men of Troy shall mingle with them, and I will give them
a new worship, and call them all Latins. Nor shall any race pay thee
more honour than they."

Then Jupiter sent a Fury from the pit. And she took the form of a
bird, even of an owl that sitteth by night on the roof of a desolate
house, and flew before the face of Turnus and flapped her wings
against his shield. Then was Turnus stricken with great fear, so that
his hair stood up and his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth. And
when Juturna knew the sound of the false bird what it was, she cried
aloud for fear, and left her brother and fled, hiding herself in the
river of Tiber.

But Aeneas came on, shaking his spear that was like unto a tree, and
said, "Why delayest thou, O Turnus? Why drawest thou back? Fly now if
thou canst through the air, or hide thyself in the earth." And Turnus
made answer, "I fear not thy threats, but the Gods and Jupiter, that
are against me this day." And as he spake he saw a great stone which
lay hard by, the landmark of a field. Scarce could twelve chosen men,
such as men are now, lift it on their shoulders. This he caught from
the earth and cast it at his enemy, running forward as he cast. But he
knew not, so troubled was he in his soul, that he ran or that he cast,
for his knees tottered beneath him and his blood grew cold with fear.
And the stone fell short, nor reached the mark. Even as in a dream,
when dull sleep is on the eyes of a man, he would fain run but cannot,
for his strength faileth him, neither cometh there any voice when he
would speak; so it fared with Turnus. For he looked to the Latins and
to the city, and saw the dreadful spear approach, nor knew how he
might fly, neither how he might fight, and could not spy anywhere his
chariot or his sister. And all the while Aeneas shook his spear and
waited that his aim should be sure. And at the last he threw it with
all his might. Even as a whirlwind it flew, and brake through the
seven folds of the shield and pierced the thigh. And Turnus dropped
with his knee bent to the ground. And all the Latins groaned aloud to
see him fall. Then he entreated Aeneas, saying, "I have deserved my
fate. Take thou that which thou hast won. Yet perchance thou mayest
have pity on the old man, my father, even Daunus, for such an one was
thy father Anchises, and give me back to my own people, if it be but
my body that thou givest. Yet hast thou conquered, and the Latins have
seen me beg my life of thee, and Lavinia is thine. Therefore, I pray
thee, stay now thy wrath."

Then for awhile Aeneas stood doubting; aye, and might have spared the
man, when lo! he spied upon his shoulders the belt of Pallas, whom he
had slain. And his wrath was greatly kindled, and he cried with a
dreadful voice, "Shalt thou who art clothed with the spoils of my
friends escape me? 'Tis Pallas slays thee with this wound, and takes
vengeance on thy accursed blood." And as he spake he drave the steel
into his breast. And with a groan the wrathful spirit passed into
darkness.


THE END.


UNWIN BROTHERS, THE GRESHAM PRESS, CHILWORTH AND LONDON.




  _Seventh Thousand, Crown 8vo, price 5s. cloth._

  STORIES FROM HOMER.

  BY THE
  REV. ALFRED J. CHURCH, M.A.,

  _Head Master of King Edward's School, Retford_;
  Author of "Stories from Virgil."

  THE ILIAD.

       I. The Quarrel of the Chiefs.
      II. The Broken Covenant.
     III. The Battle in the Plain.
      IV. Hector and Andromache.
       V. The Duel of Hector and Ajax.
      VI. The Adventure of Ulysses and Diomed.
     VII. The Wounding of the Chiefs.
    VIII. The Battle at the Wall.
      IX. The Battle at the Ships.
       X. The Battle at the Ships (_continued_).
      XI. The Deeds and Death of Patroclus.
     XII. The Rousing of Achilles.
    XIII. The Battle at the River.
     XIV. The Death of Hector.
      XV. The Ransoming of Hector.

  THE ODYSSEY.

       I. The Cyclops.
      II. The Island of Aeolus--the Laestrygons--Circe.
     III. The Regions of the Dead--Scylla--the Oxen of the
            Sun--Calypso.
      IV. Telemachus and Penelope.
       V. Nestor and Menelaus.
      VI. Ulysses on his Raft.
     VII. Nausicaa and Alcinous.
    VIII. Ulysses and the Swineherd.
      IX. The Return of Telemachus.
       X. Ulysses in his Home.
      XI. The Trial of the Bow.
     XII. The Slaying of the Suitors.

  WITH TWENTY-FOUR TINTED ILLUSTRATIONS, FROM FLAXMAN'S DESIGNS.

    "A book which ought to become an English classic. It is full
    of the pure Homeric flavour, and we think we may predict that
    it will retain its place in our literature."--_Spectator._

    "All Mr. Church's stories are told with rare grace and
    fidelity."--_Times._

    "We can give Mr. Church no higher praise than that he has
    succeeded in his undertaking. We doubt whether the first and
    greatest of story-tellers has ever before been so
    appropriately rendered for children."--_Academy._

    "Mr. Church has long since proved himself a ripe and good
    scholar, though he had not given evidence of the special
    Homeric insight which this charming volume
    displays."--_Saturday Review._

  SEELEY, JACKSON, AND HALLIDAY,
  Fleet Street, London.


  SERIES OF CHEAP SCHOOL BOOKS.

  _Conducted by the Rev. A. J. CHURCH, M.A.,
  Head Master of Retford Grammar School._

    The _Saturday Review_ says:--"We cannot too warmly hail this
    series. If all the schoolmasters in England were to adopt it
    they would have fewer occasions to complain of boys not
    having read their notes, and fewer grumblings on the part of
    patresfamilias at the heavy items of the book bill."

    Each volume of Selections contains sufficient matter for the
    work of a Term, with Notes by a Competent Editor.

  LATIN.

    First Latin Dictionary. E. S. Morgan, M.A. 2s. 6d.
    First Latin Grammar. Rev. T. White, LL.D. 1s.
    Latin Exercise Book. Part I. Rev. A. J. Church, M.A. 8d.
    Latin Exercise Book. Part II. Rev. A. J. Church, M.A. 8d.
    Latin Delectus. C. Oakley, M.A. 8d.
    Easy Latin Reading Book. Rev. H. M. Stephenson, M.A. 8d.
    Ovid--Elegiac Verse. Rev. A. J. Church, M.A. 8d.
    Ovid--Metamorphoses. Rev. North Pinder, M.A. 8d.
    Horace--Select Odes. Rev. W. J. Brodribb, M.A. 8d.
    Virgil--Aeneid, Book VI. Rev. A. J. Church, M.A. 8d.
    Caesar--British Expeditions. Rev. F. B. Butler, M.A. 8d.
    Cicero--Select Passages. Rev. W. J. Brodribb, M.A. 10d.
    Livy--Select Passages. Rev. E. H. Merriott, M.A. 8d.
    Phaedrus--Select Fables. E. Walford, M.A. 8d.
    Cornelius Nepos--Select Lives. E. Walford, M.A. 8d.
    Latin Prose through English Idiom. Rev. E. A. Abbott, D.D. 2s. 6d.

  ENGLISH.

    Milton--Minor Poems. Rev. H. S. Huckin, D.D. 8d.
    Milton--Samson. Rev. A. J. Church, M.A. 1s.
    Cowper--Task. Two Books. J. Hales, M.A. 8d.
    Goldsmith--Poems. Rev. A. R. Vardy, M.A. 8d.
    English Verse for Repetition. Rev. W. B. Stanford, M.A. 1s.
    Selections for Practice in Spelling. R. Lomas. 1s.

  MATHEMATICS.

    Algebra, to Quadratic Equations. R. Proude Smith, M.A. 1s.
    Euclid. L. B. Seeley, M.A. 1s.

  FRENCH.

    French Verse. H. Tarver. 1s. 6d.
    First French Grammar. H. Tarver. 1s. 6d.

  GREEK.

    Xenophon--Anabasis, Book IV. Rev. North Pinder, M.A. 1s.

  SEELEY, JACKSON, & HALLIDAY 54, Fleet St., London.