THE

                        MILITARY JOURNALS

                             OF TWO

                       PRIVATE SOLDIERS,

                           1758--1775,



                              WITH

                    NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES

                       TO WHICH IS ADDED,

                          A SUPPLEMENT,

                           CONTAINING

    OFFICIAL PAPERS ON THE SKIRMISHES AT LEXINGTON AND CONCORD.



                          POUGHKEEPSIE:
                  PUBLISHED BY ABRAHAM TOMLINSON,
                          AT THE MUSEUM.
                               1855.




     Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1854,

                      By ABRAHAM TOMLINSON,

    in the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United
      States, in and for the Southern District of New York.



                  STEREOTYPED BY C. C. SAVAGE.
                    13 Chambers Street, N. Y.

                      C. A. ALVORD, PRINTER,
                      29 Gold Street, N. Y.




ADVERTISEMENT.


Having been, for several years, engaged in the establishment of a
Museum in Poughkeepsie, I have, by extensive travel and research, and
by the kindness of many of my fellow-citizens in Dutchess county and
elsewhere, obtained numerous objects, not only curious in themselves,
but valuable as materials for history. Among these are two manuscript
Journals, kept by common soldiers, each during a single campaign, and
written at periods seventeen years apart. One of these soldiers served
in a campaign of the conflict known as the FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR,
which commenced a hundred years ago; the other soldier assisted in the
siege of Boston, by the American army, in 1775 and 1776. Believing
that a faithful transcript of those Journals, given _verbatim et
literatim_, as recorded by the actors themselves, might have an
interest for American readers, as exhibiting the every-day life of a
common soldier in those wars which led to the founding of our
republic, I have yielded to the solicitations of friends, and the
dictates of my own judgment and feelings, and in the following pages
present to the public faithful copies of those diaries.

Perceiving that much of the intrinsic value of these Journals would
consist in a proper understanding of the historical facts to which
allusions are made in them, I prevailed upon Mr. LOSSING, the
well-known author of the "_Pictorial Field-Book of the Revolution_" to
illustrate and elucidate these diaries by explanatory notes. His name
is a sufficient guaranty for their accuracy and general usefulness;
and I flatter myself that this little volume will not only amuse, but
edify, and that the useful objects aimed at in its publication will be
fully attained. With this hope, it is submitted to my fellow-citizens.

                                        ABRAHAM TOMLINSON.
  POUGHKEEPSIE MUSEUM, _December, 1854_.




INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.


The conflict known in America as the _French and Indian War_, and in
Europe as the _Seven Years' War_, originated in disputes between the
French and English colonists, in the New World, concerning territorial
limits. For a century the colonies of the two nations had been
gradually expanding and increasing in importance. The English, more
than a million in number, occupied the seaboard from the Penobscot to
the St. Mary's, a thousand miles in extent; all eastward of the great
ranges of the Alleganies, and far northward toward the St. Lawrence.
The French, not more than a hundred thousand strong, made settlements
along the St. Lawrence, the shores of the great lakes, on the
Mississippi and its tributaries, and upon the borders of the gulf of
Mexico. They early founded Detroit, Kaskaskia, Vincennes, and New
Orleans.

The English planted agricultural colonies--the French were chiefly
engaged in traffic with the Indians. This trade, and the operations of
the Jesuit missionaries, who were usually the self-denying pioneers of
commerce in its penetration of the wilderness, gave the French great
influence over the tribes of a vast extent of country lying in the
rear of the English settlements.

The ancient quarrel between the two nations, originating far back in
the feudal ages, and kept alive by subsequent collisions, burned
vigorously in the bosoms of the respective colonists in America, where
it was continually fed by frequent hostilities on frontier ground.
They had ever regarded each other with extreme jealousy, for the prize
before them was supreme rule in the New World. The trading-posts and
missionary-stations of the French, in the far Northwest, and in the
bosom of the dark wilderness, several hundred miles distant from the
most remote settlements on the English frontier, attracted very little
attention until they formed a part of more extensive operations. But
when, after the capture of Louisburg, by the English, in 1745, the
French adopted vigorous measures for opposing the extension of British
power in America; when they built strong vessels at the foot of Lake
Ontario--made treaties of friendship with powerful Indian
tribes--strengthened their fort at the mouth of the Niagara river--and
erected a cordon of fortifications, more than sixty in number, between
Montreal and New Orleans,--the English were aroused to immediate and
effective action in defence of the territorial limits given them in
their ancient charters. By virtue of these, they claimed dominion
westward to the Pacific ocean, south of the latitude of the north
shore of Lake Erie; while the French claimed a title to all the
territory watered by the Mississippi and its tributaries, under the
more plausible plea that they had made the first explorations and
settlements in that region. The claims of the real owner--the
Indian--were lost sight of in the discussion; and it was a significant
question asked by an Indian messenger of the agent of the English
_Ohio Company_: "Where is the Indian's land? The English claim it all
on one side of the river, and the French on the other: where does the
Indian's land lie?"

The territorial question was brought to an issue when, in 1753, a
company of English traders and settlers commenced exploring the
head-waters of the Ohio. The French opposed their operations by force.
George Washington was sent by the Virginia authorities to remonstrate
with the French. It was of no avail. The English determined to oppose
force to force; and in the vicinity of the now-flourishing city of
Pittsburg, in western Pennsylvania, the "French and Indian War" began.
Provincial troops were raised, and armies came from England. Extensive
campaigns were planned, and attempts were made to expel the French
from Lake Champlain and the southern shore of Lake Ontario. Finally,
in 1758, three armies were in motion at one time against French posts
remote from each other--Louisburg, in the extreme east; Ticonderoga,
on Lake Champlain; and Fort Du Quesne, where Pittsburg now stands.
General Sir James Abercrombie commanded the expedition against
Ticonderoga, accompanied by young Lord Howe as his lieutenant. The
French were under the command of the marquis Montcalm, who was killed
at Quebec the following year. The English and provincial troops
rendezvoused at the head of Lake George, went down that sheet of
water, attacked Ticonderoga, and were repulsed with great loss. It was
this portion of that campaign in which the soldier served who kept the
Journal given in the succeeding pages. It is a graphic outline
picture, in few and simple words, of the daily life of a common
soldier at that time.

During the campaign of 1759, Quebec was captured by the army under
Wolfe; Lord Amherst, more successful than Abercrombie, drove the
French from Lake Champlain; Sir William Johnson captured Fort Niagara;
and all Canada was in virtual possession of the English, except
Montreal. That fell early in the Autumn of 1760; and the struggle for
supremacy in America, between the French and English, was ended for
ever.

                                        L.




MILITARY JOURNAL FOR 1758.


[Illustration: Lemuel Lyon
FAC-SIMILE OF A PORTION OF THE MANUSCRIPT JOURNAL.]

April 5 1758. I Lemuel Lyon of Woodstock Inlisted under Captain David
holms of Woodstock in newingLand For this present Cannody
Expordition[1]--I Received of Captain Holms £2.0s.0d.

                   [Footnote 1: Canada expedition.]

May 30. Received £3,-16-0.

June, 2nd. We arrived at Colonal Maysons at 12 o'Clock and marched
from their to Landard[2] Abits & Sergent Stone treated us their--then
we marched to mansfield to Deacon Eldridgs about four o'clock--then we
marched to Bolton to Landard trils, and we gave 7d a night for horse
keeping.

                   [Footnote 2: Landlord. The proprietor of an inn or
                   tavern was universally called _landlord_. The title
                   is still very prevalent.]

Wednesday 7th. We had Carts to press,[3]--then we marched of from
their to Landard Strengs in Harford and from their to Landard Geds &
had raw Pork for dinner--then we marched to Landard Crews and the
Chief[4] lodges their--My mess lodged at a private house one Daniel
Catlins.

                   [Footnote 3: To take carts for the military
                   service. Under martial law, any private property
                   may be used for the public good. A just government
                   always pays a fair price for the same.]

                   [Footnote 4: Probably General Lyman, who was the
                   commander-in-chief of the Connecticut forces at
                   that time.]

Thursday 8th. Marched of and arived at Landard Gessels and their we
went to Brecfirst and then we marched from their to our stores in
Litchfield[5] to Squire Sheldings and then to Landard Buels and lodged
their and our Captain was sent for to a man in another Company that
had fits.

                   [Footnote 5: In Litchfield county, Connecticut.]

Friday 9th. Then marched from their and we had nu teams presed their
and we arrived at Landard Hollobuts in Goshen from their to widow
Leggets in Cornwell[6] and from their to Coles in Cainan[7] & lodged
their.

                   [Footnote 6: Cornwall.]

                   [Footnote 7: Canaan.]

Saturday 10th. Marched to Lawrences and from thence to Landard Bushes
in Shefield 7 mile and went to diner--thence marched and arived at one
Garnt Burges and lodged their and our Ensign went to Prayer with us--

Sonday 11th. Marched into the Paterroon Lands[8] to Landard Lovejoys &
went to diner had a hard shower then marched into Cantihook[9] to one
Hayer Carns the Stone house & lodged their & from thence to Cantihook
Town to one Bushes and slept their.

                   [Footnote 8: Livingston's manor, in Columbia
                   county. The estates of Livingston, Van Rensselaer,
                   and others, who received grants of land from
                   government, on certain conditions, in order to
                   encourage immigration and agriculture, were called
                   Patroon Lands, and the proprietors were entitled
                   Patroons, or patrons.]

                   [Footnote 9: Kinderhook.]

Monday 12th. At Cantihook.

Tuesday 13th. Marched and arived at the half way house in Albany &
Bated, & then into Green Bush[10] by Son down and lodged their in
Ranslays Barn.

                   [Footnote 10: Now East Albany, on the east side of
                   the Hudson river.]

Wednesday 14th. Stil at Albany and their I first shifted my clothes
and washed them--then we had 6 rounds of powder & ball & had orders
from Colonel Whiting to go to Senakada[11]--this day Asel Carpenter
came to Albany.

                   [Footnote 11: Schenectady.]

Thursday 15th. We went over the River Early to receive our rations in
provision and in money and we marched 2 Miles and stoped and refreshed
ourselves their half an hour and Lieut. Smith came up and we received
our Abilitan money.[12]

                   [Footnote 12: Billeting-money--that is, money to
                   pay for lodgings at private houses. When soldiers
                   are quartered at private houses, it is said that
                   such ones are _billeted_ at such a house, &c.]

Friday 16th. We had Prayers in our company at 3 Ock then all marched
of but 14 and they stayed here to guard Lieut Smith and the money and
yesterday Mr. Holmes sot of for Home and I giv 5 pence for carring my
letter--we stayed here til 5 oclock this afternoon and we heard
nothing from Lieut Smith and we had no provisions so we marched for
Scanacata[13] and we got in at Son down well & their was a Larrom[14]
this night.

                   [Footnote 13: Schenectady.]

                   [Footnote 14: Alarum, or alarm.]

Saturday 17th. Stil at Schenacata[15] and we moved into our Barrocks
and Barnabas Evings was taken poor with a working in the Body Ben
denny was taken very poor.

                   [Footnote 15: Schenectady.]

Sonday 18th. I was first called upon guard with 15 more. My turn came
first at 11 oclock--this afternoon 3 ock Lieut. Smith come up with our
abilitan money.

Monday 19th. Stil at Schenacata and their was a rigiment of province
men[16] come up to Schenacata and this night 25 of our men went over
the River west 1 mile to guard wagon Horses--this day a short training
1 Regiment.

                   [Footnote 16: Provincial troops, or American
                   soldiers. The English troops were called regulars.]

Tuesday 20th. Their marched of 3 Hundred of the Bay Forces[17] for
Fort Edward[18] and I received my abilitan in full £1.8s.0d.

                   [Footnote 17: Massachusetts Bay troops. The
                   Massachusetts colony was called _Massachusetts Bay_
                   until after the War for Independence.]

                   [Footnote 18: Fort Edward was situated upon the
                   east bank of the Hudson, about fifty miles north
                   of Albany. The fort was built by General Lyman, of
                   Connecticut, in 1755, while that officer was
                   encamped there with about six thousand troops,
                   awaiting the arrival of General William Johnson,
                   the commander-in-chief of the expedition against
                   the French at Ticonderoga and Crown Point. A
                   portion of the site of the fort is now (1854)
                   occupied by the flourishing village of Fort Edward.
                   Some of the embankments are yet visible near the
                   river. It was near this fort that Jane McCrea was
                   killed and scalped, in 1777.]

Wednesday 21st. Stil hear and we were imbodied for prayers in the
morning and then trained a little. Corperal Carpenter was taken poor.

Thursday 22d. Had orders to march to the half moon[19] and Captain
Leneses company to & at 7 oclk we marched and arivd at Tess-ceune[20]
and Lodged their at Landard Abraham Grotes.

                   [Footnote 19: Near Waterford, on the west side of
                   the Hudson river, thirteen miles north from
                   Albany.]

                   [Footnote 20: Niskayuna, a short distance from
                   Waterford, and remarkable as a settlement of
                   Shaking Quakers.]

Friday 23d. Marched in the rain and very gresy traviling it was and we
Arivd at Teburth and from thence to the place cald Lowdins Ferry[21]
to Landard Fungdors and from thence to the half moon & Lodged their.

                   [Footnote 21: On the Mohawk, about five miles above
                   Cohoes Falls. It was the chief crossing-place for
                   troops on their way north from Albany. There the
                   right wing of the American army, under Arnold, was
                   encamped, while General Schuyler was casting up
                   entrenchments at Cohoes Falls, a few weeks before
                   the Saratoga battles, in 1777.]

Saturday 24th. I received a Letter from John at the half moon and from
thence we marched & Arived at Stil Water[22] & Lodged their & Barnabas
Evings was poor.

                   [Footnote 22: Stillwater is on the west bank of the
                   Hudson, in Saratoga county, twenty-four miles north
                   from Albany. The battle of Bemis's heights was
                   fought near there, in 1777, and is sometimes known
                   as the battle of Stillwater. Opposite the mouth of
                   the Hoosick river, at Stillwater, was a stockade,
                   called Fort Winslow.]

Sonday 25th. We got 2 Battoes[23] to carry our packs up to
Salatogue[24] and we went a foot & 8 of our men were draun out to stay
at Salatogue--Captain Lewis shot at an Indian and kild him & sot in
the Battoe--from Salatogue we marched on to Fort Miller[25] and Lodged
their.

                   [Footnote 23: A batteau is a kind of scow or
                   flat-boat, used on shallow streams like the Hudson
                   above Waterford.]

                   [Footnote 24: Saratoga. This settlement was near
                   the mouth of the Fish creek, on the south side. The
                   village of Schuylerville is just across the stream,
                   on the north side. On the plain, in front of the
                   village of Schuylerville, was a regular
                   quadrangular fortification, with bastions, called
                   Fort Hardy. It was erected in 1756, and named in
                   honor of the governor of New York at that time.]

                   [Footnote 25: On the west side of the Hudson, six
                   or eight miles below Fort Edward. The river is
                   there broken by swift rapids. During this campaign,
                   Major (afterward General) Putnam was here surprised
                   by a party of Indians, and boldly descended the
                   rapids in a canoe, and escaped. It was a feat they
                   never dared to attempt, and they felt certain that
                   he was under the protection of the Great Spirit.
                   Here a stream called Bloody Run enters the Hudson.
                   It is so named because a party of soldiers from the
                   garrison, in 1759, went there to fish, were
                   surprised by the Indians, and nine were killed and
                   scalped.]

Monday 26th. Rainy and wet--I come up the River in a Battoe to Fort
Edward to the incampment--their we drad 1/2 a pound of powder and 10
Bullets a peace and 8 days provision in order for to march to the
Lake[26]--Barnabas Evings was very poor with fever nago[27] and was
forst to stay behind & David Bishop with him--we Lodged in Bush tents
and very wet it was.

                   [Footnote 26: Lake George.]

                   [Footnote 27: Fever-and-ague.]

Tuesday 27th. Marched all of Colonel Phiches[28] Regiment that were
hear with 3 teams to carry the officers we arrived at the half way
Brook[29] and their a great percel stashond for a while & from thence
we Marched to Lake George and went over upon the hill East & their
Encamptt one with myself went upon guard this night.

                   [Footnote 28: Fitch's.]

                   [Footnote 29: Afterward called Snook's creek. It
                   enters the Hudson three miles below Fort Edward.]

Wednesday 28th. We cleard our ground and pitchd our tents I sent 2
letters home.

Thursday 29th. Stil here General Limon[30] & Colonel Phiches Regiments
come up to the Lake this day I washed my Cloths 1 more rigiment come
up.

                   [Footnote 30: General Phineas Lyman, who built Fort
                   Edward. He was a native of Durham, Connecticut,
                   where he was born in 1716. He completed his
                   education at Yale college, and afterward became an
                   eminent lawyer. He was appointed commander-in-chief
                   of the Connecticut forces in 1755, and in the
                   expedition to Lake George deserved all the honor
                   awarded to General Johnson, who was jealous of
                   Lyman's abilities as a soldier. Lyman did his duty
                   nobly, and was but little noticed. Johnson was
                   unfit for his station, but being a nephew of Sir
                   Peter Warren, then a popular English admiral, he
                   received the honor of knighthood, and the sum of
                   twenty thousand dollars, for his services in that
                   campaign! General Lyman served with distinction
                   until the close of the campaign in 1760, and in
                   1762 commanded the American forces sent against
                   Havana. He was in England about eleven years, and,
                   after his return, went with his family to the
                   Mississippi, where he died in 1788.]

Friday 30th. This day there was a very unhapy mishap fel out in the
province forces & that was 1 **** shot one **** partly through the
body but did not kil him the man which was shot lived at Bridgwater
to day they drawd out 9 men to go in Battoes up the Lake.

Saturday July 1st. Colonel Worster[31] & his rigiment came up to day &
3 of our sick men 1 of them Brot nuse that one man shot another by
accident at Schenacata & an hour after he died to day our Chapling[32]
came up &. 1 of Magor Rogers[33] men came in that had bin gorn 7 days
& Expected to be gorn but 2 he was so beat out that he could not tel
what had becom of tother. this night I went upon a batto and guarded
Colonel Phiches Tub of Butter.

                   [Footnote 31: Colonel David Wooster, of
                   Connecticut, the eminent general of the Revolution,
                   who was killed at Ridgefield, while engaged in the
                   pursuit of Tryon, after the burning of Danbury, in
                   the spring of 1777. He was born in Stratford,
                   Connecticut, in March, 1710, graduated at Yale
                   college in 1738, and soon afterward received the
                   appointment of captain of a vessel of the
                   coast-guard. He was in the expedition against
                   Louisburg in 1745. He afterward went to England,
                   where he was a favorite at the court of George II.,
                   and received the appointment of captain in the
                   regular service, under Sir William Pepperell. He
                   was promoted to a colonelcy in 1755, and rose to
                   the rank of brigadier before the close of the
                   French and Indian war. He was one of the most
                   active men in getting up the expedition against
                   Ticonderoga, in 1775, which resulted in the capture
                   of that fortress, and also Crown Point, by Colonel
                   Ethan Allen and Benedict Arnold. Wooster was
                   appointed one of the first brigadiers of the
                   continental army, in 1775, and third in rank. He
                   was also appointed the first major-general of the
                   militia of his state, when organized for the War
                   for Independence; and in that capacity he was
                   employed, with Arnold, Silliman, and others, in
                   repelling British invasion in 1777. He lost his
                   life in that service. His remains were buried at
                   Danbury; and in 1854 a monument was erected over
                   his grave by his grateful countrymen, at the
                   expense of his native state.]

                   [Footnote 32: Chaplain.]

                   [Footnote 33: Commander of a corps of rangers, who
                   performed signal services during the greater part
                   of the French and Indian war. He was the son of an
                   Irishman, an early settler of Dunbarton, in New
                   Hampshire. He was appointed to his command in 1755,
                   and was a thorough scout. In 1759, he was sent by
                   General Amherst to destroy the Indian village of
                   St. Francis. In that expedition he suffered great
                   hardships, but was successful. He served in the
                   Cherokee war in 1761, and in 1766 was appointed
                   governor of Michilimacinac, where he was accused of
                   treason, and sent to Montreal in irons. He was
                   acquitted, went to England, and, after suffering
                   imprisonment for debt, returned to America, where
                   he remained until the Revolution broke out. He took
                   up arms for the king, and in 1777 went to England,
                   where he died. His "Journal of the French and
                   Indian War" is a valuable work.]

Sonday 2. In the fore noon I went to meting & heard Mr. Eals his text
was in the 5th Chapter of James 16th verse a good sermon I rote a
letter & sent home & in the after noon to meeting again.

Monday 3d. Yesterday Mager putnoms S Company came up and this morning
Mager putnom[34] come up and the Connetticuts rigiment were Imbodied
for to learn how to form your front to the Right and left for Jineral
Abbacromba[35] and his A de Camp to vieu.

                   [Footnote 34: Israel Putnam, afterward the
                   Revolutionary general. He was born in Salem,
                   Massachusetts, in January, 1718. He was a vigorous
                   lad, and in 1739 we find him cultivating land in
                   Pomfret, Connecticut, the scene of his remarkable
                   adventure in a wolf's den, so familiar to every
                   reader. He was appointed to the command of some of
                   the first troops raised in Connecticut for the
                   French and Indian war in 1755, and was an active
                   officer during the entire period of that conflict,
                   especially while in command of a corps of rangers.
                   He was ploughing in his field when the news of the
                   skirmishes at Lexington and Concord reached him. He
                   immediately started for Boston, and, at the head of
                   Connecticut troops, was active in the battle of
                   Bunker Hill. He was one of the first four
                   major-generals of the continental army appointed by
                   Congress in June, 1775, and he was constantly on
                   duty in important movements until 1779, when a
                   partial paralysis of one side of his body disabled
                   him for military service. He lived in retirement
                   after the war, and died at Brooklyn, Windham
                   county, Connecticut, on the 29th of May, 1790, at
                   the age of seventy-two years.]

                   [Footnote 35: General James Abercrombie, the
                   commander-in-chief of the campaign. He was
                   descended from an ancient Scotch family, and,
                   because of signal services on the continent, was
                   promoted to the rank of major-general, the military
                   art having been his profession since boyhood. He
                   was superseded by Lord Amherst, after his defeat at
                   Ticonderoga, and returned to England in the spring
                   of 1759.]

Tuesday 4. This day I cut my hat and received my amanition and
provision for 4 days and made radey for to go on.

Wednesday 5th. This day the Army by son rise got ready for to March
and Marched of by Water, and Arived at the Saberday point[36] & stayed
their til midnight then Marched again to the first narrows & Landed
their and went down.

                   [Footnote 36: Sabbath-day Point. This is a fertile
                   little promontory, jutting out into Lake George
                   from the western shore, a few miles from the little
                   village of Hague, and surrounded by the most
                   picturesque scenery imaginable. It was so named, at
                   this time, because it was early on Sunday morning
                   that Abercrombie and his army left this place and
                   proceeded down the lake. There a small provincial
                   force had a desperate fight with a party of French
                   and Indians, in 1756, and defeated them.
                   Abercrombie's army went down the lake in batteaux
                   and whaleboats, and reached the Point just at dark.
                   Captain (afterward General) Stark relates that he
                   supped with the young lord Howe that evening, at
                   the Point, and that the nobleman made many anxious
                   inquiries about the strength of Ticonderoga, the
                   country to be traversed, &c., and, by his serious
                   demeanor, evinced a presentiment of his sad fate.
                   He was killed in a skirmish with a French scout two
                   days afterward. His body was conveyed to Albany, in
                   charge of Captain (afterward General) Philip
                   Schuyler, and buried there. He was a brother of the
                   admiral and general of that name, who commanded
                   the British naval and land forces in America in
                   1776.]

Thursday 6th. 12 A Clock at night we marched of again[37] & landed at
the 1st narrows & then we Marched on to the falls[38] within 2 miles
of the fort and there we was attackt by the Enemy[39] and the
Engagement held 1 hour and we kiled and took upwards of 2 & 50, & of
Captain Holmes Company we had 3 Men wounded. Sergent Cada Sergent
Armsba and Ensign Robbins & at Sondown the French come out again 5
thousand strong and our men came back again to the Landing place &
Lodged their.

                   [Footnote 37: "The order of march," says Major
                   Rogers, "exhibited a splendid military show." There
                   were sixteen thousand well-armed troops. Lord Howe,
                   in a large boat, led the van of the flotilla,
                   accompanied by a guard of rangers and expert
                   boatmen. The regular troops occupied the centre,
                   and the provincials the wings. The sky was clear
                   and starry, and not a breeze ruffled the dark
                   waters as they slept quietly in the shadows of the
                   mountains. Their oars were muffled, and, so
                   silently did they move on, that not a scout upon
                   the hills observed them; and the first intimation
                   that the outposts of the enemy received of their
                   approach was the full blaze of their scarlet
                   uniforms, when, soon after sunrise, they landed and
                   pushed on toward Ticonderoga.]

                   [Footnote 38: Rapids in the stream which forms the
                   outlet of Lake George into Lake Champlain. Here are
                   now extensive saw and grist mills. The distance
                   from the foot of Lake George to Fort Ticonderoga is
                   about four miles.]

                   [Footnote 39: The English lacked suitable guides,
                   and became bewildered in the dense forest that
                   covered the land. Lord Howe was second in command,
                   and led the van, preceded by Major Putnam and a
                   scout of one hundred men, to reconnoitre. The
                   French set fire to their own outpost, and
                   retreated. Howe and Putnam dashed on through the
                   woods, and in a few minutes fell in with the French
                   advanced guard, who were also bewildered, and were
                   trying to find their way to the fort. A smart
                   skirmish ensued, and, at the first fire, Lord Howe,
                   another officer, and several privates, were killed.
                   The French were repulsed, with a loss of about
                   three hundred killed, and one hundred and forty
                   made prisoners. The English battalions were so much
                   broken, confused, and fatigued, that Abercrombie
                   ordered them back to the landing-place, where they
                   bivouacked for the night.]

Friday 7th. Majer Rogers went down to the mils and drove them of there
from & kild and took upwards of 150 & at Son down the last of the Army
marched down to the Mils and Majer putnom made a Bridge over by the
Landing place this night we lodged by the Mils.

Saturday 8th. Then marched back 2 or 3 rigiments to the Landing place
to guard & help Get up Artillira and we worked all the fore noon
onloading the Battoes and at noon we set out down to the Mils with the
Artillira & we got near the Mils and we had orders to leave the
Artillira[40] their and go back & get our arms and we went down to the
Mils of our rigiment 2 Hundred were ordered to go over on the point to
keep the French from Landing their and we stayed while next morning
son 2 hours high & when we came in all our army and Artillira was gorn
back & the Mils fired and we marched back to the Landing place and had
to secure matter of 200 Barrels of Flour & we heard the French were a
coming upon us and we stove them all and come of us as soon as we
could and about 10 Ock we sot sail and & by Son down we arrived at
Lake George[41] according to all accounts the Engagement began about
10 clock and held 10 Hours steady and we lost 3 Thousand rigulars.

                   [Footnote 40: This was Abercrombie's fatal mistake.
                   He sent an engineer to reconnoitre the fort and
                   outworks. The engineer reported the latter to be so
                   weak, in an unfinished state, as to be easily
                   carried, without artillery, by the force of English
                   bayonets. The difficulties in the way of heavy
                   cannons, in that dense forest, were very
                   formidable; and Abercrombie was willing to rely
                   upon sword and bayonet, on the strength of his
                   engineer's report. That functionary was mistaken;
                   and when the English approached the French lines,
                   they found an embankment of earth and stones, eight
                   feet in height, strongly guarded by _abatis_, or
                   felled trees, with their tops outward. The English
                   made a furious attack, cut pathways through these
                   prostrate trees, and mounted the parapet. They were
                   instantly slain, and thus scores of Britons were
                   sacrificed, by discharges of heavy cannons. When
                   two thousand men had fallen, Abercrombie sounded a
                   retreat, and the whole British army made its way to
                   the landing-place at the foot of Lake George, with
                   a loss of twenty-five hundred muskets. They went up
                   the lake to Fort William Henry, and the wounded
                   were sent to Fort Edward and to Albany. At his own
                   solicitation, Colonel Bradstreet was sent to attack
                   the French fort Frontenac, where Kingston now
                   stands, at the foot of Lake Ontario; and General
                   Stanwix proceeded to erect a fort toward the
                   head-waters of the Mohawk, where the village of
                   Rome now flourishes.]

                   [Footnote 41: The head of the lake was especially
                   designated as "Lake George." There was the
                   dilapidated fort William Henry, built by Sir
                   William Johnson, in the autumn of 1755; and, about
                   half a mile southeast from it, Fort George was
                   afterward erected. The ruins of its citadel may yet
                   (1854) be seen.]

Monday 10th. Stil at Lake George in our old encampment 2 Cannon and 2
morter peaces all of them Brass come into Lake George to day.

Tuesday 11th. I washed my Clothes to day had Tea for Brecfirst.

Wednesday 12th. To day I was cald upon guard. Stephen Lyon went to
Fort Edward.

Thursday 13th. To day washed My Clothes.

Friday 14th. Nothing remarkable.

Saturday 15th. Nothing remarkable cald out to work.

Sonday 16th. Went to meeting to hear Mr. Pommerai[42] & his text was
in the 16th Chapter of Isaiah the 9th verce in the afternoon went to
hear Mr. Eals and his text was in 4th Chapter of Amos & the 12th verce
Sung the 45 Salm the last time sung the 44th Salm this day Colonel
Dotays Rigiment marched of.

                   [Footnote 42: Pomeroy.]

Monday 17th. This day Sergent Joseph Mathers had a new shirt put on of
70 stripes[43] I washed and at night was caled upon the picket guard
Barny went down to the halfway brook[44] and back again to guard
Artillira.

                   [Footnote 43: Flogging was facetiously termed
                   "putting on a new shirt." Seventy lashes was a
                   pretty severe punishment.]

                   [Footnote 44: This was the outlet of three little
                   lakes, situated about half way between the head of
                   Lake George and the bend of the Hudson at Sandy
                   Hill. They are the head-waters of Clear river, the
                   west branch of Wood creek, which empties into Lake
                   Champlain at Whitehall.]

Tuesday 18th. One Samuel Jonson died very suddenly he belonged to
Captain Latimer Company of new Cannen, Nehemiah Blackmore was whipt 10
stripes for fireing his gun.

Wednesday 19th. This day to work upon the Hospetal gitting timber to
it I went upon the Island[45] to stay thair a week.

                   [Footnote 45: This was Diamond island, lying
                   directly in front of Dunham's bay, and not far
                   from the village of Caldwell. It was so called
                   because of the number and beauty of quartz-crystals
                   found upon it. Burgoyne made it a depôt of military
                   stores when on his way from Canada, by the way of
                   Lake Champlain, in 1777. It was the scene of a
                   sharp conflict between the little garrison and a
                   party of Americans under Colonel Brown, on the 25th
                   of September, 1777, while Gates and Burgoyne were
                   confronted at Saratoga. Brown was repulsed.]

Thursday 20th. Stil at work Colonel Worster sot out to go down to
Albany and a number of men with him this morning 10 Men were a going
to the half way Brook to guard the Post and the Indians way laid them
and kild 9 of them & 1 got in safe and they rallyd out from the Brook
100 & went back to see what was the Matter and they laid wait for them
& they fired upon the front first and kiled 2 Captains and 2
Leiutenants on the spot & our men were supprised and run back all but
a few and they stood a little while & lost 17 men the engagement began
son 2 hours high about a nowr after Leiut. Smith & 200 of our men went
down to help guard the teames down to Fort Edward.

Friday 21st. This day at knight Leiut. Smith came back & very poor he
was the rest of the guard returned well.

Saturday 22d. This day Colonel Partrages[46] rigiment were resolved to
have their full Allowance or go of and they got it[47]--a small shower
& at night our post came in and our Men that stayed behind came up I
received a letter from Home.

                   [Footnote 46: Partridge's.]

                   [Footnote 47: They were volunteers.]

Sonday 23d. Went to meeting and the text was in the 3 chapter of John
& the 16 verse & in the after noon the Text was in the 6 chapter of
Micah 6 & 7 verses this day wet & hard showers.

Monday 24th. This day a week ago Ensign Robins died at Albany this day
Henry Morris came up to Lake George with 2 Waggon Loads of Rum and
sold it right of--

Tuesday 25th. Captain Holmes and 5 of our men went down to the half
way Brook to be stashoned their til Furder orders--at 9 Ock one James
Makmehoon[48] was hanged upon the galloes upon the top of the Rockka
noose[49] our post came in and I was released from the Haspital work.

                   [Footnote 48: M'Mahon?]

                   [Footnote 49: This locality can not be identified.]

Wednesday 26th. Majer putnom had orders to list 400 ranjers and listed
some to day.

Thursday 27th. This day the Captains of the Companys drawed out 9 men
of a company for ranjers.

Friday 28th. There was about 40 teams & wagons a coming up about half
way between Forte Edward and half way Brook and a scout of French &
Indians way laid them and kiled every ox and destroyed all their stors
every thing[50] and about midnight our camps were alarmd of it and
Majer putnom rallyd about a 1000 Men & went after them.

                   [Footnote 50: Rogers, in his Journal, speaks of
                   this occurrence. He says it was on the 27th, and
                   that one hundred and sixteen men were killed, of
                   whom sixteen were rangers.]

Saturday 29th. This day Rogers went upon the track with his
ranjers[51] and sent back for all the picket guard and they went &
this day I was very poor & took a portion of fizik.

                   [Footnote 51: He went out with seven hundred men,
                   to intercept the marauding party, but they
                   escaped.]

Sonday 30th. This morning by break of day som of Majer putnoms men
that he left with the Battoes spied some more a coming down the Lake
and they com & told & Limon rallyd up about 2000 men and went up the
Lake I was poor and went to meeting Mr. Ingarson[52] preach'd & his
text was in salms the 83 & the 14 & 15 & the after noon the text was
in Duteronemy 32 & 29 verse.

                   [Footnote 52: Ingersoll.]

Mon. 31st. 9 of our Newingland Men were put under guard for making a
false larrom about the battoes coming down upon us & also one regular
that Rogers took that desarted last year to the French from us.

Tuesday August 1st. Their was about 700 men went down to the Half Way
Brook to be stashond their and 8 of our company and Captain Holmes
came back.

Wednes. 2. To day Jineral Limon came in of a scout & the men that went
with him and Rogers and putnom went of a scout with 14 or 15 hundred
for 10 days[53] this day Craft died and was buried Stephen Lyon come
of scout.

                   [Footnote 53: Rogers says that, on his return from
                   his attempt to intercept the marauding party, he
                   was met by an express, with orders to march toward
                   the head of Lake Champlain, at South and East bays,
                   to prevent the French marching upon Fort Edward.
                   There he was joined by Major Putnam and Captain
                   Dalyell or D'Ell.]

Thurs. 3rd. Two of our men went out a fishing for 2 days but had poor
luck.

Friday 4th. We had orders to march to Fort Edward & I washed up my
clothes.

Sat. 5th. This morning about half our rigiment marched forward to
build brest Works along upon the road in some bad places we arived at
Fort Edward at 9 O clock & we Built 2 Brest works.

Sonday 6th. We drawd 3 days provision and this afternoon the Rest of
our Rigiment came down and the teams that went up the day Before we
received our pacet[54] of letters from home.

                   [Footnote 54: Packet.]

Monday 7th. Cap.n & all that were able to go were ordered to guard
down to Fort Miller and back again.

Tues. 8th. In the morning we were drawd out for work and worked the
fore noon then we were ordered to fix every Man in the rigiments to
make ready, to go out to help Majer putnom and we met them a coming in
about son down and we helpt them a long as far as we could & that nite
& lay out that nite & 3 of the wounded men died there and Ben Deny for
one.[55]

                   [Footnote 55: A severe engagement took place on
                   Clear river, the west branch of Wood creek, about a
                   mile northwest from Fort Anne village (then the
                   site of a picketed blockhouse, called Fort Anne),
                   between a party of rangers and provincials under
                   Rogers, Putnam, and Captain Dalyell, or D'Ell, and
                   about an equal number of French and Indians under
                   Molang, a famous partisan leader. The English
                   troops were marching when attacked: Putnam was in
                   front, with the provincials; Rogers was in the
                   rear, with his rangers; and D'Ell in the centre,
                   with the regulars. Molang attacked them in front,
                   and a powerful Indian rushed forward and made
                   Putnam a prisoner. The provincials were thrown into
                   great confusion, but were rallied by Lieutenant
                   Durkee, who was one of the victims of the Wyoming
                   massacre twenty years afterward. D'Ell, with Gage's
                   light infantry, behaved very gallantly, and the
                   rangers finally put the enemy to flight. The latter
                   lost about two hundred men. Colonel Prevost, then
                   in command at Fort Edward, sent out three hundred
                   men, with refreshments for the party, and all
                   arrived at Fort Edward on the 9th. This was the
                   relief-party mentioned in the text, under date of
                   the 8th.]

Wed. 9th. We got in about 8 a clock & Buried the dead & the wounded
were dresd & carried over on the Island[56] Powers came up with a load
of Settlers[57] stores and treated us well.

                   [Footnote 56: This is an island in the Hudson,
                   opposite Fort Edward, and known as Rogers's
                   island.]

                   [Footnote 57: Sutler's.]

Thur. 10th. I was cald out to work upon the Block house this day our
post went of home with our letters.

Friday 11th. We went up to guard teams to Half Way Brook and to Build
a Brest Work 36 Ox teams & 6 Wagons.

Sat. 12th. Colonel Phich[58] had a letter from Major putnom at
tiantiroge[59] he is taken prisoner.[60]

                   [Footnote 58: Fitch.]

                   [Footnote 59: Ticonderoga.]

                   [Footnote 60: The Indian who seized Putnam tied him
                   to a tree, and for a time he was exposed to the
                   cross-fire of the combatants. His garments were
                   riddled by bullets, but, strange to say, not one
                   touched his person. He was carried away in the
                   retreat, his wrists tightly bound with cords. The
                   Indians rejoiced over the capture of their great
                   enemy, and he was doomed to the torture. In the
                   deep forest he was stripped naked, bound to a
                   sapling, wood was piled high around him, the
                   death-songs of the savages were chanted, and the
                   torch was applied. Just then a heavy shower of rain
                   almost extinguished the flames. They were again
                   bursting forth with fiercer intensity, when a
                   French officer, informed of what was going on,
                   darted through the crowd of yelling savages, and
                   released the prisoner. He was delivered to Montcalm
                   at Ticonderoga, then sent to Montreal, and, after
                   being treated kindly, was exchanged for a prisoner
                   taken by Colonel Bradstreet at Frontenac.]

Son. 13th. Day the chief of our men upon duty and the rest went to
meeting the afternoon the text was in the 2nd of timothy the 1st
chapter & 10 verce.

Mon. 14. I had nothing to du I rote a letter to John.

Tues. 15. I was upon picit[61] guard & wet and stormy it was 1 of the
regalars whipt for sleping upon guard.

                   [Footnote 61: Picket.]

Wednesday 16. The ranjers discoverd a scout of French & com in to Fort
Edward and all that were able were ready at a minits warning to day I
sent a Letter to John Lyon.

Thursday 17th. w, p, 31 stripes stil & Nothing to do the Liev.ts fixed
up their tents.

Friday 18th. 6 of our men were ordered to go over to work upon the
Block House over the river I was raly tired at night.

Saturday 19th. I washed My clothes Col fitch at Salatogue.

Sonday 20th. We were almost all out upon duty to work at the High Ways
and in the after noon a very hard shower which sot our tents all
aflote.

Monday 21st. I went down to Fort Mizerey[62] & I heard of John Day's
death at Saletogue this day Morris came up and we lived well.

                   [Footnote 62: Fort Misery was a breastwork at the
                   mouth of Moses's kill, or creek, a short distance
                   from Fort Miller, on the east side of the Hudson.]

Tuesday 22d. I went up the river to look for a horse Steven & I was
cald upon picit guard.

Wednesday 23d. I went out to look oxen and was treated well 1 mans gun
went of and cut of his finger we drove out the 2 men out of the Block
House kep the great Cattle.

Thursday, 24th. I was cald out to guard up teams and to work on the
road & had a Jil of rum for it Zachariah Catlin died at Fort Edward.

Friday 25th. I was cald upon the quorter guard & we heard the great
guns that were fired at the Lake[63] they shot at a mark and our
Provinshals beat them & it made them very mad.

                   [Footnote 63: At Fort George, at the head of Lake
                   George.]

Saturday 26. David Lyon and Barnes sot out to go to Albany sick this
day they held a rigimental Court Mershal upon 3 deserters of Captain
Mathers company one William Cannody & William Clemanon were Judged to
have 1000 Lashes and to day receved 200 & 50 stripes a peace tother
was forgiven.

Sonday 27. I was out upon the works at the great Block House we were
out of provision we drawed for 7 days & but 4 gorn so the regalers
shot Pigeons and our men did so to.

Monday 28th. Every Private in our company was out upon duty that was
able, & about 4 a clock we came in and the orders were that every man
should make ready to fire 3 valleys[64] and first they fired the
cannon at the Fort one after tother round the Fort which is 21 then
the small arms & so 3 rounds a piece and then made a great fire on the
Perrade and played round it & 1 Jil of Rum a man aloud for the frollic
& a Barrel of Beer for a Company[65] & very wet knight.

                   [Footnote 64: Volleys.]

                   [Footnote 65: It was the king's birthday. The
                   firing of twenty-one heavy guns formed a royal
                   salute.]

Tuesday 29th. Very wet in the Morning then cleared of cold I went upon
duty and sent a Letter Home.

Friday September ye 1st. Our duty was to help git out the Cannon out
of the Bottom of the river that was dropt in by the means of going to
near the end of the Brig[66] and sunk the scows and drownd 1 ox very
cold work A woman whipt 70 stripes & drumed out of Camp.

                   [Footnote 66: Bridge.]

Saterday 2nd. I was cald upon the pickit guard to day last nite I went
down to Fort Misketor[67] & Smith Ainsworth treated us well.

                   [Footnote 67: Fort Musquito was a breastwork cast
                   up at the mouth of Snooks' creek.]

Sonday 3rd. I was out upon the escort and every man upon som duty I
went to meeting part of the fore noon and the text was in acts 24 & 25
Charles Ripla was put in Ensign.

Monday 4th. Our Post sot of home I went down to Fort Misketor to guard
teams and the Post and the Lobster's[68] and our men hopt &
rassled[69] together to see which would beat and our men Beat.

                   [Footnote 68: This was a nickname for the regular
                   troops, who were dressed in scarlet uniforms.]

                   [Footnote 69: Wrestled.]

Tuesday 5th. Stil & Nothing strange.

Wednesday 6th. Most all of our men upon duty I was to work a making a
road to go up to the great Block House.

Thursday 7th. All our men out upon works guardin teams a great number
of them nigh 100 & when we came back their was a scout com in to Fort
Edward that went out from the Lake they discoverd nothing.

Friday 8th. This day sergent Erls went out to Fort An[70] after the
Con-nu[71] & Lieut. Larnard & Ephraim Ellinghood Knap & John Richason
and Jeb Brooks & Hezekiah Carpenter they 6 of our company 40 in all
went along I went to work at the high way & had half a pint of Rum
for it.

                   [Footnote 70: Fort Anne was erected in 1757, a year
                   before the occurrences here narrated took place. It
                   was a strong blockhouse of logs, with portholes for
                   cannon and loopholes for musketry, and surrounded
                   by a picket of pine-saplings. When the writer
                   visited the spot in 1848, he dug up the part of one
                   of the pickets yet remaining in the earth, and, on
                   splitting it, it emitted the pleasant odor of a
                   fresh pine-log, though ninety years had elapsed
                   since it was placed there. This fort was near the
                   bank of Wood creek, about eleven miles from the
                   head of Lake Champlain, at the village of
                   Whitehall. It was in the line of Burgoyne's march
                   toward the Hudson, in 1777; and near it quite a
                   severe skirmish took place between Colonel Long, of
                   Schuyler's army, and a British detachment under
                   Colonel Hill, on the 8th of July, the day after
                   Ticonderoga was abandoned to the enemy. Victory was
                   almost within the grasp of Colonel Long, when his
                   ammunition failed, and he was compelled to
                   retreat.]

                   [Footnote 71: Canoe.]

Saterday 9th. I was warned a quarter guard and I changed with Moses
Peak and went upon the Escort & got in by 12 a clock I was warned out
to work but did not do much sergent Erls com in with his Con-nu--and
the Jineral was much pleased with it.

Sonday 10. I was upon guard but went to meeting a part of the fore
noon and the text was in the 24 of Acts & 25 verce & the Afternoon the
text was in James the 6th & 12 verce.

Monday 11. I took 4 days provision & Josh Barrit and one ranjer with
me & we went out near fort An and we spied a fire and som person and
we com back and made our report to the Jeneral & he blamed us som and
said we should have a new pilot and go again. Jo Downer put under
guard.

Tuesday 12th. I was freed from duty and we went & split out som plank
to du up our tent.

Wednesday 13th. To work in the Fort a wheeling gravel all day 4
regulars whipt in Fort som for gaming & one for being absent after
being warned upon guard.

Thursday 14th. I was warned on Escort down to Mizzery[72] and flankt
all the day Tuesday 12 at night there was 2 Bonfires & 2 Barrels of
Rum aloud for the Rejoicing of Broad Street's taking Catarocrway.[73]

                   [Footnote 72: Fort Misery.]

                   [Footnote 73: The Indian name of the site of Fort
                   Frontenac (where Kingston, Upper Canada, now
                   stands), taken by Colonel Bradstreet, was
                   Cataraqua. That was also the Indian name for Lake
                   Ontario.]

Friday 15th. Day I was to work over upon the Island & worked hard a
shovling dirt &c Ephraim Ellinghood taken poorly.

Saturday 16th. Day I went to cuting fassheens[74] & stented 4 a peace
in half a day & 12 stakes.

                   [Footnote 74: Fascines--bundles of sticks, mixed
                   with earth, and used for filling ditches in the
                   construction of forts.]

Sonday 17th. All our men upon works Mr. Pomri[75] preachd 1 sermon &
his text in James Chapter 5th & 12 verce Stephen child had a post to
Albany and sot out this day one regular com in that was a fishing at
half way Brook.

                   [Footnote 75: Pomeroy.]

Monday 18th. I was to work over to the Block House and took my Farewel
of working their & all our sick were drawd up & som dischargd.

Tuesday 19th. 4 of our company had a final discharge from the Campain
& sot of home Seth Bassit Jonathan Corbin John Peak & Silas Hoges.

Wednesday 20th. Stil Here the main of us & Nothing remarkable only
almost all our woodstock men came up & with great Joy we recived them
& much more the things that were sent us, I receved a letter from Ben
Lyon.

Thursday 21st. Nothing remarkable this day.

Friday 22nd. Our Woodstock Old melisha[76] sot out home & Lieutenant
Smith & Corperal Peak & William Mercy & Samuel Leavins had a pass to
Albany and went with them along down and Many more that did not Belong
to our Company.

                   [Footnote 76: Militia.]

Saturday 23d. Our Post came up and I received a Letter from home.

Sonday 24th. Mr. Pomry[77] preachd one sermon in the middle of the day
so that the work men might Have som opportunity to hear som his text
was in Ezekiel the 37 Chapter & 36 verce I was to work upon the Island
& I heard part of the sermon.[78]

                   [Footnote 77: Pomeroy.]

                   [Footnote 78: The channel between Rogers's island,
                   on which the great blockhouse was built, and Fort
                   Edward, does not exceed two hundred feet in width.]

Monday 25. Nothing remarkable only Stephen Lyon got hurt Samuel Morris
& Chub went down along to Albany.

Tuesday 26th. One scout went out for 3 days this day a great number of
teams came down from the Lake.

Wednesday 27th. The Thompson men that came up to see us sot out for
newingland and sergent Cromba had a pass to Albany & went down along.

Thursday 28th. Nothing remarkable only the scout came in that went out
for 3 days.

Friday 29th. Nothing remarkable only very long orders &c.

Saturday 30th. Nothing remarkable only the crissning[79] of the Royal
Block House and the whole of our rigiment that were able went over to
work and had a good frolick to drink the Men in Jeneral worked well at
the intrenching round the Block House the trench 3 foot deep.

                   [Footnote 79: Christening.]

Sonday October ye 1st. Nothing remarkable but somthing very strange, &
that is the Camps were so stil and no work going foward nor no prayers
nor no sermon & a Jil of Rum into the Bargain this we had from the
Jenerals our month promised to us yesterday Mr. Pomri went down to
Seratoga to see his son that was sick and to day he come back &c.

Monday ye 2nd. All the rigiment that were able to work went over to
the Block House besides what wos upon guard and they were divided into
4 parties and they that got don first was to have the Best fat sheep 1
sheep to each party I was upon the grass Guard & at night I found it
very tedious Lying out for it stormed exceding hard all night.

Tuesday ye 3rd. Our mes being all of duty we made us up 2 Straw bunks
for 4 of us to lay in and as it hapened we did it in a good time for
it was a very cold night.

Wednesday ye 4th. Being very cold Corperal Sanger & Eliezer Child had
a pas down to Albany & Likewise a small scout went for Number four &
we made our chimney serjant Kimbal was broke and turned into the
ranks.

Thursday 5th. Jeneral Ambross[80] arrived at Fort Edward about 12 a
clock & immediately he went of to the Lake nothing more remarkable to
day.

                   [Footnote 80: General Amherst.]

Friday 6th. Henry Lyon and Ephraim Ellinghood poorly and cleared from
duty 3 men whipt about 3 hundred lashes apeace & 1 woman 2 & 50
Lashes on bear rump.

Saterday 7th. Our Picket went up toward the Half way brook to meet
jeneral Ambros[81] & about 3 a clock he arrived at Fort Edward and at
2 a clock the picket went down with him again and his wagon & 6
horses.

                   [Footnote 81: Amherst.]

Sonday 8. In the fore noon all our men upon works in the afternoon we
were aloud to attend meeting & Mr Pomy[82] Preached one sermon & his
text was in Ezekiel 36 & 37 verce our family this day had a great
rariryty for diner and that was a Bild Puden.

                   [Footnote 82: Pomeroy.]

Monday 9. Nothing remarkable among us this day.

Tuesday 10. I was upon Guard and a very stormy day & Night it was
orders came out strickt that all fires should be put out by 8 of the
clock in the morning and not to have no more til 6 at night & they
that dont obey the orders are to have their chimney tore down & not to
have no other during this campaign Colonel Fitch lost a Barrel of
wine.

Wednesday 11th. Stil warm & wet som of our Rigiment discharged Home
but none of our company.

Thursday 12. A very clear cold morning all our men upon works & upon
guard that were able Colonel Harts Rigiment of the Hampshier march
down to Fort Edward in order for Home.

Friday 13th. All our men upon works again to day 3 dischargd vis
Richard jordin, Stephen Lyon & John Howlet, at night 300 of the Bay
men came down sick & 2 of them that carrad their packs died in the
night.

Saturday 14th. All warned out upon works but the stormy wether defeted
them in it the Regulars which came down from the Lake with us have
orders to march next friday down along in order for their winter
quorters at Hallefax[83] this night the sentry which stood at the
Southerd of the store House spied a man a gitting of Flour and he
haild him 3 times but he would not stop and the sentry fired but did
not hit him & in his hurry he left his tom me hawk[84] & one shoe.

                   [Footnote 83: Halifax, Nova Scotia.]

                   [Footnote 84: Tomahawk.]

Sonday ye 15. Very cold all upon works & guard by son rise this
evening their came in a great number of teams & Samuel Peak Brought
the malancoly news of Stephen Childs being Kilde and skulpt[85] and
another Captivated I was out upon the grass guard.

                   [Footnote 85: Scalped.]

Monday 16th. All upon works & all the teams sot of for the Lake 12 men
taken from the quorter guard to guard teams this evening there came in
a great number of waggons and hundred or better.

Tuesday 17th. Being very pleasant in the Morning then showery & wet
all the rest of the day til 10 a clock at knight--about 12 oclock at
night the teams came in with the Artillira--this day a number of our
men went down to Fort Miller in battoes to carry the sick and Cap.ns
Bag went down & the men stayed out.

Wednesday 18th. Being cold the teams sot out for the Lake--about 40 of
the Kings waggons--this afternoon their was a Lobster[86] Corperel
married to a Road Island whore--our men came in from Fort Miller.

                   [Footnote 86: British regular.]

Thursday 19th. Our rigiment was mustered by 9 a clock in the morning &
our Brigade-major cald over the role of each company and after that we
had a drink of flip[87] for working over at the Royal Block House--at
one of the clock our men were all calld to work--A Court morshol held
at Capt. Holmes tent & Captain Holmes President & at the role of the
Pickit guard their was one Isac Ellis whipt 30 stripes--was to had
50--Col. Henmans[88] men came in loaded with Artillira stores.

                   [Footnote 87: A mixture of beer and rum, warmed by
                   thrusting a hot iron into it.]

                   [Footnote 88: Hinman's.]

Friday 20th. Cold stil & our men all upon works--this afternoon Lieut.
Smith came up to us again from Green Bush, & Shubal child came to his
team.

Saturday ye 21st. Still cold--in the morning our men cald out to work
by sonrise or before & 6 of our company viz. David Bishop Ephraim
Ellingwood Samuel Mercey Nathaniel Abbott David Jewet and Drake
marched of with their Packs--this night their came down a great number
of teams from ye Lake here loded with cannon Balls and Bum shells.
Likewise a number of sick came down.

Sonday 22. The teams set out for ye Lake again--I was upon the quarter
guard--a large number of sick sot out for Home & it yet held cold &
at night it cleared of very clear & stil but very fresing cold & a
black frost.

Monday ye 23rd. I come of guard--Clerk Burrows began his Month with
bess--at night 3 rigiments of Province men came down from ye Lake &
Lodged in the wood near the uper Block House--a number of teames down
from ye Lake Loaded with Artilliry stores.

Tuesday 24th. A number of teames started for ye Lake again--I received
2 Letters from Capt. Benjamin Lyon & 1 from Joshua--the Post came up
yesterday to Fort Edward--This day our drawing & we had good pork--3
rigiments of Bay men moved down along which was Colonel Pribbels[89]
Colonel Williams & Colonel Nichols.

                   [Footnote 89: Prebles.]

Wednesday 25th. Jineral Abbacromba arived at Fort Edward near night
and all our rigiment there were of duty were ordered to be out upon
the perrade with their side arms on but the jineral for Bid it--Col.l
Partrages rigiment came down & some of the Lather caps & stayed Here.

Thursday ye 26th. Stormy morning--snow pretty wet & raw cold--I went
upon the pickit last night and had one Quort of rum for keeping sheep.

Friday 27th. Being lowry & wet one of our men Discharged home & sot
of--Nathaniel Barnes a number of teams sot out for the Brook &
returned again before son down.

Saterday 28th. Being stil cold all our men turned out to work son
rise & that want a Nuf & they sent for every weighter[90] & every one
that belongs to the rigiment--a number of teams sot out down Home ward
& 3 of our company went with them viz. Sergt. Armsba Jonathan Child
and Pain Convis--this after noon the orders came out that every
setler[91] that Belongs to the Provinshols should Quit this place by
the first of November.

                   [Footnote 90: Waiter.]

                   [Footnote 91: Sutler.]

Sonday ye 29th. Rany & wet--about 9 o clock in the morning Every man
in the Rigiment that could go went to the falls[92] to help Draw down
the battoes and very muddy it was.

                   [Footnote 92: The "third fall," as it was called,
                   in the Hudson, at Sandy Hill.]

Monday ye 30th. Being very pleasant in the morning we were all turned
out after Battoes up to the falls & we went twice apeace.

Tuesday ye 31st. All our men turned out by the Revallies[93] Beating
to go after Battoes & jineral Provorce[94] was out amongst our tents
to help turn us out & he said it was the last work we should do that
was flung up to day--I went upon the Quarter guard at noon and they
got down all the Battoes.

                   [Footnote 93: Reveillé.]

                   [Footnote 94: Provost.]

Wednesday November ye 1st. Lowry & wet I come of guard our men all
upon works & 3 rigiments of our Conneticuts came down about noon &
Colonel Whitings had orders to go over to the Royal Block House and
their to remain til further orders and tother 2 rigiments Sot of
Home in Battoes & 2 or 3 rigiments of lobsters--we had orders com
out that we should have 2 days to clean up in & to set for Home on
Sonday--this day I wrote a Letter & sent to John.

Thursday ye 2nd. Very cold--our men turned out to cutting fashheens &
the orders were that it was the last days work that we should do.

Friday ye 3d. Very cold--our men all turned out upon works notwith
Standing yesterdays promise--our men had but poor incouragements to
work & laid but Little weight to what the jineral promised them for he
said the first man that disobeyed his orders again should be shot to
death whatsoever soldier or officer.

Saturday 4th. I was orderly after the jineral & our men all to work a
drawing in Canon into the fort & our quorter guard was not releaved
til after noon & after that orders com out that we should strike our
tents by 8 oclock and be ready to march by 9--one Cimbals got his
discharge from the regular service to day.

Sonday ye 5th. Being very cold it began to rain so that we were
detained but Colonel Whiting Marched of--rainy all day Long--we had
orders to be ready to march at 7 Oclock in the morning.

Monday ye 6th. Cloudy stil--at 8 Oclock we struck our tents & at 9
aclock we marched of & about half after 12 we arrivd at Fort Miller
and made a little stop then marched again and arived at Saratoga Son
about one hour high & made no stop their but marched on about 3 mile
& Encampt in the woods.

Friday ye 10th. Very stormy & snow in the Morning--we drawd 2 days
alowance of provissions but no money and about 2 o clock we sot out
from Green Bush & arivd at Cantihook Town about ten a clock at
knight--13 of us & Lieutenant Larnard.

Saturday 11th. From thence we marched son two Hours high & arivd at
John Hug gar Booms[95] & revived our selves a little & bought som rum
that belonged to Colonel Whitens Rigiment & from thence to Love Joys &
went to supper & from thence to Robberses & lodged their in the
Patterroon lands.[96]

                   [Footnote 95: Hogeboom's.]

                   [Footnote 96: See note 8.]

Sonday 12th. Being stil cold we sot out at Son rise & arived at Bushes
in Sheffield and had a good brecfirst & their was moore with Horses &
from thence to Larrances & revivd our selves their--to Coles & thence
to Seggick in Cornwel & then to Wilcocks in Goshen & Lodged their.

Monday 13th. Cold--I com up to Holleboate & sent my Pack a long from
goshen & then we marched and arived at Litchfield & then to Herrintown
to Wiers & from their to Strongs in Farmingtown & Lodged their.

Tuesday 14th. Very cold & frosty--marched 5 mile through the Meadows &
went to Brecfast and com to Mercies and stayed their & capt.n Holmes
came up.

Wednesday 15th. We marched & arived at Chenys in Bolton and from
thence we marched and Arived at Lees in covantry[97] & Lodged
their--very rainy Stephen Lyon met us with the Horses.

                   [Footnote 97: Coventry.]

Thursday 16th. Being warm & pleasant we arived at Woodstock.

  NOTE.--The soldiers had, necessarily, a great deal of leisure
  during permanent camp-duties, and contrived various ways to amuse
  themselves, and "kill time." In those days the common soldiers
  carried their powder in the horns of cows or oxen, and many
  amused themselves by ornamenting them by a skilful use of their
  knives. Below is a specimen of one of these ornamented horns,
  prepared during the campaign of 1758. Upon it is neatly cut the
  figure of a fortified building (a part of which is seen in the
  engraving), the owner's name, and a verse, as follows:--

  "Eluathan Ives His Horn, Made at Lake George, September ye 22d,
     Ad. 1758.

                    "I, powder, With My Brother Baul
                    A Hero like do Conquer All.
                    Steel not this Horn For Fear of Shame
                    For on it is the Oners name.
                    The Roos is Red, the Grass is Green--
                    The Days Are past Which I Have Seen"

[Illustration: Horn]




A JOURNAL FOR 1775, A. D.




INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.


The following is a literal transcript of a Journal kept by a common
soldier named SAMUEL HAWS, of Wrentham, Massachusetts, who appears to
have been one of the _minute-men_, organized toward the close of 1774
and early in 1775. At that time there were about three thousand
British troops in Boston, under General Thomas Gage, who was also
governor of the colony of Massachusetts. He was popularly regarded as
an oppressor; and act after act of the British government, during a
year preceding, had convinced the American people that they must
choose the alternative to submit or fight. They resolved to fight, if
necessary. During the summer of 1774, the people commenced arming, and
training themselves in military exercises; the manufacture of arms and
gunpowder was encouraged; and throughout Massachusetts, in particular,
the people were enrolled in companies, and prepared to take up arms at
a moment's warning. From this circumstance they were called
"MINUTE-MEN."

With his strong force, Gage felt quite certain that he could suppress
the threatened insurrection, and keep the people quiet. Yet he felt
uneasy concerning the gathering of ammunition and stores by the
patriots at Concord, sixteen miles from Boston; and on the night of
the 18th of April, 1775, he sent a detachment of soldiers to seize
them. They proceeded by the way of Lexington, where they arrived
at dawn of the 19th. The expedition became known, and the country was
aroused. When the British approached Lexington, they were confronted
by about seventy minute-men. A skirmish ensued: eight patriots were
killed, and several were wounded. _That was the first bloodshed of the
Revolution._ The British then went on to Concord, to seize the stores,
where they were again confronted by minute-men. Indeed, they had been
annoyed all the way by them, as they fired from behind buildings,
stone-walls, and trees. They destroyed the stores, and in a skirmish
killed several more American citizens. The country was now thoroughly
aroused, and the minute-men hastened toward Lexington and Concord from
all directions. The British found it necessary to retreat, and nothing
saved the whole troop sent out the night before from utter
destruction, but a strong reinforcement under Lord Percy. The whole
body retreated hastily to Charlestown, and across to Boston, with a
loss, in killed and wounded, of two hundred and seventy-three men.
Intelligence of the tragedy soon spread over the country, and from the
hills and valleys of New England thousands of men, armed and unarmed,
hastened toward Boston, and formed that force (of which our Journalist
was one) that, for nine months, kept the British army prisoners upon
the peninsulas of Boston and Charlestown. By common consent,
Artemas Ward, a soldier of the French and Indian war, was made
commander-in-chief, and he performed the duties of that office with
zeal until he was superseded by Washington, early in July, 1775.




A JOURNAL FOR 1775.

[Illustration: A Journal for 1775 in Wrentham April the 19 Samuel Haws
FAC-SIMILE OF A PORTION OF THE MANUSCRIPT JOURNAL.]


WRENTHAM,[98] April the 19.

About one a clock the minute men[99] were alarmed and met at Landlord
Moons We marched from there the sun about half an our high towards
Roxbury for we heard that the regulars had gone out and had killed six
men and had wounded Some more that was at Lexinton then the kings
troops proceded to concord and there they were Defeated and Drove Back
fiting as they went they gat to charlstown hill that night[100] We
marched to headens at Walpole[101] and their got a little refreshment
and from their we marched to Doctor cheneys and their we got some
victuals and Drink and from thence we marched to Landlord clises
at Dedham[102] and their captain parson and company joined us and then
we marched to Jays and their captain Boyd and company joined us and we
marched to Landlord Whitings we taried their about one hour and then
we marched to richardes and Searched the house and found Ebenezer
aldis and one pery who we supposed to Be torys and we searched them
and found Several Letters about them which they were a going to cary
to Nathan aldis in Boston but makeing them promis reformation We let
them go home then marching forward we met colonel graton[103]
returning from the engagement which was the Day before and he Said
that he would be with us amediately then we marched to Jamicai
plain[104] their we heard that the regulars Were a coming over the
neck[105] then we striped of our coats and marched on with good
courage to Colonel Williams and their we heard to the contrary We
staid their some time and refreshed our Selves and then marched to
Roxbury parade and their we had as much Liquor as we wanted and every
man drawd three Biscuit which were taken from the regulars[106] the
day before which were hard enough for flints We lay on our arms until
towards night and then we repaired to Mr. Slaks house and at night Six
men were draughted out for the main guard nothing strange that night.

                   [Footnote 98: In Norfolk county, Massachusetts,
                   thirty-two miles southwest from Boston.]

                   [Footnote 99: See introductory remarks. The
                   skirmishes at Lexington and Concord occurred early
                   in the morning of this day.]

                   [Footnote 100: See introductory remarks.]

                   [Footnote 101: Twenty-one miles from Boston.]

                   [Footnote 102: Thirteen miles from Boston.]

                   [Footnote 103: Colonel John Greaton. He was a bold
                   officer, and commanded a corps which performed a
                   sort of ranger service. At this time he was only a
                   major. In June following he carried off about eight
                   hundred sheep and lambs, and some cattle, from Deer
                   island. About that time he was promoted to the rank
                   of colonel. In the middle of July, he led one
                   hundred and thirty-six men, in whaleboats, to
                   destroy forage and other property on Long island,
                   in Boston harbor; and at one time he captured a
                   barge belonging to a British man-of-war. In April,
                   1776, he accompanied General Thompson to Canada. He
                   was promoted to the rank of brigadier in the
                   continental army, in January, 1783.]

                   [Footnote 104: Jamaica Plain, six miles from
                   Boston.]

                   [Footnote 105: The isthmus that connected the
                   peninsula of Boston with the main, at Roxbury.]

                   [Footnote 106: The British soldiers were all called
                   regulars. This word denotes soldiers belonging to
                   the regular army, as distinguished from militia.]

D 21. Nothing remarkable this day.

D 22. Nothing Strange this D nor comical.

D 23. Being Sabath day we marched on to the parade their was an alarm
this night but it prouved to be a falce one Some of our men went to
Weymoth.[107]

                   [Footnote 107: Twelve miles southeast from Boston.]

D 24. Nothing strange to day.

D 25. Nothing remarkable to day.

D 26. We were guarded and a party draughted out for the mane guard.

D 27. The inlistment came out to inlist men for the masechusetts
Service Some of our minute men inlisted the Same day but captain Pond
went home and several of his company they went as far as Doctor
cheanys that night and the next morning reached home on monday the
company were called together in order to inlist men Lietunant
messenger with a party went down to Roxbury and we Still remaing in
Mr. Slaks house also on the same day their war four tories caried
throug roxbury[108] to cambrigg[109] from marshfield[110] and their
was a great Shouting when they came through the camp.[111]

                   [Footnote 108: One mile from Boston.]

                   [Footnote 109: Three miles northwest from Boston.]

                   [Footnote 110: Thirty-one miles southeast from
                   Boston.]

                   [Footnote 111: Tories were those who adhered to the
                   British. It is a name derived from the vocabulary
                   of English politics in the time of Charles II. A
                   _tory_, then, was an adherent of the crown; a
                   _whig_ was an opposer of the government. The word
                   was first used in America about 1770.]

D 28. This day our regement paraded and went through the manuel
exesise then we grounded our firelocks and every man set down by their
arms and one abial Petty axedentely discharged his peace and shot two
Balls through the Body of one asa cheany through his Left side and
rite rist he Lived about 24 hours and then expired he belonged to
Walpole[112] and he was caried their and Buried on the 30 day of April
on Sunday after meting this young man was but a few days Before fired
at by one main guard in atempting to pass the guard and was not hurt
in the least.

                   [Footnote 112: Twenty-one miles southwest from
                   Boston.]

D 29. About nine o clock the said cheney died about fore in the
afternoon We had another alarm but their was nothing done.

30th. Being the Lord's day we went to meeting and heard Mr. Adams[113]
and he preached a very Sutable Sermon for the ocation.

                   [Footnote 113: Rev. Amos Adams, a minister at
                   Roxbury. He was a graduate of Harvard college. He
                   died of dysentery, which prevailed in the camp, at
                   Dorchester, on the 5th of October, 1775, in the
                   forty-eighth year of his age.]


MAY.

1d. Nothing very remarkable this day.

2d-11. Nothing of consequence hapened.

12-14. No great for news.

15, 16. No news worth mentioning.

17. At night their was a fire broke out in Boston ocationed by the
kings troops that were a dealing out their Stores when one of the
Soldiers letting a candle fall amongst some powder and set it on fire
which ocationed the Destruction of a great number of Buildings and
killed some Soldiers and destroyed a considerable deal of their
amunition Besides a great quantity of flower.

18, 19. Nothing very remarkable.

20. Nothing strange to day.

21. Being Sunday about eight o clock we were alarmed we heard that the
regulars were a landing at Dorchester Point and that there was two
Lighters gone to Weymoth Loaded with the Kings troops but it was a
false alarm and their was nothing done.[114]

                   [Footnote 114: On Sunday morning, the 21st of May,
                   the British commander sent two sloops and an armed
                   schooner to take off a quantity of hay from Grape
                   island. They were opposed by the people who
                   gathered on the point nearest the island. These
                   finally got two vessels afloat, went to the island,
                   drove the British off, burnt eighty tons of hay,
                   and brought off many cattle. There was some severe
                   fighting during the affair. Mrs. John Adams,
                   writing to her husband, said: "You inquire who were
                   at the engagement at Grape island. I may say with
                   truth, all of Weymouth, Braintree, and Hingham, who
                   were able to bear arms.... Both your brothers were
                   there; your younger brother with his company, who
                   gained honor by their good order that day. He was
                   one of the first to venture on board a schooner, to
                   land upon the island." Mr. Adams was then in the
                   Continental Congress, at Philadelphia.]

22. Nothing to day for news.

23-26. Nothing remarkable.

the 27. At night we heard the report of cannon and of Small arms but
we could not tell from whence it was.[115]

                   [Footnote 115: On Saturday, May 27th, a detachment
                   of Americans was sent to drive all the live stock
                   from Hog and Noddle's islands, near Boston. They
                   were observed by the British, who despatched a
                   sloop, a schooner, and forty marines, to oppose
                   them. They were fired on from the vessels, and
                   quite severe skirmishing continued through the
                   night. The Americans sent for reinforcements, and,
                   at about nine o'clock at night, some three hundred
                   men and two pieces of cannon arrived, commanded by
                   General Putnam in person, and accompanied by Dr.
                   Warren as a volunteer. They compelled the British
                   to abandon their sloop, and the Americans took
                   possession of it. The British lost twenty killed
                   and fifty wounded. The Americans had none killed,
                   and only four wounded. They captured twelve swivels
                   and four four-pound cannon, besides clothing and
                   money.]

the 28. Being Sunday we were informed that the firing we heard
yesterday was at Nedlers[116] Island between the Kings troops and our
men, our men killed several of them and took a number of field pieces
and burnt two Schooners and they did not hurt any of our men.

                   [Footnote 116: Noddle's.]

the 29. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 30. Captain Ponds company moved to comodore Lorings house.[117]

                   [Footnote 117: Probably the house of Joshua Loring,
                   jr., near Roxbury, who was a violent loyalist.
                   General Gage made him sole auctioneer in Boston. He
                   was afterward commissary of prisoners in New York.
                   His wife is referred to in Hopkinson's poem, "_The
                   Battle of the Kegs_."]

the 31. Being election day we drank the Ladies health and success.

June the 1. Nothing remarkable hapened this day.

the 2-8. Nothing remarkable hapened.

the 9. We passed muster Before colonel Robinson[118] and received one
months pay.

                   [Footnote 118: Colonel John Robinson, who was
                   second in command in the skirmish at Concord on the
                   19th of April. He commanded the detachment that
                   guarded Boston neck, for some time. Speaking of
                   that duty, Gordon remarks: "The colonel was
                   obliged, therefore, for the time mentioned, to
                   patrol the guards every night, which gave him a
                   round of nine miles to traverse."]

the 10. Their was a man Whiped for Stealing.

the 11. Their was a soldier died at the hospittle which was the first
that had died of Sickness since we incampt the same day their was two
fire Ships[119] drumed out of the rhodisland compy.

                   [Footnote 119: Harlots.]

the 12. Nothing Strange this day.

the 13. Dito.

the 14. The general[120] seing the reinforcement of the Kings troops
come to Boston ordered the comps to be in readeness also ordered that
a number of teams be imploid in carting fusheens[121] and other
materials for building Brest Works this being on thursday.

                   [Footnote 120: General Thomas, who had command of
                   the right wing, extending from Roxbury to
                   Dorchester. General Artemas Ward was the
                   commander-in-chief until the arrival of Washington,
                   early in July.]

                   [Footnote 121: Fascines. See note 74.]

the 15. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 16. Nothing of consiquence this day.

the 17. It being Saturday the Kings troops Landed at charlestown and
set the whole town on fire and Laid it all in ashes then they
proceeded to Bunkers hill[122] where colonel putnam intrenchet and
after an engagement which Lasted the afternoon the troops took the
Hill and it is said that the nearest computation of the Loss of the
enemy was about 1500 is killed and wounded were alarmed about one o
clock that day and went down to our alarm post and we lay their all
the afternoon and about six o clock the troops fired from their Brest
Work on Boston neck at our people in Roxbury and we staid until the
firing was over and then our regiment was ordered to cambridge to
asist our forces and we reached their about twelve o clock at night
and Lodged in the meting house until break of day being Sunday
we turned out and marched to prosket hill[123] expecting to come
to an ingagement we halted at a house at the bottom of the hill
and fixed for a battle then we marched up the hill where we went to
intrenching about 12 o clock Some of our men went down the hill
towards the troops after Some flower and the troops fired at them and
wounded David Trisdale in the shoulder and another in the Leg about 4
o clock colonel Reed[124] ordered his regiment to march to roxbury and
we arived their about sunset very weary.

                   [Footnote 122: This is a mistake. It was Breed's
                   hill, nearer Charlestown and Boston than Bunker's
                   hill. Colonel William Prescott, and not General
                   Putnam, was entrenched there, and was in command
                   during the engagement. He had been sent with a
                   company, the night before, about a thousand strong,
                   to throw up a redoubt on Bunker's hill. He made a
                   mistake, and performed the work on Breed's hill.
                   The British had no suspicion of the work that went
                   on during that sultry June night, and were greatly
                   alarmed when they saw a formidable breastwork
                   overlooking their shipping in the harbor, and
                   menacing the city. During the engagement, General
                   Putnam was on Bunker's hill, urging on
                   reinforcements for Prescott. Dr. Warren, just
                   appointed major-general, joined Prescott as a
                   volunteer during the battle, and was mortally
                   wounded just as the conflict ended. It must be
                   remembered that the writer of this Journal was in
                   General Thomas's division, which did not
                   participate in the battle of the 17th of June.]

                   [Footnote 123: Prospect hill. The Americans
                   retreated from Breed's and Bunker's hills to Winter
                   and Prospect hills, and Cambridge. The remains of
                   the American entrenchments on Prospect hill were
                   demolished in 1817.]

                   [Footnote 124: Colonel James Reed, of New
                   Hampshire. He was active in the battle of the 17th.
                   He was a brave officer, and was at the head of a
                   regiment at Ticonderoga the following year.]

the 19. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 20. Dito.

the 21. Nothing worth a mentioning.

the 22. Dito.

the 23. Nothing remarkable to day.

the 24. The enemy fired again upon Roxbury about 3 o clock and the
guards fired upon each other and their was one man killed and we were
alarmed.[125]

                   [Footnote 125: The Americans were alarmed on the
                   24th by indications that the whole British army in
                   Boston was about to force its way across Boston
                   neck. At noon they commenced throwing bombshells
                   into Roxbury, but the alert soldiers prevented
                   damage from them, and saved the town. Colonel
                   Miller, of Rhode Island, said in a letter--"Such
                   was the courage of our men, that they would go and
                   take up a burning carcass or bomb, and take out the
                   fuse!"]

the 25. Sunday Nothing remarkable.

the 26. This morning very early our men went to set Browns house on
fire but did not efect it.[126]

                   [Footnote 126: The house and barns of Thomas Brown
                   were on the neck, about a mile from Roxbury
                   meeting-house, and were occupied by the British
                   advanced guard. Two Americans tried to set fire to
                   the barn on the 24th, and were killed.]

the 27. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 28. We moved to a little house that capt Bligs formerly Lived in
but we Soon moved from there to Slaks house again.

the 29. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 30. Nothing hapened only there was a Smart shower.


JULY.

the 1. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 2. Dito.[127]

                   [Footnote 127: The British again hurled some shells
                   into Roxbury on Sunday, the 2d of July, but the
                   extent of the damage was setting fire to one house,
                   which was consumed.]

the 3. Dito.[128]

                   [Footnote 128: George Washington was chosen
                   commander-in-chief of the continental armies on the
                   15th of June, 1775. He set out for the headquarters
                   of the army at Cambridge on the 21st, reached there
                   on the 2d of July, and took formal command of the
                   army on the morning of the 3d.]

the 4. Their was a flag of truce come out of town to our centry on the
neck.

the 5. Nothing worth a mentioning to day.

the 6. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 7. Early in the morning we were alarmed and all of us repaired to
our alarm Post and we had not been their Long before we Saw Browns
house and Barn on fire and they were both consumed[129] these were Set
on fire by some of our brave ameracans and they took one gun and too
Bagonets and one halbert.

                   [Footnote 129: A party of volunteers, under Majors
                   Tupper and Crane, attacked the British advanced
                   guards, drove them in, and set fire to Brown's
                   house. They took several muskets, and retreated
                   without loss.]

the 8, 9. Nothing remarkable.

the 10. About Eleven o clock their was a party of Soldier sent to
germantown[130] to get some whale Boats they marched down their that
night the next night being clear they set out for Long island and
arived there in a Short time then they Plundred the island and took
from thence 19 head of horned cattle and a number of Sheep and three
Swine[131] also eighteen priseners and amongst them were three women.

                   [Footnote 130: It is impossible to identify this
                   place. A letter, dated on the 12th, says, "We have
                   just got, over land from Cape Cod, a large fleet of
                   whaleboats," &c., &c. The place alluded to in the
                   text was probably near Boston.]

                   [Footnote 131: This party went from Roxbury camp.
                   The report says that they brought from Long island
                   "fifteen prisoners, two hundred sheep, nineteen
                   cattle, thirteen horses, and three hogs." The
                   prisoners were taken to Concord.]

the 11. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 12. Major Tupper and his company returned to Roxbury with their
prisoners and the same day their was a Party draughted out to go to
Long island to burn the Buildings their when they were atacked by the
Kings troops and had a smart engagement[132] but we Lost but one man
and he belonged to Captain Persons company of Stoughton.[133]

                   [Footnote 132. The party under Colonel Greaton,
                   mentioned in a preceding note.]

                   [Footnote 133: Twenty miles south from Boston.]

the 13. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 14. Nothing remarkable untill night and then their was a man
killed at the main guard with a canon Ball.

the 15-17. Nothing remarkable.

the 18. Nothing remarkable this day.[134]

                   [Footnote 134: A strong party of Americans took
                   possession of an advanced post in Roxbury, upon
                   which the British kept up an incessant fire.]

the 19. We had an alarm and we went to our alarm Post and stayed their
about one hour and could not discover any thing and so we returned to
our Baracks again.

the 20. Their was a man killed who belonged to captain Bachelors
company in Col Reeds Regiment he was killed by a guns going
accidentely of, he was shot about Seven o clock and died about nine o
clock the same night his name was Wood Belonged to upton[135] he was
about 24 or 25 years of age.[136]

                   [Footnote 135: Upton is thirty-five miles southwest
                   from Boston.]

                   [Footnote 136: The 20th was observed throughout the
                   camps as a day of fasting and prayer. Before
                   daylight that morning, a party from Heath's
                   regiment landed on Nantasket point, set fire to the
                   lighthouse, and brought away a thousand bushels of
                   barley and a quantity of hay.]

the 21-24. Nothing remarkable.

the 25. Our Regement with four more were under arms and marched
towards cambridg to meet general Ward.

the 26. General Heaths regement moved from Dorchester to cambridg and
Jeneral Wards regement moved from cambridg to Dorchester and took
general Heath's Baracks.

the 27. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 28. Dito.

the 29. Nothing bad.

the 30. Being Sunday we had an alarm and went to our Fort[137] the
same day there was a party of men draughted out to go to the Light
house and major tupper was comander of the party.[138]

                   [Footnote 137: This was a very strong quadrangular
                   work, on the highest eminence in Roxbury. It had
                   four bastions, and in every respect was a regular
                   work. It is now well preserved, the embankments
                   being from six to fifteen feet in height from
                   without.]

                   [Footnote 138: On that day the British, five
                   hundred strong, marched over the neck, and built a
                   slight breastwork to cover their guard. The
                   American camp was in alarm all the day, and that
                   night the troops lay on their arms. The tories in
                   Boston were also alarmed, for they dreaded an
                   invasion of the city by their exasperated
                   countrymen.]

the 31. This day major tupper and his men returned to Roxbury with
between thirty and forty prisoners some regulars and some torys and
some mariens[139] and had something of a battle and we lost one man
and another wounded and our men Burnt the Light house and took some
plunder[140] thar was an alarm the firing began first at the floating
Battery and then at the Brest Work and then the troops marched out and
set the george tavern[141] on fire our men took one prisoner and the
same night one of the enemy deserted and came to our centrys at
Dorchester point and brought away with him too guns and too cartridg
Boxes and 60 rounds of cartridgs all in good order and their was
several more deserted to cambridg the same night.

                   [Footnote 139: Marines.]

                   [Footnote 140: The British commenced rebuilding the
                   lighthouse on Nantasket point. Major Tupper, with
                   three hundred men, attacked the working-party,
                   killed ten or twelve men, and took the rest
                   prisoners. He then demolished the works, but,
                   before he could leave, some armed boats came to
                   oppose him. In the skirmishing that ensued,
                   fifty-three of the British were killed or captured.
                   Tupper lost one man killed, and two wounded.]

                   [Footnote 141: A party of British troops sallied
                   out toward Roxbury, drove in the American pickets,
                   and burned the tavern which was situated upon the
                   portion of the neck nearest Roxbury.]


AUGUST DOMINA 1775.

the 1. The floating Battery[142] went up towards Brookline fort[143]
then our men perceiving her move they began to fire at her out of
colonel Reeds fort untill they drove her back to her old place the
same day they fired from Roxbury hill fort and it was said that they
fired through their Baracks.

                   [Footnote 142: When the British built their
                   breastwork on the neck, the Sunday previous, they
                   had a floating battery brought into Charles river,
                   and moored it within three hundred yards of
                   Sewall's point.]

                   [Footnote 143: The Brookline fort was on Sewall's
                   point, between Roxbury and Cambridge. It commanded
                   the entrance to Charles river.]

the 2. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 3. Dito.

the 4. Nothing remarkable to day only I went to the main guard and the
enemy fired at us as we came up.

the 5. Dito.

the 6. Being Sunday nothing remarkable at night I went on the piquet
guard.

the 7. Nothing strange.

the 8. Dito.

the 9. Nothing remarkable this day only I went upon fatigue.

the 10. Nothing strange We had a great rain.

the 11. Their was three men whipt for deserting they were whipt ten
stripes apiece they belonged to the conecticut forces.

the 12. Nothing remarkable to day I went upon fatigue to
Dorchester.[144]

                   [Footnote 144: The village and church of Dorchester
                   was four miles from Boston. The heights of
                   Dorchester are in what is now called South Boston.]

the 13. Being Sunday we went to Hear Mr. Willard[145] and after Meting
our Men went to Entrench down at the George tavern and About Brake of
day they got Hom.

                   [Footnote 145: Joseph Willard, D.D., who was made
                   president of Harvard college in December, 1781. He
                   died in New Bedford, in 1804, at the age of
                   sixty-four years.]

14. Their was Nothing Remarcable I went upon fatigue down to the
George tavern.

15. Two Oclock this Afternoon when the Lobsters[146] fired on our
guards which was returned by our Roxbury fort the fireing was
continued for some time but how much to their Damag we dont know one
of our men was slitely wounded their fireing was from a floating
Batery and it is thought would have killed one or too men if they had
not have Lain down for the Ball passed within about 4 foot of our
Barack the night passed without any alarm.

                   [Footnote 146: A nickname given to the British
                   regulars, on account of their red suits. They were
                   so called in England, as early as the time of Queen
                   Anne.]

the 16. This day they fired at our main guard but no material Damage
was done the remaining part of their mallice seemed to be postponed to
a future season our american guard kept their ground and the night
passed without any alarm &c. &c.

the 17. About nine Oclock the enemy fired upon our main guard and
fatigue men they through 4 Balls and 2 Bombs and one of the Balls
struck 2 guns which belonged to the main guard and the men had them on
their Shoulders but did not hurt them much.

the 18. Behold their Spite this morning before the sun rise the enemy
fired at our working party on the neck this side the george tavern our
rifle men fired at them and it is thought killed too of them but
notwithstanding all their fireing of balls and bombs though some of
them came so near that it could hardly be called an escape yet their
was not one man wounded on our side one bomb was thrown in the evening
but did no Damage one of the enemy came to our centrys and is now in
our guard house.

the 19. I went upon fatigue the morning began with fireing from the
wicked enemy at our guard but did no hurt in the afternoon they rifle
men fired at the enemy and they enemy at them and they wounded one of
the rifle men in the foot Slitely but what Damage we did them is
uncertain let this Suffice for a short acount of the tranactions of
the 19 day.

the 20. I went upon the main guard at night our boats went up with in
gun Shot of the comon[147] and alarmed them by fireing Several guns
and then returned without any Loss on our side.

                   [Footnote 147: The large park, known as Boston
                   Common, extended down to the water's edge, before
                   the flats were filled in.]

the 21. Nothing remarkable hapened this day at night one of the enemy
deserted and came to us.

the 22. We paraded nothing remarkable I went down to the piquet.

the 23, 24. Nothing remarkable.

the 25. A flag of truce came out of town but for what I dont know.

the 26. This morning their was a man ran away from the floating
battery.

the 27. Being Sunday but they make such a fireing over at Bunkers hill
that it seems to be more Like the Kings birth day than Sunday but what
Sucksess they have had we are not able to determine but we heard that
they killed too men and wounded 3 or 4 four more[148]

                   [Footnote 148: About nine o'clock on Sunday
                   morning, the 27th, the British opened a heavy
                   cannonade from Bunker's hill (where they had built
                   a strong redoubt), and from a ship and floating
                   battery in Mystic river. The firing was directed
                   upon the American works on Winter, Prospect, and
                   Ploughed hills. They continued to bombard these
                   works daily until the 10th of September.]

the 28. But they still hold up their firing at Bunkers hill nothing
more remarkable this day.

the 29. I went upon the piquet down to the george tavern and the enemy
fired several small arms at us but did us no Damage.

the 30. Very rainy nothing extraordinary this day.

the 31. Nothing extraordinary this day only it was rainy at night
Lieutenant Foster and four men went down to the piquet.[149]

                   [Footnote 149: There was a famous tree in Boston,
                   under which the patriots had often held meetings
                   since the time of the stamp-act excitement. On that
                   account it was called "Liberty-Tree." It was a
                   noble elm, and stood at the corner of the present
                   Washington and Essex streets. On the 31st of
                   August, 1775, the British cut it down, with no
                   apparent motive but the indulgence of petty spite.
                   An eye-witness of the event says: "After a long
                   spell of laughing and grinning, sweating, swearing,
                   and foaming, with malice diabolical, they cut down
                   a tree, because it bore the name of liberty." A
                   tory soldier was killed by its fall. A poet of the
                   day wrote:--

                     "A tory soldier, on its topmost limb--
                     The Genius of the Shade looked stern at him,
                     And marked him out that same hour to dine
                     Where unsnuffed lamps burn low at Pluto's shrine.
                     Then tripped his feet from off their cautious stand:
                     Pale turned the wretch--he spread each helpless hand,
                     But spread in vain--with headlong force he fell,
                     Nor stopped descending till he stopped in hell!"]


SEPTEM.

the 1. This morning very early just past one o clock the enemy began
to fire from their Brest Work and their floating batery which
ocationed an alarm their fireing Semed to be at our main guard and
piquet they fired a number of guns and threw several bombs and they
were permitted to kill too men the one belongd to Col Huntingtons[150]
Regement and the other belonged to col Davidsons Regement and one of
the riflemen was slitely wounded but see the Providence of god in it
when 6 or 7 hundred men were before the mouths of their canon there
was but too men killed We should not have thought it strange if they
had killed 20 considering the Situation that they were in too of the
regulars centrys deserted about a hour before the firing began this
was the smartest fireing that ever has been this campaign in the
afternoon they fired upon our fatigue party but did no Damage also
about Sunset there was several guns fired on board the Ships there was
several Ships came in to the harbour thus far the proceding of the 1
day.

                   [Footnote 150: Colonel Jedediah Huntington, of
                   Norwich, Connecticut. The British now seemed
                   determined to make a general assault upon the
                   besiegers, and a heavy cannonade was opened
                   simultaneously upon the Americans at Roxbury and in
                   the vicinity of Cambridge.]

the 2. I went down to the right hand of the burying place and we had
not been their Long before we were ordered of and the canon began to
play upon the enemy from Roxbury fort on the hill and the field peices
from the brest work in the thicket the ocation of our mens fireing
upon them was this they had advanced about 30 or 40 rods this side
their other brest work on the neck and were intrenching their[151]
they fired several guns at us but did us no Damage in the afternoon we
went down to our work again expecting every moment when they would
fire at us but they never fired one gun in the afternoon at night thir
was a platform caried down to the thicket in order to mount a canon
their Nothing more remarkable to day.

                   [Footnote 151: They threw up a slight breastwork a
                   little in advance of their lines on the neck, and
                   not far from the George tavern.]

the 3. Being Sunday we turned out about day and went to our alarm post
and it rained and we cam home and John coleman drinkt 3 pints cyder at
one draught nothing more remarkable this day.

the 4. We turned out this morning before day and went to our alarm
post nothing remarkable this day at night I went upon the piquet down
to Lambs Dam[152] nothing more remarkable.

                   [Footnote 152: Lamb's dam was between Roxbury and
                   Dorchester. There the Americans completed a strong
                   work on the 10th of September, and mounted four
                   eighteen-pounders.]

the 5. Nothing remarkable only Benjamin Mc Lain sent home 10 Letters
at one draught by Lieutenant Bacon and Lieutenant Foster had Likt to
have been put under guard for playing ball.

the 6. Nothing remarkable this day at Night our men went down below
the george tavern for a safe guard for the centrys.

the 7. We turned out early this morning and went to our alarm post and
had a smart scrimmage[153] with no enemy and this day I went upon the
creek guard several Ships sailed out of the harbour old White was
buried and their was much joy.[154]

                   [Footnote 153: Skirmish.]

                   [Footnote 154: We can not explain this local
                   allusion.]

the 8. Came of the creek guard and nothing remarkable hapned onely
they enemy fired at our fatigue party but did no damage at night upon
the door guard.

the 9. In the morning the enemy fired upon our fatigue party but did
them no Damage in the afternoon I went upon fatigue at night our men
caried Several canon down into the thicket to the brest works
their.[155]

                   [Footnote 155: The breastworks in the thicket were
                   the Roxbury lines of fortifications in advance of
                   the fort.]

the 10. Being Sunday our men went on fatigue and the enemy fired upon
them and broke three guns that were paraded but hurt no man at night
their was a man deserted from cambridg and went to the enemy.

the 11. We turned out and went to our alarm post and Ensign Parot
shook one of his men for disobying orders this day their was a boat
drove ashore belonging to the regulars and a Seargent and 5 men on
board and they were all taken prisoners at night I went upon the
piquet and was almost frozen to Death.

the 12. Our men went down to Lambs Dam to entrenching not above half a
mile from the enemys brest work but nothing remarkable hapened.

the 13. Colonel Clap officer of the day our men took this day 26
prisoners in mistick[156] river as we heard.

                   [Footnote 156: Mystic.]

the 14. This morning I went upon fatigue down in the Street[157] and
the enemy fired one shot at us and struck the brest work but did no
Damage captain Pond[158] comanded of the party.

                   [Footnote 157: The road leading from Roxbury across
                   the neck into Boston.]

                   [Footnote 158: Captain Pond was from New Hampshire,
                   and was an officer in Colonel Stark's regiment.]

the 15. Their was a regular and too men of wars men[159] ran away Last
night and this morning nothing more remarkable their was 3 guns fired
on board the Ship in cambridg Bay.

                   [Footnote 159: From the vessels known as
                   men-of-war.]

the 16. Nothing remarkable hapened only the regulars fired several
Shot at our men that were upon fatigue but did no Damage.

the 17. Being Sunday I went upon the fatigue and the enemy fired
several times at our men but did no Damage and they threw several
Bombs.

the 18. I came of the creek guard and the enemy fired several canon at
our men but killed none and onely wounded one or too slitely and Last
night their was several men ran away from a man of war and toward
night the enemy fired several Shots from the Ship in cambridg bay and
our men fired one Shot from Prospect hill at the Ship in the Bay but
did not strike her.

the 19. The enemy began to fire about eight oclock into the street but
did no damage except slitely wounding one or too at night I went upon
the piquet and Nothing remarkable hapened also their was a man put
under guard for comeing on to the parade Drunk.

the 20. Nothing remarkable hapened this day the enemy fired one shot
at our fatigue party but did no damage they fired over at Bunkers hill
and threw several Bombs.

the 21. Last night I was on the door guard and this morning the enemy
fired small arms at our men but did no Damage in the afternoon they
fired canon but to no purpose.

the 22. Last night I was upon the door guard this being the Kings
crownation[160] the enemy fired a number of canon and toward night
they put in balls but did no damage.

                   [Footnote 160: Coronation. George III. and his wife
                   Charlotte were crowned on the 22d of September,
                   1761. It was always a holyday next to that of the
                   king's birthday.]

the 23. I went upon fatigue down in the street and the Enemy began to
fire at us about 9 oclock and fired without intermition for some time
bie the best acounts they fired above one hundred balls and our men
fired 3 canon from our brest work near Lams Damb and one of the balls
went into Boston amongst the housen but through the good hand of
Devine providence in all their firing they did not kill one man nor
wound any except one or too slitely.[161]

                   [Footnote 161: Frothingham says: "On the 23d, the
                   British discharged one hundred and eight cannon and
                   mortars on the works at Roxbury without doing any
                   damage."]

the 24. Being Sunday we went to meting and heard a fine Sermon from
psalms 14-11 this day our men went on fatigue as usual but the enemy
did not fire upon them.

the 25. I went on fatigue down in the thicket in the forenoon and at
noon I was taken not well and did not go in the afternoon our men
fired three field peices at the enemy but what execution they did we
canot determine nothing more.

the 26. Nothing remarkable hapened this day onely their was 200 men
draughted out to go to the governors Island to take some cattle.

the 27. Our men went to the Island and took 12 head of Cattle and 2
horses and came of without any Molestation[162] at night I went upon
the piquet and it rained very hard and we turnd in to the housen and
La their Colonel Clap[163] was officer of the piquet.

                   [Footnote 162: This expedition was under Major
                   Tupper. They burnt a fine pleasure-boat just ready
                   to be launched, belonging to some British
                   officers.]

                   [Footnote 163: Of the Rhode Island "Army of
                   Observation," under General Greene.]

the 28. Nothing remarkable hapened this day there was too guns fired
from the ship in Cambrige Bay.

the 29. This day the Ship sailed out of cambridge Bay and their was
another came and took her place at night I went on the piquet without
any supper nothing remarkable.

the 30. This morning our men fired one field peice as the regulars
came to relieve their main guard and that afronted them and they began
to fire their canon from their brest work and floating Batry and they
fired about 30 canon but did no damage also last night their was too
regulars deserted and came to our centrys on the neck nothing more
remarkable this day.


OCTOBER A 1775.

the 1. Being Sunday I went to meting up to the conecticut forces and
Mr. Wilard preacht a Sermon from chronicles the 20th chapter 10-11-12
v also in the afternoon Mr. Wilard preachd a sermon from 1st of
corrintheans 15 ch 54 &. 55 vers, also Last night their was six
mareens dessrtd from on board the Scarborough.[164]

                   [Footnote 164: This was a sloop-of-war, carrying
                   twenty guns.]

the 2. Nothing remarkable hapned this day General Thomas Brigade passt
Mustter about Sunset as our piquet paraded on the grand parade the
enemy fired 3 or 4 shots up to the meeting house one of the balls went
through the shed by the Providence tavern but did no damage of
consequence at night our chimney Swallow went on the piquet for
nothing and found himself.

the 3. Nothing remarkable hapened this day at night I went upon the
piquet.

the 4. We past muster nothing remarkble hapened this day onely their
was four of the enemy deserted at night.

the 5. Nothing remarkable hapened this day onely their was 5 or 6
prisoners went through the camp that were taken at Dartmouth[165] on
board the prize that our men took.

                   [Footnote 165: He probably refers to the prisoners
                   taken in the armed schooner _Margaretta_, at
                   Machias, Maine, in the month of May, by some
                   Americans under Jeremiah O'Brien; or they may have
                   been of the crew of two small cruisers afterward
                   captured by O'Brien. They were taken to Watertown,
                   where the Provincial Congress of Massachusetts was
                   in session.]

the 6. The enemy fired between 80 and 90 Canon at our men but killed
nine onely cut of one mans arm and killed too cows So much for this
day.

the 7. I went upon the creek guard and nothing remarkable hapned at
night their was a regular deserted and the regular guard fired upon
him but did not hurt him.

the 8. Being Sunday it rained and we had no preaching nothing
remarkable hapned at night their was a regular deserted and came to
our men and their was another set out but they were discovered and
they took one of them.

the 9. About eight o clock their was a Rifle man whipt 39 stripes for
Stealing and afterwards he was Drummed out of the camps if the
infernal regions had ben opened and cain and Judas and Sam Haws[166]
had been present their could not have ben a biger uproar.

                   [Footnote 166: The writer of this Journal.]

the 10. I went up on the creek guard and nothing remarkable hapened
their.

the 11. Their was a Rifle man[167] Drummed out of the camps for
threatning his offisers also I went to Cambridg with Boats.

                   [Footnote 167: These riflemen were from Maryland.
                   The company had been raised by order of Congress,
                   and placed in command of Captain Michael Cresap,
                   who, without a shadow of justice, was made to
                   figure unfavorably in the celebrated speech
                   attributed to Logan, the Mingo chief. Proof is
                   abundant that the stain put upon the character of
                   Cresap, by the speech of Logan from the pen of
                   Jefferson, was unmerited. Captain Cresap was taken
                   sick, and, at about the time here indicated, he
                   started for home, but died at New York, on the 18th
                   of October, 1775, at the age of thirty-three years.
                   His remains yet lie buried in Trinity churchyard, a
                   few feet from Broadway.]

the 12. This day nothing remarkable hapned only I went to work along
with the general at Mr. Parkers at night I went upon the piquet.

the 13. I went a chesnuting with a number of respectable gentlemen
that belonged to the army and we had a rifle frolick[168] and came
home about 10 Oclock.

                   [Footnote 168: Shooting at a mark, for liquor.]

the 13. About 2 or 3 o clock their was one of our men taken and caried
to the quarter guard for thieft abel Weatheril by name but it was made
up and he was taken out at night and returned to his Duty.

the 14. This day nothing remarkable hapned.

the 15. Being Sunday I went upon fatigue down to the george tavern and
their was a flag of truce went in and another came out.[169]

                   [Footnote 169: Communications are thus had between
                   belligerent armies. By common consent, as a rule of
                   war, a person approaching one army from another,
                   with a white flag, is respected as a neutral; and
                   to "fire upon a flag," as the phrase is when the
                   bearer is fired upon, is considered a great breach
                   of faith and honor.]

the 16. Nothing remarkable hapned Colonel Reeds Laidy came down to
reveu the Regiment and treated them[170] nothing more this day.

                   [Footnote 170: The wives of officers often visited
                   permanent camps, and formed pleasant social
                   parties. Mrs. Washington visited her husband at
                   Cambridge, while he remained there. She also spent
                   a portion of the winter with him at Valley Forge,
                   and likewise at Morristown.]

the 17. I went a chesnuting up to neutown[171] and at night our
floating Baterys went up towards the canon and fired 13 shots but
unlucky for them one of their 9 pounders split and killed one man dead
and wounded 8 more one of them it is thought mortally.

                   [Footnote 171: Newton, seven miles north from
                   Boston.]

the 18. I went upon the creek guard and John Bates was Lanch corporeal
also in the afternoon their was 3 Boston men came out under pretence
of fishing but they made their escape to Dorchester point.

the 19. Was rainy and nothing remarkable hapned.

the 20. The things that were taken at the Light house were vendued and
went very high[172] Nothing more remarkable hapned this day at night
their was a regular deserted from the enimy.

                   [Footnote 172: When Major Tupper destroyed the
                   lighthouse on Nantasket point, he carried away all
                   the furniture and the great lamp by which it was
                   lighted.]

the 21. I went upon the creek guard[173] and it rained all day nothing
remarkable hapned.

                   [Footnote 173: The creek referred to is Stony
                   brook, northward from Roxbury fort.]

the 22. Being Sunday nothing remarkable this day.

the 23. Nothing remarkable hapned at night I went upon the piquet and
nothing hapned worth a mentioning.

the 24. Nothing remarkable hapned this day onely we heard that the
french were a going to join us upon conditions that we would trade
with them.[174]

                   [Footnote 174: As early as July, 1775, Dr. Franklin
                   had suggested the propriety of a political
                   confederation of all the colonies, and the
                   establishment of governmental relations with
                   foreign powers, especially with France, which, it
                   was well known, hated England. In November of that
                   year, Benjamin Harrison, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas
                   Johnson, John Dickenson, and John Jay, were
                   appointed a committee to open and carry on
                   correspondence with foreign governments; and in
                   March following, Silas Deane was appointed a
                   special agent of Congress to the court of France.
                   Rumors of such intentions appear to have reached
                   the army, according to our Journalist, as early as
                   the 24th of October, 1775.]

the 25. We turned out and went to the Larm post and it was very cold
and we came home and there was a high go of Drinking Brandy and
several of the company were taken not well prety soon after[175]
nothing more this day.

                   [Footnote 175: A very natural consequence.]

the 26. This morning early their was several Laidies came down from
wrentham and they went to cambridg and the rest of their acts are they
not writen in the Lamentations of Samuel Haws, finis.

the 27. This day I went upon fatigue and we got our Stents done about
noon.

the 28. Nothing remarkable this day onely I was chose cook for our
room consisting of 12 men and a hard game too.

the 29. Being Sunday the officers had hard work to get hands for
meting it was so cold nothing more this day.

the 30. This day nothing remarkable hapned.

the 31. Nothing remarkable.[176]

                   [Footnote 176: During the whole of October, affairs
                   were very quiet, and no skirmish of importance
                   occurred. The "Essex Gazette" of the 19th said,
                   "Scarcely a gun has been fired for a fortnight." On
                   the 4th, a small fleet, under Captain Mowatt,
                   sailed from Boston harbor, and destroyed Falmouth
                   (now Portland), Maine. On the 15th, a committee
                   from Congress arrived, to consult with Washington
                   concerning the future, and a reorganization of the
                   army.]


NOVEMBER 1775.

the 1. Las night the fire ran over Samuel Hawes's hair and that
provoket him to wrath Nothing very remarkable hapned this day that I
know of.

the 2. their was Some gentlemen and Laidies came down from Wrentham
and they went to cambridg.

the 3. It was a very rainy day and we went to childses and had an old
fudg fairyouwell my friends.

the 4. Nothing remarkable hapned this day onely the gentry went home
to Wrentham.

the 5. Being the memorial 5th of novem. the enemy fired from every
Ship in the harbour nothing more remarkable this day.

the 6. Nothing remarkable hapned this day.

the 7. Their was a vendue opened att this house and their was not Less
than a hundred and twenty Dollars worth of things vendued and sold at
private sale and Swapt.

the 8. Nothing remarkable hapned this day that I know of.

the 9. Nothing remarkable hapned this day that is worth
amentioning.[177]

                   [Footnote 177: On this day there was quite a severe
                   skirmish occurred at Lechmere's point, now
                   Cambridgeport.]

the 10. This day I went home upon furlow,[178] yesterday Sergent Yett
went home.

                   [Footnote 178: That is, a written permission from
                   his commanding officer, to leave for a specified
                   time.]

the 11. I went to captain whitings and nothing remarkable hapned.

the 12. Being Sunday I went to meting Nothing more this day.

the 13. This day the Long faced People trained at Wrentham and Serg
Felt went upon the piquet and fired several times upon the centrys.

the 14. This day I came down from Wrentham with Serg Felt and at
night their was three men deserted from the floating Battery this day
we had a Lottery and Serg Foster drawd a pair of Breeches[179] worth 5
Dollars and their was considerable other tradeing caried on at night
their was 8 men more deserted.

                   [Footnote 179: At that time leather breeches were
                   much in vogue, because they were durable. The more
                   costly ones of buckskin were worn only by
                   officers.]

the 16. Nothing remarkable hapned captain Pond Listed three or four
men for the next campaign[180] att night it was very cold.

                   [Footnote 180: Late in October a new organization
                   of the army took place, and enlistments for a
                   certain term were commenced. Hitherto there had
                   been great confusion in the matter. The army had
                   gathered around Boston from sudden impulse, and it
                   was continually changing. The excitement which had
                   brought them together had in a measure subsided,
                   and enlistments went on slowly. After a month's
                   exertions, only five thousand names were enrolled;
                   and Washington, lamenting the dearth of public
                   spirit, almost despaired. Alluding to the
                   selfishness exhibited in camp, he says: "Such
                   stock-jobbing and fertility in all low arts, to
                   obtain advantages of one kind and another, I never
                   saw before, and pray God I may never witness
                   again."]

the 17. Very blustering and their was a man Whipt thirty and nine
Lashes for Stealing and getting Drunk and running away and afterwards
he was drummed out of the camps thus he &c.

the 18. Nothing remarkable hapned this day that I know of.

the 19. This day being Sunday it was very pleasant and we had
Preaching Nothing more this day.

the 20. This day nothing very remarkable at night their was a regular
deserted and Swam over to Dorchester and escaped.

the 21. This day Nothing very remarkable this day the piquet was made
easier by half &c. &c.

the 22. To morrow is thanksgiveing this day ended without any thing
remarkable.

the 23. Being thanksgiveing I went with Serg Felt up to newtown and
kept thanksgiveing their and returnd to our Barricks at night and we
had not ben a bed long when our captain came to us and ordered us all
to Lye upon our arms by order of General Washington Lesemo[181] of the
American Army incampt at cambridg and roxbury and other places[182]
nothing more this day that I know of onely 2 regulars deserted at
night on cambridg side.[183]

                   [Footnote 181: Generalissimo.]

                   [Footnote 182: On the previous day, General Putnam,
                   with a strong detachment, broke ground at Cobble
                   hill, where the M'Lean Asylum now stands. The
                   object was to erect batteries for the purpose of
                   cannonading Boston. It was expected the British
                   troops would sally out of the city and attack them,
                   and that expectation caused Washington to issue the
                   order for _all_ the troops to be ready for action
                   at a moment's warning.]

                   [Footnote 183: Frothingham says, "Two British
                   sentinels came off in the night to the detachment"
                   of General Putnam.]

the 24. Nothing hapned very remarkable this day that I know of.

the 25. This morning Captain Pond inlisted several men for the next
campaign; o you nasty Sloven how your Book Looks.[184]

                   [Footnote 184: This remark refers to several blots
                   of ink which disfigure the page of his Journal on
                   which he was writing.]

the 26. Being Sunday it was Stormy Nothing remarkable this day.

the 27. Nothing very remarkable hapned this day.

the 28. Nothing very Strange onely Peperiss curacle came out of Boston
that old tory Dog.

the 29. Nothing remarkable onely one of our Privateers took a prize
richly Laden.[185]

                   [Footnote 185: That was the British storeship
                   _Nancy_, captured off Cape Anne, and carried into
                   that harbor, by Captain John Manly, commander of
                   the American armed schooner _Lee_, one of the six
                   vessels fitted out at Boston under the direction of
                   Washington, before Congress had yet taken any
                   measures to establish a navy. So valuable were the
                   stores of the _Nancy_, that Washington supposed
                   General Howe would immediately make efforts to
                   recover her, and he had an armed force sent to Cape
                   Anne to secure them. There were two thousand
                   muskets, one hundred thousand flints, thirty
                   thousand round shot for one, six, and twelve
                   pounders, over thirty thousand musket-shot, and a
                   thirteen-inch brass mortar that weighed
                   twenty-seven hundred pounds. The arrival of these
                   produced great joy in the camp. Colonel Moylan,
                   describing the scene, says: "Old PUT [General
                   Putnam] was mounted on the mortar, with a bottle of
                   rum in his hand, standing parson to christen, while
                   god-father Mifflin [afterward General Mifflin] gave
                   it the name of _Congress_."

                   On the 29th of November, Washington commenced
                   planting a bomb-battery on Lechmere's point, with
                   the intention of bombarding the British works on
                   Bunker hill. They completed it in the course of a
                   few days, entirely unmolested.]

the 30. Nothing extreordenary this day that I know of.


DECEMBER.

the 1. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 2. This day I with a number of rispectable gentlemen went[186]....

                   [Footnote 186: The author did not expect to have
                   his Journal published, or he would have omitted the
                   entry here made. There seems nothing in it
                   derogatory to his character, yet he has chosen
                   words to express his thoughts not suited "to ears
                   polite."]

the 3. Being Sunday it rained nothing remarkable hapned this day.

the 4. Nothing remarkable hapnd this day at night we were ordered to
Ly upon our arms.[187]

                   [Footnote 187: Washington was now in hourly
                   expectation of an attack from the British, and,
                   knowing his own weakness, he considered his
                   situation very critical. In vigilance alone seemed
                   a security for safety.]

the 5. Nothing Strange hapned this day.

the 6. Nothing comical this day only their was considerable of
tradeing caryd on.[188]

                   [Footnote 188: The Yankee love of trade and barter
                   appears to have been very prevalent in the camp.]

the 7. This day nothing Strang.

the 8. This day I with several more inlisted for the year 1776 under
captain Oliver Pond.

the 9. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 10. This day the Long faced People[189] arived here from wrentham
and other places.

                   [Footnote 189: New militia recruits from the
                   country, who had never seen service.]

the 11. This day I past muster before general Spencer[190] nothing
more this day.

                   [Footnote 190: General Joseph Spencer, of East
                   Haddam, Connecticut. He remained in service until
                   1778, when he resigned, left the army, and became a
                   member of Congress. He held rank next to Putnam in
                   the army at Boston. He died in 1789, at the age of
                   seventy years.]

the 12. This day it was very cold and the melitia had to mount guard
that is good for them.

the 13. This day I went to cambridg and viewed the works on
copple[191] hill.[192]

                   [Footnote 191: Cobble.]

                   [Footnote 192: These, it is said, were the most
                   perfect of any of the fortifications raised around
                   Boston at that time.]

the 14. This day I went to Watertown[193] with Lieutenant Bacon and a
number of others in order to get some coats but we could not find any
that suited us and so we returned.[194]

                   [Footnote 193. Seven miles northwest from Boston.
                   It was then the seat of the revolutionary
                   government in Massachusetts.]

                   [Footnote 194: Washington issued a notice, on the
                   28th of October, that tailors would be employed to
                   make coats for those who wished them.]

the 15. This day nothing very remarkable.

the 16. This day nothing strange at night their was an atempt made to
blow up A Ship but it failed also this night we heard that Quebeck was
taken.[195]

                   [Footnote 195: This was a mistake. On the 13th of
                   September, Colonel Benedict Arnold left Cambridge
                   with a detachment to cross the country by the way
                   of the Kennebec, to invade Canada and capture
                   Quebec. Arnold's army suffered terribly on the
                   march, and arrived at Point Levi, opposite Quebec,
                   on the 9th of November, and prepared to attack the
                   city. He was obliged to postpone his attack, and
                   Quebec never fell into the hands of the patriots.]

the 17. Being Sunday it was foul weather nothing remarkable hapned
this day onely the enemy fired at our men on Lechmers[196] Point and
wounded one and our men returned the fire from copple hill.

                   [Footnote 196: Lechmere's.]

the 18. This day the Ship moved out of the Bay and the Enemy threw
Bombs from mount Hoordom[197] but did no Damage.

                   [Footnote 197: A nickname given to Bunker's hill.]

the 19. This day nothing remarkable hapned.

the 20. Nothing strange this day.

the 21. This day it was very cold nothing strange this day.

the 22. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 23. Nothing strange this day.

the 24. Ditto Ditto Ditto.

the 25. Good.

the 26. Very cold this day nothing remarkable this day.

the 27. Nothing remarkable to day.

the 28. Nothing strange this day.

the 29. Nothing strange this day Last Night our men made an atempt to
take Bunker hill but their Scheem was frustrated &c.[198]

                   [Footnote 198: On the night of the 28th, an
                   unsuccessful attempt was made to surprise the
                   British outposts on Charlestown neck, and then to
                   attack the enemy on Bunker's hill. The Americans
                   started to cross from Cobble hill, on the ice. One
                   of the men slipped and fell when they were half way
                   across, and his gun went off. This alarmed the
                   British, and they were on their guard. It was
                   computed that, from the burning of Charlestown, on
                   the 17th of June, until Christmas day, the British
                   had fired more than two thousand shot and shells.
                   They hurled more than three hundred bombshells at
                   Plowed hill, and one hundred at Lechmere's point.
                   Gordon says that, with all this waste of metal,
                   they "killed only seven men on the Cambridge side,
                   and just a dozen on the Roxbury side."]

the 30, 31. Nothing remarkable.


JANUARY.

the 1. A Happy new year 1776 Behold the man three score and ten upon a
Dying Bed he'se run his race and get no Grace and Awful Sight indeed
Nothing very remarkable this 1 day of January 1776 Anoquedomina.[199]

                   [Footnote 199: Anno Domini.]

the 2. Nothing strange this day.

the 3. 20 men out of each Regement in Roxbury side to cut
fachines[200] I believe we have it by and by.

                   [Footnote 200: Fascines.]

the 4. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 5-7. Nothing strange.

the 8. At night some of our brave heroick Americans went Past the
Enemys Brest Work at Bunker hill and burnt several housen at the foot
of Bunker hill and took 5 men and 1 woman Prisoners and came of as far
as copple hill when the flames began to extend and the enemy that were
in the fort perceiving a number of men gather round the fire &
suposing them to be our men they kept up a bright fire for the space
of near half an hour upon their own men devillightfooly[201]
they[202]....

                   [Footnote 201: Delightfully.]

                   [Footnote 202: When Charlestown was burned,
                   fourteen houses escaped the flames. These were
                   occupied by the British; and, on the 8th of
                   January, General Putnam sent Major Knowlton
                   (afterward killed at Harlem), with a small party,
                   to set those houses on fire. The affair was
                   injudiciously managed, and, before all could be
                   fired, the flames of one alarmed the British in the
                   fort. They discharged cannons and small-arms in all
                   directions, in their confusion and affright. At
                   that moment a play, called "The Blockade of
                   Boston," written for the occasion by General
                   Burgoyne, was in course of performance in the city.
                   In the midst of the scene in which Washington was
                   burlesqued, a sergeant dashed into the theatre and
                   exclaimed, "The Yankees are attacking Bunker's
                   hill!" The audience thought it was part of the
                   play, until General Howe said, "Officers, to your
                   alarm-posts!" Then women shrieked and fainted, and
                   the people rushed to the streets in great
                   confusion.]

the 9. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 10. Nothing very remarkable this day it was very cold.

the 11. Nothing very remarkable this day.

the 12. All furlows stopt this day.

the 13. Nothing strange this day.

the 14. Being Sunday nothing remarkable this day.

the 15. This day we heard that the regulars had taken Providence and
burnt all the housen except two.[203]

                   [Footnote 203: Sir James Wallace commanded a small
                   British flotilla in Narraganset bay, during the
                   summer and autumn of 1775. He was really a
                   commissioned pirate, for he burnt and plundered
                   dwellings, and stores, and plantations, wherever he
                   pleased. The fact above alluded to was the plunder
                   and destruction of the houses on the beautiful
                   island of Providence (not the town of Providence)
                   by that marauder, at the close of November, 1775.
                   He also desolated Connanicut island, opposite
                   Newport; and every American vessel that entered
                   that harbor was seized and sent to Boston.]

the 16. Nothing remarkable hapened this day at night we were all
ordered to Ly upon our arms.

the 17. This day we had the disagreeable news that our men were
defeated that went to Quebeck and that General montgomery and colonel
Arnold were either killed or taken Prisoners but we Pray God thy news
may prove falce[204] at night it was thought their was a spy out from
Boston and our centrys fired at him but we dont know the Sertainty of
it cold weather for the Season.

                   [Footnote 204: Arnold, with only seven hundred men,
                   appeared before Quebec on the 18th of November, and
                   demanded its surrender. He was soon compelled to
                   retire, and, marching up the St. Lawrence twenty
                   miles, he there met, in December, General
                   Montgomery, with a small force, descending from
                   Montreal. They marched against Quebec, and, early
                   in the morning of the 31st of December, proceeded
                   to assail the city at three distinct points.
                   Montgomery was killed, Morgan and many of the
                   Americans were made prisoners, and Arnold, who was
                   severely wounded, retired to Sillery, three miles
                   above Quebec.]

the 18. Nothing strange this day.

the 19. This day we heard that our men had taken a Ship Loaded with
Gunpowder the truth of it we have not yet Learned but we hope it will
prove true.[205]

                   [Footnote 205: Several of the prizes captured by
                   Manly and others contained powder and arms; and
                   late in December, Colonel (afterward General) Knox
                   arrived from Ticonderoga with forty-two sled-loads
                   of cannons, mortars, lead, balls, flints, &c. By
                   the close of January, powder became quite plentiful
                   in the American camp.]

the 20. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 21. Ditto.

the 22. Nothing strange.

the 23. Nothing remarkable.

the 24. This day capt Pond came from Wrentham Nothing remarkable.

the 25. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 26. Nothing very remarkable.

the 27. Nothing remarkable this day.

the 28. Nothing remarkable.

the 29. This day we moved to Dorchester into the widow Birds house.

the 30. Nothing strange this day.

the 31. Ditto.


FEBRUARY.

the 1. This day nothing remarkable.

the 2. Ditto.

the 3. Nothing Remarkable this day.

the 4. Ditto.

the 5. The Lobsters came out almost to copple hill and took 3 cows and
killed them and were fired upon from copple hill and they were obligd
to mak of Leaving their Booty behind them.

the 6. The melitious men[206] marched from Wrentham and arived in camp
at Dorchester.

                   [Footnote 206: Militia-men.]

the 7. Nothing very remarkable this day.

the 8. Their was a number of our men went a Scating on the Bay near
Bosston common and the Enemy fired upwards of a hundred small arms
that did no damage.

the 9. Nothing very remarkable at night their was thre of our Amarican
Boys made their escape from the Enemy in Boston and were taken up by
our men who were Patroling on Dorchester Point to and they brought of
things to considerable value.

the 10. Nothing Strange this day.[207]

                   [Footnote 207: Here the Journal ends abruptly, and
                   we have no clew to the writer afterward. As he had
                   enlisted for the campaign of 1776, he doubtless
                   remained with the army until after the expulsion of
                   the British from Boston, in March following, unless
                   he was killed in some of the skirmishes that
                   frequently occurred, or was obliged to leave the
                   army on account of sickness. Whatever was his fate,
                   the veil of oblivion is drawn over it, for he was
                   one of the thousands who with warm hearts and stout
                   hands struggled in the field for the liberties of
                   their country, lie in unhonored graves, and have
                   had no biographers. If he lived until the conflict
                   ended, and died in his native town, no doubt his
                   grave is in the old churchyard at Wrentham. His
                   family was among the earliest settlers there, for
                   Daniel Haws was a resident of the village when it
                   was burnt, in the time of King Philip's war, almost
                   two hundred years ago; and on a plain slab in that
                   old burial-place is the name of Ebenezer Haws, who
                   died in 1812, at the age of ninety-one years.]




SUPPLEMENT,
CONTAINING
OFFICIAL PAPERS ON THE SKIRMISHES AT LEXINGTON AND CONCORD,
AND A LIST OF REVOLUTIONARY ARTICLES IN THE POUGHKEEPSIE MUSEUM.




SUPPLEMENT.

OFFICIAL PAPERS CONCERNING THE SKIRMISHES AT LEXINGTON AND CONCORD.


In the preceding Journal of a Soldier, in 1775, his narrative
commences on the day of the skirmishes at Lexington and Concord, the
opening conflicts of the Revolution. Some official matters relating to
those events, which are inaccessible to the general reading-public,
will doubtless be acceptable, as they certainly are appropriate, in
this connection.

The skirmishes occurred on the 19th of April, 1775. On the 22d, the
Provincial Congress of Massachusetts assembled, and, deeming it
important to have the whole truth known, appointed a committee to take
depositions in relation to the transactions of the British troops in
their route to and from Concord. Another committee was appointed the
following day, consisting of Dr. Church, Elbridge Gerry, and Thomas
Cushing, to draw up a narrative of the massacre. The committee to
take depositions held their sessions at Concord and Lexington, on the
23d and 25th of April. Feeling it to be expedient to send an account
immediately to England, a committee, consisting of Dr. Warren, Mr.
Freeman, Mr. Gardiner, and Colonel Stone, was chosen to prepare a
letter to Dr. Franklin, the colonial agent in London. They reported a
letter, and also an "Address to the Inhabitants of Great Britain," on
the same day. Captain Richard Derby, of Salem, was employed to proceed
immediately with the despatches. He placed them in the hands of Doctor
Franklin on the 29th of May, and on the following day the address was
printed and circulated. It gave the first intelligence of the
skirmishes at Lexington and Concord, to the British public.

The following, copied from the Journals of the Continental Congress,
are the several papers referred to:--

  "_To the Hon. Benjamin Franklin, Esq., at London._
    "IN PROVINCIAL CONGRESS, WATERTOWN, _April 26, 1775_.

     "SIR: From the entire confidence we repose in your faithfulness
     and abilities, we consider it the happiness of this colony that
     the important trust of agency for it, in this day of unequalled
     distress, is devolved on your hands, and we doubt not your
     attachment to the cause and liberties of mankind will make every
     possible exertion in our behalf a pleasure to you; although our
     circumstances will compel us often to interrupt your repose, by
     matters that will surely give you pain. A singular instance
     hereof is the occasion of the present letter. The contents of
     this packet will be our apology for troubling you with it.

     "From these you will see how, and by whom, we are at last plunged
     into the horrors of a most unnatural war.

     "Our enemies, we are told, have despatched to Great Britain a
     fallacious account of the tragedy they have begun; to prevent the
     operation of which to the public injury, we have engaged the
     vessel that conveys this to you, as a packet in the service of
     this colony, and we request your assistance in supplying Captain
     Derby, who commands her, with such necessaries as he shall want,
     on the credit of your constituents in Massachusetts Bay.

     "But we most ardently wish that the several papers herewith
     enclosed may be immediately printed and dispersed through every
     town in England, and especially communicated to the lord-mayor,
     aldermen, and council, of the city of London, that they may take
     such order thereon as they may think proper. And we are confident
     your fidelity will make such improvement of them as shall
     convince all, who are not determined to be in everlasting
     blindness, that it is the united efforts of both Englands that
     can save either: but that whatever price our brethren in the one
     may be pleased to put on their constitutional liberties, we are
     authorized to assure you that the inhabitants of the other, with
     the greatest unanimity, are inflexibly resolved to sell theirs
     only at the price of their lives.

       "Signed by order of the Provincial Congress,
                  "JOSEPH WARREN, _President, P. T._

              "A true copy from the original minutes,
                  "SAMUEL FREEMAN, _Sec. P. T._"


The depositions relative to the commencement of hostilities are as
follows:--

                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 25, 1775_.

     "We, Solomon Brown, Jonathan Loring, and Elijah Sanderson, all of
     lawful age, and of Lexington, in the county of Middlesex, and
     colony of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, do testify and
     declare that, on the evening of the 18th of April, instant, being
     on the road between Concord and Lexington, and all of us mounted
     on horses, we were, about ten of the clock, suddenly surprised by
     nine persons, whom we took to be regular officers, who rode up to
     us, mounted and armed, each having a pistol in his hand, and,
     after putting pistols to our breasts, and seizing the bridles of
     our horses, they swore, if we stirred another step, we should be
     all dead men, upon which we surrendered ourselves. They detained
     us until two o'clock the next morning, in which time they
     searched and greatly abused us, having first inquired about the
     magazine at Concord, whether any guards were posted there, and
     whether the bridges were up, and said four or five regiments of
     regulars would be in possession of the stores soon. They then
     brought us back to Lexington, cut the horses' bridles and
     girths, turned them loose, and then left us.

                                   "SOLOMON BROWN,
                         "JONATHAN LORING, ELIJAH SANDERSON."


                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 25, 1775_.

     "I, Elijah Sanderson, above named, do further testify and
     declare, that I was on Lexington common, the morning of the 19th
     of April aforesaid, having been dismissed by the officers above
     mentioned, and saw a large body of regular troops advancing
     toward Lexington company, many of whom were then dispersing. I
     heard one of the regulars, whom I took to be an officer, say,
     "Damn them, we will have them;" and immediately the regulars
     shouted aloud, run and fired upon the Lexington company, which
     did not fire a gun before the regulars discharged on them. Eight
     of the Lexington company were killed while they were dispersing,
     and at a considerable distance from each other, and many wounded;
     and, although a spectator, I narrowly escaped with my life.

                                   "ELIJAH SANDERSON."


                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 23, 1775_.

     "I, Thomas Rice Willard, of lawful age, do testify and declare
     that, being in the house of Daniel Harrington, of said Lexington,
     on the 19th instant, in the morning, about half an hour before
     sunrise, looked out at the window of said house, and saw (as I
     suppose) about four hundred regulars in one body, coming up the
     road, and marched toward the north part of the common, back of
     the meeting-house of said Lexington; and as soon as said regulars
     were against the east end of the meeting-house, the commanding
     officer said something, what I know not, but upon that the
     regulars ran till they came within about eight or nine rods of
     about a hundred of the militia of Lexington, who were collected
     on said common, at which time the militia of Lexington dispersed.
     Then the officers made a huzza, and the private soldiers
     succeeded them: directly after this, an officer rode before the
     regulars to the other side of the body, and hallooed after the
     militia of said Lexington, and said, "Lay down your arms, damn
     you, why don't you lay down your arms?"--and that there was not a
     gun fired till the militia of Lexington were dispersed. And
     further saith not.

                                   "THOMAS RICE WILLARD."


                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 25, 1775_.

     "Simon Winship, of Lexington, in the county of Middlesex, and
     province of Massachusetts Bay, New England, being of lawful age,
     testifieth and saith, that on the 19th April instant, about four
     o'clock in the morning, as he was passing the public road in said
     Lexington, peaceably and unarmed, about two miles and a half
     distant from the meeting-house in said Lexington, he was met by a
     body of the king's regular troops, and being stopped by some
     officers of said troops, was commanded to dismount. Upon asking
     why he must dismount, he was obliged by force to quit his horse,
     and ordered to march in the midst of the body; and, being
     examined whether he had been warning the minute-men, he answered,
     'No, but had been out, and was then returning to his father's.'
     Said Winship farther testifies that he marched with said troops,
     till he came within about half a quarter of a mile of said
     meeting-house, where an officer commanded the troops to halt, and
     then to prime and load: this being done, the said troops marched
     on till they came within a few rods of Captain Parker's company,
     who were partly collected on the place of parade, when said
     Winship observed an officer at the head of said troops,
     flourishing his sword, and with a loud voice giving the word,
     'Fire! fire!' which was instantly followed by a discharge of arms
     from said regular troops; and said Winship is positive, and in
     the most solemn manner declares, that there was no discharge of
     arms on either side, till the word 'Fire' was given by the said
     officer as above.

                                   "SIMON WINSHIP."


                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 25, 1775_.

     "I, John Parker, of lawful age, and commander of the militia in
     Lexington, do testify and declare that, on the 19th instant, in
     the morning, about one of the clock, being informed that there
     were a number of regula-officers riding up and down the road,
     stopping and insulting people as they passed the road; and also
     was informed that a number of regular troops were on their march
     from Boston, in order to take the province stores at Concord,
     ordered our militia to meet on the common in said Lexington, to
     consult what to do, and concluded not to be discovered, nor
     meddle or make with said regular troops (if they should
     approach), unless they should insult or molest us; and, upon
     their sudden approach, I immediately ordered our militia to
     disperse, and not to fire. Immediately said troops made their
     appearance, and rushed furiously, fired upon, and killed eight of
     our party, without receiving any provocation therefor from us.

                                   "JOHN PARKER."


                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 24, 1775_.

     "I, John Robins, being of lawful age, do testify and say that, on
     the 19th instant, the company under the command of Captain John
     Parker, being drawn up (some time before sunrise) on the green or
     common, and I being in the front rank, there suddenly appeared a
     number of the king's troops, about a thousand, as I thought, at
     the distance of about sixty or seventy yards from us, huzzaing,
     and on a quick pace toward us, with three officers in their front
     on horseback, and on full gallop toward us, the foremost of which
     cried, 'Throw down your arms, ye villains, ye rebels!' upon which
     said company dispersing, the foremost of the three officers
     ordered their men, saying, 'Fire, by God! fire!' at which moment
     we received a very heavy and close fire from them; at which
     instant, being wounded, I fell, and several of our men were shot
     dead by me. Captain Parker's men, I believe, had not then fired
     a gun. And further the deponent saith not.

                                   "JOHN ROBINS."


                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 25, 1775_.

     "We, Benjamin Tidd, of Lexington, and Joseph Abbot, of Lincoln,
     in the county of Middlesex, and colony of Massachusetts Bay, in
     New England, of lawful age, do testify and declare that, on the
     morning of the 19th of April instant, about five o'clock, being
     on Lexington common, and mounted on horses, we saw a body of
     regular troops marching up to the Lexington company, which was
     then dispersing. Soon after, the regulars fired, first, a few
     guns, which we took to be pistols from some of the regulars who
     were mounted on horses, and then the said regulars fired a volley
     or two before any guns were fired by the Lexington company; our
     horses immediately started, and we rode off. And further say not.

                                   "BENJAMIN TIDD, JOSEPH ABBOT."


                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 25, 1775_.

     "We, Nathaniel Mullokin, Philip Russell, Moses Harrington, jun.,
     Thomas and Daniel Harrington, William Grimes, William Tidd, Isaac
     Hastings, Jonas Stone, jun., James Wyman, Thaddeus Harrington,
     John Chandler, Joshua Reed, jun., Joseph Simonds, Phineas Smith,
     John Chandler, jun., Reuben Cock, Joel Viles, Nathan Reed, Samuel
     Tidd, Benjamin Lock, Thomas Winship, Simeon Snow, John Smith,
     Moses Harrington the 3d, Joshua Reed, Ebenezer Parker, John
     Harrington, Enoch Willington, John Hornier, Isaac Green, Phineas
     Stearns, Isaac Durant, and Thomas Headley, jun., all of lawful
     age, and inhabitants of Lexington, in the county of Middlesex,
     and colony of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England, do testify
     and declare, that, on the 19th of April instant, about one or two
     o'clock in the morning, being informed that several officers of
     the regulars had, the evening before, been riding up and down the
     road, and had detained and insulted the inhabitants passing the
     same; and also understanding that a body of regulars were
     marching from Boston toward Concord, with intent (as it was
     supposed) to take the stores, belonging to the colony, in that
     town, we were alarmed, and having met at the place of our
     company's parade, were dismissed by our captain, John Parker, for
     the present, with orders to be ready to attend at the beat of the
     drum. We further testify and declare, that, about five o'clock in
     the morning, hearing our drum beat, we proceeded toward the
     parade, and soon found that a large body of troops were marching
     toward us. Some of our company were coming up to the parade, and
     others had reached it, at which time the company began to
     disperse. While our backs were turned on the troops, we were
     fired on by them, and a number of our men were instantly killed
     and wounded. Not a gun was fired by any person in our company on
     the regulars, to our knowledge, before they fired on us, and
     they continued firing until we had all made our escape.

                         "Signed by each of the above deponents,"


                                   "LEXINGTON, _25th of April, 1775_.

     "We, Nathaniel Parkhurst, Jonas Parker, John Munroe, jun., John
     Winship, Solomon Pierce, John Muzzy, Abner Meeds, John Bridge,
     jun., Ebenezer Bowman, William Munroe the 3d, Micah Hager, Samuel
     Saunderson, Samuel Hastings, and James Brown, of Lexington, in
     the county of Middlesex, and colony of the Massachusetts Bay, in
     New England, and all of lawful age, do testify and say, that, on
     the morning of the 19th of April instant, about one or two
     o'clock, being informed that a number of regular officers had
     been riding up and down the road the evening and night preceding,
     and that some of the inhabitants, as they were passing, had been
     insulted by the officers, and stopped by them; and being also
     informed that the regular troops were on their march from Boston,
     in order (as it was said) to take the colony stores then
     deposited at Concord, we met on the parade of our company in this
     town. After the company had collected, we were ordered by Captain
     Parker (who commanded us) to disperse for the present, and to be
     ready to attend the beat of the drum; and accordingly the company
     went into houses near the place of parade. We further testify and
     say, that, about five o'clock in the morning, we attended the
     beat of our drum, and were formed on the parade; we were faced
     toward the regulars then marching up to us, and some of our
     company were coming to the parade with their backs toward the
     troops, and others, on the parade, began to disperse, when the
     regulars fired on the company, before a gun was fired by any of
     our company on them. They killed eight of our company, and
     wounded several, and continued their fire until we had all made
     our escape.

                                   "Signed by each of the deponents."


                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 25, 1775_.

     "I, Timothy Smith, of Lexington, in the county of Middlesex, and
     colony of Massachusetts Bay, in New England, being of lawful age,
     do testify and declare, that, on the morning of the 19th of April
     instant, being on Lexington common, as a spectator, I saw a large
     body of regular troops marching up toward the Lexington company,
     then dispersing, and likewise saw the regular troops fire on the
     Lexington company, before the latter fired a gun. I immediately
     ran, and a volley was discharged at me, which put me in imminent
     danger of losing my life. I soon returned to the common, and saw
     eight of the Lexington men who were killed, and lay bleeding at a
     considerable distance from each other; and several were wounded.
     And further saith not.

                                   "TIMOTHY SMITH."


                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 25, 1775_.

     "We, Levi Mead and Levi Harrington, both of Lexington, in the
     county of Middlesex, and colony of Massachusetts Bay, in New
     England, and of lawful age, do testify and declare, that, on the
     morning of the 19th of April, being on Lexington commons, as
     spectators, we saw a large body of regular troops marching up
     toward the Lexington company; and some of the regulars, on
     horses, whom we took to be officers, fired a pistol or two on the
     Lexington company, which was then dispersing. These were the
     first guns that were fired, and they were immediately followed by
     several volleys from the regulars, by which eight men belonging
     to said company were killed, and several wounded.

                                   "LEVI HARRINGTON, LEVI MEAD."


                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 25, 1775_.

     "I, William Draper, of lawful age, and an inhabitant of Colrain,
     in the county of Hampshire, and colony of Massachusetts Bay, in
     New England, do testify and declare, that, being on the parade of
     said Lexington, April 19th instant, about half an hour before
     sunrise, the king's regular troops appeared at the meeting-house
     of Lexington. Captain Parker's company, who were drawn up back of
     said meeting-house on the parade, turned from said troops, making
     their escape, by dispersing. In the meantime, the regular troops
     made a huzza, and ran toward Captain Parker's company, who were
     dispersing; and, immediately after the huzza was made, the
     commanding officer of said troops (as I took him) gave the
     command to the said troops--"Fire! fire! damn you, fire!"--and
     immediately they fired, before any of Captain Parker's company
     fired, I then being within three or four rods of said regular
     troops. And further say not.

                                   "WILLIAM DRAPER."


                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 23, 1775_.

     "I, Thomas Fessenden, of lawful age, testify and declare, that,
     being in a pasture near the meeting-house, at said Lexington, on
     Wednesday last, at about half an hour before sunrise, I saw a
     number of regular troops pass speedily by said meeting-house, on
     their way toward a company of militia of said Lexington, who were
     assembled to the number of about one hundred in a company, at the
     distance of eighteen or twenty rods from said meeting-house; and
     after they had passed by said meeting-house, I saw three
     officers, on horseback, advance to the front of said regulars,
     when one of them, being within six rods of the said militia,
     cried out, "Disperse, you rebels, immediately!" on which he
     brandished his sword over his head three times: meanwhile, the
     second officer, who was about two rods behind him, fired a
     pistol, pointed at said militia, and the regulars kept huzzaing
     till he had finished brandishing his sword; and when he had thus
     finished brandishing his sword, he pointed it down toward said
     militia, and immediately on which the said regulars fired a
     volley at the militia, and then I ran off as fast as I could,
     while they continued firing till I got out of their reach. I
     further testify, that, as soon as ever the officer cried,
     "Disperse, you rebels," the said company of militia dispersed
     every way, as fast as they could; and, while they were
     dispersing, the regulars kept firing at them incessantly. And
     further saith not.

                                   "THOMAS FESSENDEN."


                                   "LINCOLN, _April 23, 1775_.

     "I, John Bateman, belonging to the fifty-second regiment,
     commanded by Colonel Jones, on Wednesday morning, on the 19th day
     of April instant, was in the party marching to Concord, being at
     Lexington, in the county of Middlesex, being nigh the
     meeting-house in said Lexington, there was a small party of men
     gathered together at that place, when our said troops marched by;
     and I testify and declare that I heard the word of command given
     to the troops to fire, and some of said troops did fire, and I
     saw one of said small party lay dead on the ground nigh said
     meeting-house; and I testify that I never heard any of the
     inhabitants so much as fire one gun on said troops.

                                   "JOHN BATEMAN."


                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 23, 1775_.

     "We, John Hoar, John Whithead, Abraham Garfield, Benjamin Munroe,
     Isaac Parks, William Hosmer, John Adams, Gregory Stone, all of
     Lincoln, in the county of Middlesex, Massachusetts Bay, all of
     lawful age, do testify and say that, on Wednesday last, we were
     assembled at Concord, in the morning of said day, in consequence
     of information received that a brigade of regular troops were on
     their march to the said town of Concord, who had killed six men
     at the town of Lexington. About an hour afterward, we saw them
     approaching, to the number, as we apprehended, of about twelve
     hundred, on which we retreated to a hill about eighty rods back,
     and the said troops then took possession of the hill where we
     were first posted. Presently after this we saw the troops moving
     toward the north bridge, about one mile from the said Concord
     meeting-house. We then immediately went before them and passed
     the bridge just before a party of them, to the number of about
     two hundred, arrived. They there left about one half of their two
     hundred at the bridge, and proceeded with the rest toward Colonel
     Barrett's, about two miles from the said bridge. We then, seeing
     several fires in the town, thought the houses in Concord were in
     danger, and marched toward the said bridge; and the troops that
     were stationed there, observing our approach, marched back over
     the bridge, and then took up some of the planks. We then hastened
     our march toward the bridge, and, when we had got near the
     bridge, they fired on our men--first three guns, one after the
     other, and then a considerable number more; and then, and not
     before (having orders from our commanding officers not to fire
     till we were fired upon), we fired upon the regulars, and they
     retreated. On their retreat through the town of Lexington to
     Charlestown, they ravaged and destroyed private property, and
     burnt three houses, one barn, and one shop.

                              "Signed by each of the above deponents."


                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 23, 1775_.

     "We, Nathan Barret, captain; Jonathan Farrar, Joseph Butler, and
     Francis Wheeler, lieutenants; John Barret, ensign; John Brown,
     Silas Walker, Ephraim Melvin, Nathan Buttrick, Stephen Hosmer,
     jun., Samuel Barret, Thomas Jones, Joseph Chandler, Peter
     Wheeler, Nathan Pierce, and Edward Richardson, all of Concord, in
     the county of Middlesex, in the province of Massachusetts Bay, of
     lawful age, testify and declare, that, on Wednesday, the 19th
     instant, about an hour after sunrise, we assembled on a hill near
     the meeting-house in Concord aforesaid, in consequence of an
     information that a number of regular troops had killed six of our
     countrymen at Lexington, and were on their march to said Concord;
     and, about an hour afterward, we saw them approaching, to the
     number, as we imagine, of about twelve hundred; on which we
     retreated to a hill about eighty rods back, and the aforesaid
     troops then took possession of a hill where we were first posted.
     Presently after this, we saw them moving toward the north bridge,
     about one mile from said meeting-house; we then immediately went
     before them, and passed the bridge just before a party of them,
     to the number of about two hundred, arrived. They there left
     about one half of these two hundred at the bridge, and proceeded
     with the rest toward Colonel Barret's, about two miles from the
     said bridge. We then, seeing several fires in the town thought
     our houses were in danger, and immediately marched back toward
     said bridge, and the troops who were stationed there, observing
     our approach, marched back over the bridge, and then took up some
     of the planks. We then hastened our steps toward the bridge, and
     when we had got near the bridge, they fired on our men--first
     three guns, one after the other, and then a considerable number
     more; upon which, and not before (having orders from our
     commanding officer not to fire till we were fired upon), we fired
     upon the regulars, and they retreated. At Concord, and on their
     retreat through Lexington, they plundered many houses, burnt
     three at Lexington, together with a shop and barn, and committed
     damage, more or less, to almost every house from Concord to
     Charlestown.

                                   "Signed by the above deponents."


     "We, Joseph Butler and Ephraim Melvin, do testify and declare,
     that, when the regular troops fired upon our people at the north
     bridge, in Concord, as related in the foregoing depositions, they
     shot one, and we believe two, of our people, before we fired a
     single gun at them.

                                   "JOSEPH BUTLER, EPHRAIM MELVIN.
       "LEXINGTON, _April 23, 1775_."


                                   "CONCORD, _April 23, 1775_.

     "I, Timothy Minot, jun., of Concord, on the 19th day of this
     instant, April, after that I had heard of the regular troops
     firing upon Lexington men, and fearing that hostilities might be
     committed at Concord, thought it my incumbent duty to secure my
     family. After I had secured my family, some time after that,
     returning toward my own dwelling, and finding that the bridge on
     the north part of said Concord was guarded by regular troops,
     being a spectator of what had happened at said bridge, declare
     that the regular troops stationed on said bridge, after they saw
     the men that were collected on the westerly side of said bridge,
     marched toward said bridge; then the troops returned toward the
     easterly side of said bridge, and formed themselves, as I
     thought, for regular fight: after that they fired one gun, then
     two or three more, before the men that were stationed on the
     westerly part of said bridge fired upon them.

                                   "TIMOTHY MINOT, JUN."


                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 23, 1775_.

     "I, James Barret, of Concord, colonel of a regiment of militia,
     in the county of Middlesex, do testify and say that, on Wednesday
     morning last, about daybreak, I was informed of the approach of a
     number of the regular troops to the town of Concord, where were
     some magazines belonging to this province, when there was
     assembled some of the militia of this and the neighboring towns,
     I ordered them to march to the north bridge (so called), which
     they had passed and were taking up. I ordered said militia to
     march to said bridge and pass the same, but not to fire on the
     king's troops unless they were first fired upon. We advanced near
     said bridge, when the said troops fired upon our militia, and
     killed two men dead on the spot, and wounded several others,
     which was the first firing of guns in the town of Concord. My
     detachment then returned the fire, which killed and wounded
     several of the king's troops.

                                   "JAMES BARRET."


                                   "LEXINGTON, _April 23, 1775_.

     "We, Bradbury Robinson, Samuel Spring, Thaddeus Bancroft, all of
     Concord, and James Adams, of Lexington, all in the county of
     Middlesex, all of lawful age, do testify and say, that, on
     Wednesday morning last, near ten of the clock, we saw near one
     hundred of the regular troops, being in the town of Concord, at
     the north bridge in said town (so called); and having passed the
     same, they were taking up said bridge, when about three hundred
     of our militia were advancing toward said bridge, in order to
     pass said bridge, when, without saying anything to us, they
     discharged a number of guns on us, which killed two men dead on
     the spot, and wounded several others; when we returned the fire
     on them, which killed two of them, and wounded several, which was
     the beginning of hostilities in the town of Concord.

                              "BRADBURY ROBINSON, THADDEUS BANCROFT,
                              "SAMUEL SPRING, JAMES ADAMS."


                                   "WORCESTER, _April 26, 1775_.

     "Hannah Bradish, of that part of Cambridge called Menotomy, and
     daughter of Timothy Paine, of Worcester, in the county of
     Worcester, Esq., of lawful age, testifies and says, that, about
     five o'clock on Wednesday last, afternoon, being in her
     bedchamber, with her infant child, about eight days old, she was
     surprised by the firing of the king's troops and our people, on
     their return from Concord. She being weak and unable to go out of
     her house, in order to secure herself and family, they all
     retired into the kitchen, in the back part of the house. She soon
     found the house surrounded with the king's troops; that upon
     observation made, at least seventy bullets were shot into the
     front part of the house; several bullets lodged in the kitchen
     where she was, and one passed through an easy-chair she had just
     gone from. The door of the front part of the house was broke
     open; she did not see any soldiers in the house, but supposed, by
     the noise, they were in the front. After the troops had gone off,
     she missed the following things, which, she verily believes, were
     taken out of the house by the king's troops, viz., one rich
     brocade gown, called a negligee, one lutestring gown, one white
     quilt, one pair of brocade shoes, three shifts, eight white
     aprons, three caps, one case of ivory knives and forks, and
     several other small articles.

                                   "HANNAH BRADISH."


       PROVINCE OF THE
      MASSACHUSETTS BAY,           WORCESTER, SS., _April 26, 1775_.

     "Mrs. Hannah Bradish, the above deponent, maketh oath before us,
     the subscribers, two of his majesty's justices of the peace for
     the county of Worcester, and of the quorum, that the above
     deposition, according to her best recollection, is the truth.
     Which deposition is taken in _perpetuam rei memoriam_.

                                   "THOMAS STEEL,
                                   "TIMOTHY PAINE."


                                   "CONCORD, _April 23, 1775_.

     "I, James Marr, of lawful age, testify and say, that, in the
     evening of the 18th instant, I received orders from George
     Hutchinson, adjutant of the fourth regiment of the regular troops
     stationed at Boston, to prepare and march: to which orders I
     attended, and marched to Concord, where I was ordered by an
     officer with about one hundred men to guard a certain bridge
     there. While attending that service, a number of people came
     along, in order, as I suppose, to cross said bridge, at which
     time a number of the regular troops first fired upon them.

                                   "JAMES MARR."


                                   "MEDFORD, _April 25, 1775_.

     "I, Edward Thoroton Gould, of his majesty's own regiment of foot,
     being of lawful age, do testify and declare, that, on the evening
     of the 18th instant, under the orders of General Gage, I embarked
     with the light infantry and grenadiers of the line, commanded by
     Colonel Smith, and landed on the marshes of Cambridge, from
     whence we proceeded to Lexington. On our arrival at that place,
     we saw a body of provincial troops, armed, to the number of about
     sixty or seventy men. On our approach, they dispersed, and soon
     after firing began, but which party fired first I can not
     exactly say, as our troops rushed on shouting and huzzaing
     previous to the firing, which was continued by our troops so long
     as any of the provincials were to be seen. From thence we marched
     to Concord. On a hill, near the entrance of the town, we saw
     another body of provincials assembled: the light-infantry
     companies were ordered up the hill to disperse them; on our
     approach, they retreated toward Concord. The grenadiers continued
     the road under the hill toward the town. Six companies of light
     infantry were ordered down to take possession of the bridge which
     the provincials retreated over; the company I commanded was one.
     Three companies of the above detachment went forward about two
     miles. In the meantime, the provincial troops returned, to the
     number of about three or four hundred. We drew up on the Concord
     side of the bridge; the provincials came down upon us, upon which
     we engaged and gave the first fire. This was the first engagement
     after the one at Lexington. A continued firing from both parties
     lasted through the whole day. I myself was wounded at the attack
     of the bridge, and am now treated with the greatest humanity, and
     taken all possible care of by the provincials at Medford.

                                   "EDWARD THOROTON GOULD,
                                   "_Lieut. King's Own Regiment_."


       "PROVINCE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY,
       "_Middlesex County, April 25, 1775_.

     "Lieutenant Thoroton Gould, aforenamed, personally made oath to
     the truth of the foregoing declaration by him subscribed, before
     us,

                                   "THAD. MASSON,
                                   "JOSIAH JOHNSON, SIMON TUFTS,
                                  _Justices of the peace for the
                                   county aforesaid, quorum unus_."


       "PROVINCE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY, CHARLESTOWN, SS.

     "I, Nathaniel Gorham, notary and tabellion public, by lawful
     authority duly admitted and sworn, hereby certify to all whom it
     may or doth concern, that Thaddeus Masson, Josiah Johnson, and
     Simon Tufts, Esqrs., are three of his majesty's justices of the
     peace (_quorum unus_) for the county of Middlesex; and that full
     faith and credit is and ought to be given to their transactions
     as such, both in court and out. In witness whereof, I have
     hereunto affixed my name and seal, this twenty-sixth day of
     April, _Anno Domini_ one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five.

                         "NATHANIEL GORHAM, _Notary Public_." (L. S.)


(All the above depositions are sworn to before justices of the peace,
and duly attested by notaries public, in manner of the last one.)


       "IN PROVINCIAL CONGRESS, WATERTOWN, _April 26, 1775_.

         "_To the Inhabitants of Great Britain._

     "FRIENDS AND FELLOW-SUBJECTS: Hostilities are at length commenced
     in this colony by the troops under the command of General Gage;
     and it being of the greatest importance that an early, true, and
     authentic account of this inhuman proceeding, should be known to
     you, the Congress of this colony have transmitted the same, and,
     from want of a session of the Hon. Continental Congress, think it
     proper to address you on the alarming occasion.

     "By the clearest depositions relative to this transaction, it
     will appear that, on the night preceding the 19th of April
     instant, a body of the king's troops, under the command of
     Colonel Smith, were secretly landed at Cambridge, with an
     apparent design to take or destroy the military and other stores,
     provided for the defence of this colony, and deposited at
     Concord; that some inhabitants of the colony, on the night
     aforesaid, while travelling peaceably on the road between Boston
     and Concord, were seized and greatly abused by armed men, who
     appeared to be officers of General Gage's army; that the town of
     Lexington by these means was alarmed, and a company of the
     inhabitants mustered on the occasion; that the regular troops, on
     their way to Concord, marched into the said town of Lexington,
     and the said company on their approach began to disperse; that
     notwithstanding this, the regulars rushed on with great violence,
     and first began hostilities, by firing on said Lexington company,
     whereby they killed eight, and wounded several others; that the
     regulars continued their fire until those of said company, who
     were neither killed nor wounded, had made their escape; that
     Colonel Smith, with the detachment, then marched to Concord,
     where a number of provincials were again fired on by the troops,
     two of them killed and several wounded, before the provincials
     fired on them; and that these hostile measures of the troops
     produced an engagement that lasted through the day, in which many
     of the provincials and more of the regular troops were killed and
     wounded.

     "To give a particular account of the ravages of the troops, as
     they retreated from Concord to Charlestown, would be very
     difficult, if not impracticable. Let it suffice to say, that a
     great number of the houses on the road were plundered, and
     rendered unfit for use; several were burnt; women in childbed
     were driven, by the soldiery, naked into the streets; old men
     peaceably in their houses were shot dead; and such scenes
     exhibited as would disgrace the annals of the most uncivilized
     nations.

     "These, brethren, are marks of ministerial vengeance against this
     colony, for refusing, with her sister-colonies, a submission to
     slavery; but they have not yet detached us from our royal
     sovereign. We profess to be his loyal and dutiful subjects, and
     so hardly dealt with as we have been, are still ready, with our
     lives and fortunes, to defend his person, family, crown, and
     dignity. Nevertheless, to the persecution and tyranny of his
     cruel ministry we will not tamely submit: appealing to Heaven for
     the justice of our cause, we determine to die or be free.

     "We can not think that the honor, wisdom, and valor of Britons
     will suffer them to be long inactive spectators of measures in
     which they themselves are so deeply interested--measures pursued
     in opposition to the solemn protests of many noble lords, and
     expressed sense of conspicuous commoners, whose knowledge and
     virtue have long characterized them as some of the greatest men
     in the nation--measures executing contrary to the interest,
     petitions, and resolves of many large, respectable, and opulent
     counties, cities, and boroughs in Great Britain--measures highly
     incompatible with justice, but still pursued with a specious
     pretence of easing the nation of its burdens--measures which, if
     successful, must end in the ruin and slavery of Britain, as well
     as the persecuted American colonies.

     "We sincerely hope that the great Sovereign of the universe, who
     hath so often appeared for the English nation, will support you
     in every rational and manly exertion, with these colonies, for
     saving it from ruin; and that, in a constitutional connection
     with the mother-country, we shall soon be altogether a free and
     happy people.

       "Per order:
                 "JOSEPH WARREN, _President, P. T._"




NAMES OF THE KILLED AND WOUNDED AT LEXINGTON AND CONCORD.


The following list of the names of those first martyrs in the cause of
American liberty is given in the eighteenth volume of the
"Massachusetts Historical Collections:"--

     LEXINGTON.--_Killed_: Jonas Parker, Robert Monroe, Samuel Hadley,
     Jonathan Harrington, jr., Isaac Muzzy, Caleb Harrington, John
     Brown, Jedediah Moore, John Raymond, Nathaniel Wyman, 10.
     _Wounded_: John Robbins, Solomon Pierce, John Tidd, Joseph Comee,
     Ebenezer Monroe, jr., Thomas Winship, Nathaniel Farmer, Prince
     Estabrook, Jedediah Monroe, Francis Brown, 10.

     CONCORD.--_Wounded_: Charles Miles, Nathan Barrett, Abel
     Prescott, jr., Jonas Brown, George Meriot, 5.

     CAMBRIDGE.--_Killed_: William Marcy, Moses Richardson, John
     Hicks, Jason Russell, Jabez Wyman, Jason Winship, 6. _Wounded_:
     Samuel Whittemore, 1. _Missing_: Samuel Frost, Seth Russell, 2.

     NEEDHAM.--_Killed_: John Bacon, Elisha Mills, Amos Mills,
     Nathaniel Chamberlain, Jonathan Parker, 5. _Wounded_: Eleazer
     Kingsbury, ---- Tolman, 2.

     SUDBURY.--_Killed_: Josiah Haynes, Asahel Reed, 2. _Wounded_:
     Joshua Haynes, jr., 1.

     ACTON.--_Killed_: Isaac Davis, Abner Hosmer, James Hayward, 3.
     _Wounded_: Luther Blanchard, 1.

     BEDFORD.--_Killed_: Jonathan Wilson, 1. _Wounded_: Job Lane, 1.

     WOBURN.--_Killed_: Daniel Thompson, Asahel Porter, 2. _Wounded_:
     George Reed, Jacob Bacon, ---- Johnson, 3.

     MEDFORD.--_Killed_: Henry Putnam, William Polly, 2.

     CHARLESTOWN.--_Killed_: James Miller, Edward Barber, 2.

     WATERTOWN.--_Killed_: Joseph Coolidge, 1.

     FRAMINGHAM.--_Wounded_: Daniel Heminway, 1.

     DEDHAM.--_Killed_: Elias Haven, 1. _Wounded_: Israel Everett, 1.

     STOWE.--_Wounded_: Daniel Conant, 1.

     ROXBURY.--_Missing_: Elijah Seaver, 1.

     BROOKLINE.--_Killed_: Isaac Gardner, 1.

     BILLERICA.--_Wounded_: John Nichols, Timothy Blanchard, 2.

     CHELMSFORD.--_Wounded_: Aaron Chamberlain, Oliver Barron, 2.

     SALEM.--_Killed_: Benjamin Pierce, 1.

     NEWTON.--_Wounded_: Noah Wiswell, 1.

     DANVERS.--_Killed_: Henry Jacobs, Samuel Cook, Ebenezer
     Goldthwait, George Southwick, Benjamin Deland, Jotham Webb,
     Perley Putnam, 7. _Wounded_: Nathan Putnam, Dennis Wallace, 2.
     _Missing_: Joseph Bell, 1.

     BEVERLY.--_Killed_: Reuben Kerryme, 1. _Wounded_: Nathaniel
     Cleves, Samuel Woodbury, William Dodge, 3.

     LYNN.--_Killed_: Abednego Ramsdell, Daniel Townsend, William
     Flint, Thomas Hadley, 4. _Wounded_: Joshua Felt, Timothy Monroe,
     2. _Missing_: Josiah Breed, 1.

               TOTAL: Killed, 49; Wounded, 39; Missing, 5 = 93.




A CATALOGUE
OF
REVOLUTIONARY ARTICLES
IN
THE POUGHKEEPSIE MUSEUM.


The following are among the Collection of Curiosities in the Museum at
Poughkeepsie:--

ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPTS.

Letter of Washington to Governor Clinton, acquainting him of a design
of the British to seize his person while residing at Poughkeepsie, and
convey him to New York. Dated at Dobbs's Ferry, 1780.

Letter of Washington to Brigadier-General Whiten on the subject of the
removal of the troops from Trenton to Philadelphia. Dated Plumpton
Plains, New Jersey, 1777.

Letter of Washington on the subject of promotions in the army. Dated
1779.

Note of invitation from Washington to Dr. John Thomas to dinner. Dr.
Thomas was surgeon of the Massachusetts line. Dated headquarters,
Newburgh, 1780.

Soldiers' discharge, signed by Washington, 1782.

Letter of the Marquis de Lafayette on the subject of fortifying the
North river. Written to Governor Clinton in 1778.

Letter of the Baron Steuben to Governor Clinton on the good appearance
of the New York line of the army. Dated New Windsor, 1780.

Letter of Lord Stirling to Governor Clinton on the discharge of the
command of Major Wessenfells. Dated Albany, 1782.

Letter of Clinton in reply.

Resolution drawn up in Congress, and signed by John Hancock,
requesting the state of New York to erect a monument, at continental
expense, to the memory of Brigadier-General Herkimer, killed on the
Mohawk in 1777. Dated in Congress, 1777.

Letter of Captain Abraham Schenck, of Fishkill, containing an order
for old linen rags, for lint, for the surgeon of his command. Dated
near Croton, 1776.

Letter of General Heath relating to beacons in the highlands. Dated
Robintson's House, 1780.

Letter of General Heath on the condition of the prisoners confined in
the Provost prison, at West Point. Dated Highlands, 1780.

Letter of Captain Nathaniel Toms, describing a chase after the British
over the Schuylkill in 1777.

Journal of Lemuel Lyon, of Woodstock, Vermont, who served in the
French and Indian war, in the expedition against Ticonderoga,
commanded by General Abercrombie. The journal commences on the 5th of
April, 1758, and closes on the 16th of November, 1759.

Journal of Samuel Haws, one of the minute-men called out on the day of
the battle of Lexington: commencing April 19, 1775, and ending in
January, 1776.

Three original letters of Washington to Colonel Marinus Willet,
relating to a secret expedition against Oswego in 1782. Dated at
Newburgh headquarters, 1782.

Letter of Joshua H. Smith, the person who conducted André toward the
British lines. Directed from Goshen jail to Governor Clinton,
complaining of the state of his health and the closeness of his
confinement. Dated 1780.

Letter of Ezekiel Hyatt, of Crompond, Westchester county, to James
Jackson, Esq., of Fishkill, in Dutchess county, informing him that
Husson, a notorious cowboy and freebooter, had gone up to steal his
horses, and was to have a hundred guineas if he got them. Dated
Crompond, 1777.

Letter of Lieutenant Lawrence on the subject of the departure of the
British fleet from the harbor of Newport. Dated Reading, 1780.

Letter by the direction of Washington to Abraham Schenck and others,
of Fishkill, to solicit shirts of the inhabitants of their precinct
for the soldiers of the army, many of whom were utterly destitute of
that article. Dated Kingston, 1780.

Letter of Samuel Barker, while confined in the Provost prison, New
York, to his wife in Westchester county. Dated Provost Prison, 1777.


MISCELLANEOUS ARTICLES.

Lock of Washington's hair--an unquestionable relic--derived from the
late Judge Thompson, of the supreme court of the United States.
Presented by his recent widow, the present Mrs. Lansing, of
Poughkeepsie.

Fragments of the first coffin of Washington. Presented by Lewis Grube,
Esq., artist, Poughkeepsie.

One of the points of the _chevaux-de-frieze_ placed in the Hudson
river, near New Windsor, in 1780, to prevent the passage of the
British ships. It was raised accidentally by the anchor of a sloop
commanded by Captain Abraham Elting, in New Paltiz, Ulster county, in
1836. It is pointed with iron, and weighs some hundreds of pounds.

Wooden camp candlestick, used in General Smallwood's brigade while
encamped at Fishkill, in Dutchess county, in the Revolution. From
Jackson Diddle, Esq., Fishkill.

Homespun linen rifle-shirt, worn by Captain Abraham Duryea at the
battle of Long Island. From Charles Robinson, Esq., Fishkill.

Sheet of stamp-parchment, containing the stamps and duties of the
stamp-act.

Sword of Captain Archibald Campbell, killed at the skirmish at Ward's
house, in Weschester county, in 1776. Captain Campbell was the
commanding officer of the British party. From his grandson, Captain
Archibald Campbell, of Pawlings, Dutchess county.

Sword of one of Lee's legion, of Virginia. It has inscribed, on one
side of the blade, "Victory or Death!"--on the opposite side,
"Grenadiers of Virginia."

Tooth of Miss Jane M'Crea, found lying in her coffin when her remains
were disinterred and removed to Fort Edward in 1824, by Mr. George
Barker, of Sandy Hill, and presented by him to the late Captain
Matthew Danvers, of Sandy Hill, and to the collection by his widow,
Mrs. Mary Danvers, of Poughkeepsie.

Iron-pipe tomahawk, found on the battle-field of Saratoga. From Van
Wyck Brinkerhoff, Esq., of Fishkill.

Cannon-rammer, taken with Burgoyne at Saratoga. Purchased, with a lot
of other "lumber" (sold at West Point by order of the government,
after the Revolution), by Joseph Jackson, Esq., and others, of
Fishkill. From Van Wyck Brinkerhoff, Esq., of Fishkill.

Knapsack of Captain David Uhl, a captain of militia in the Revolution,
and worn by him when he joined his regiment at Harlem, in 1776. It is
made of homespun linen. From his daughter, Mrs. Henry Abell, of Union
Vale, Dutchess county.

Hessian camp-kettle, dug up on the battle-field of Bennington. By Mr.
Charles Hoag, of Dover, Dutchess county.

Iron spur, found on the battle-field of the Cowpens. It is much
rusted, and is believed to have belonged to one of Tarleton's men.
From B. J. Lossing, Esq., of Poughkeepsie.

United States musket, found on the line of the retreat of the
Americans from the battle-ground at Hubbardton, Vermont. It has the
date of 1774 on the breech. From B. J. Lossing, Esq.

Collection of relics from all the battle-fields of the Revolution.
From B. J. Lossing, Esq.

Cocked hat, worn by Lemuel Lyon on board the tea-ship in Boston
harbor. The wearer was the writer of the first Journal in this volume.
From his relative, Mr. J. Colby, of New York city.

Surgical instruments of Dr. John Thomas, a regimental surgeon in the
Revolution. They were used in several of the principal battles of the
war. From his son, Mr. Thomas, of Poughkeepsie.

Original portrait of Dr. John Thomas.

Broken United States bayonet, found on the battle-ground of Guilford
Courthouse, North Carolina. By Mr. Charles Ney, of Amenia, Dutchess
county.

Bayonet of John Woodin, a continental soldier. The point of this
instrument was broken off in the wall of the fort at Stony Point, when
in the body of a British soldier. Presented by a relative.

A Spanish dollar, taken from the cavity of the hip-bone of a skeleton
dug up at Bemis's heights, Saratoga, in 1841. With it were five other
dollars and an English guinea, and also a fragment of leather,
supposed to be the remains of a purse or pocket-book. From Mrs. John
Wing, of Washington, Dutchess county.

English musket, taken in a skirmish from a foraging-party of the
British in Westchester county, in the Revolution, by Captain Abraham
Meriot, of Newcastle, Westchester county, commander of a party of
American militia. From Mr. John Townsend, of Poughkeepsie.

Tory musket, hidden during the whole period of the Revolution, in a
hollow tree, in Dover, Dutchess county, to prevent its being seized by
the committee-men and used against the king.

English musket, brought off from the battle-field of White Plains by
Colonel Abraham Humphrey, of Smallwood's brigade. Presented by the
late Colonel Humphrey Cornell, of Beekman, Dutchess county.

Fragments of human-bones from the battle-field of Red Bank. From B. J.
Lossing, Esq., of Poughkeepsie.

Piece of one of the palmetto-logs of old Fort Moultrie, in Charleston
harbor. From B. J. Lessing, Esq.

Horn of Lieutenant Charles Wallace, of the 1st Royal Highland
regiment, curiously engraved with the names and distances of all the
fortified posts from Quebec to Albany, together with the name and rank
of the wearer. It was obtained from an Indian after the battle of
Saratoga.

Metal button, ploughed up on Quaker hill, Dutchess county, where a
division of the American array encamped in the Revolution. It has the
letters "U. S. A." raised on the surface. A number of other articles
belonging to the camp have been found in the neighborhood. A long line
of the stone fireplaces of the soldiers still remain.

Spontoon of Lieutenant Alfred Van Wyck, of Fishkill, Dutchess county,
used in hunting the cowboys in Fishkill mountain, in the Revolution.
By his son, Theodorus Van Wyck, Esq., of Fishkill Hook, who remembers
to have been shown, within the last forty years, by an individual then
living, the bones of a "skinner," or cowboy, still lying unburied in a
defile of the mountains.

See also, a large collection of other curiosities.


THE END.