THE

TRAVELS

AND

ADVENTURES

OF

_JAMES MASSEY._


Translated from the FRENCH.


LONDON:

Printed for JOHN WATTS, at the Printing-Office
in _Wild-Court_ near _Lincoln's-Inn Fields_.

MDCCXXXIII.


[Illustration: G. Van de Gucht Inv. et Sculp.]




DEDICATION


TO

JEREMIAH DUMMER, Esq;


SIR,

The Recommendation these Travels have been favour'd with from
yourself and other good Judges, as a History admirably adapted
both to the Entertainment and Instruction of the Reader; and your
Commands upon me to translate it, lay me under the strongest
Inducement to claim your Patronage.

And I humbly conceive that your Retirement from that AGENCY,
during which you perform'd so many National Services in
cultivating a mutual good Understanding and Commerce between
_Old_ and _New England_, as justly gain'd you the Love and
Applause of those who truly understand the Interests of both
People, gives you the more Leisure to receive a Dedication.

It must be own'd that bright Accomplishments, acquired and
improv'd in _European_, as well as _American_ Universities; The
Elegance of your Taste, both in Men and Books; The Politeness of
your Conversation; Your Esteem for the Sciences, which are so
delicately interwoven in the following Narrative; Your Knowledge
in the _Belles Lettres_; Your long Acquaintance with the _Beau
Monde_; And, what is equal to all, Your generous Disposition to
do Good to Mankind;, are Qualities which would have continued you
very useful and ornamental in a Public Station.

Yet I take Leave to congratulate you on your Preference of a
private Life; since not only an innate Principle of Honour, but
an easy Fortune, set you above the Temptation of soliciting
Employments, and subjecting yourself to Dependencies which often
prove Snares to the best of Men, by causing them to deviate from
the sacred Paths of Truth and Justice. This probably was the
Reason you lately declin'd acting as an _Inspector_ of a GREAT
COMPANY'S Affairs, an Office of no little Trust and Confidence,
and to which you was unanimously elected by the _General Court_.

I heartily wish you Health and long Life for the Pleasure and
Profit of all your Friends, and especially of,

       SIR,

            _Your most obedient_

  _October 11_,
     1732.
                 _humble Servant_,


                STEPHEN WHATLEY.




THE PREFACE

The _French_ EDITOR'S LETTER,

To _M_ * * *


SIR,

_These are the_ TRAVELS _you heard so much talk of, and was so
desirous to see. By what Chance the Manuscript fell into my
Hands, I will let you know another time: As soon as I had dipp'd
into it, I could not help reading it from the Beginning to the
End, and found so many curious and important Passages in it, and
so many instructive Dissertations on several Points of
Philosophy, as gave me abundant Satisfaction. Many of my Friends,
Men of excellent Sense and Learning, have express'd equal
Approbation of it, so that I dare say, Sir, you will read it with
the same Pleasure._

_I own to you that at the first Reading I suspected the Author
had taken a Traveller's Privilege of mixing a little Romance in
his Relation; but when I perus'd it again, and consider'd it a
little more particularly, I found nothing in it but what was very
natural, and highly probable. And that Air of Candour and
Simplicity we meet with every where in the honest old Gentleman
the Author, has fully convinc'd me._

_There are Passages indeed, in certain Conversations upon Points
of Religion, which, at first, a little shock'd me, but upon a
closer Examination, and finding that the Author, who always was a
great Champion for his own Religion, has generally expos'd their
Weakness or Falshood, I thought there was nothing in it that
could startle a Man well instructed in the Christian Faith,
which, God be prais'd, is too well establish'd to fear any thing
from the Attacks of Libertines or Infidels: Consequently, we have
no need to have recourse to mean Artifices for concealing the
force of the Arguments made use of against us, as if we had a bad
Cause to defend._

                        _I am, &._




THE CONTENTS.


CHAP. I. _Of our Author's particular Studies and Profession; with
an Account of his Embarking, and his first Shipwreck on the Coast
of_ Spain.

CHAP. II. _The Author's Stay at_ Lisbon, &c.

CHAP. III. _Of the Author's Second Voyage, and his Shipwreck upon
an unknown Coast._

CHAP. IV. _The Author, with only two Comrades, leaves the rest of
the Company, and penetrates into those unknown Countries. The
Obstacles he meets with in his Passage_, &c.

CHAP. V. _Continuation of the Adventures of the Author and his
Comrades, till they came to an Inhabited Country._

CHAP. VI. _Of the Discovery of a very fine Country, its
Inhabitants, their Language, Manners and Customs_, &c. _and of
the Esteem which our Author and his Comrades gained there._

CHAP. VII. _A curious Conversation between the Author, the Judge,
and the Priest of the Village concerning Religion._

CHAP. VIII. _The Author is carry'd to the King's Court. He traces
the Origin of those Monarchs; describes the Royal Palace,
Temple_, &c.

CHAP. IX. _Which contains several very curious Conversations
betwixt the King and our Author._

CHAP. X. _Containing the Ceremonies at the Births and Burials in
this Country, the manner of administring Justice, and many other
Remarkables._

CHAP. XI. _More Adventures of the Author, and his Comrade, till
their Departure from Court._

CHAP. XII. _The Author leaves this fine Country; the Ways he
contriv'd to get out of it. He meets again on the Sea-Side with
some of the Ship's Company with whom he had formerly been cast
away upon the Coast_, &c.

CHAP. XIII. _Containing what happened to the Residue of the
Ship's Company, during the Author's Absence; and the rest of
their Adventures 'till their Departure from this Country._

CHAP. XIV. _The Author's Passage from the Southern Countries to_
Goa, _where he was imprison'd by the Inquisition. The Story of a_
Chinese _whom he met with there, and the Manner how they got
their Liberty._

CHAP. XV. _Of the Author's Departure for_ Lisbon: _How he was
taken and carry'd into Slavery, and what happened to him while he
was a Slave._

CHAP. XVI. _Continuation of the Adventures of_ Peter Hudde _who
is mention'd in the second Chapter; and the Author's Arrival at_
London.




The Travels _and_ Adventures of _JAMES MASSEY._




CHAP. I.

_Of our Author's particular Studies and Profession; with an
Account of his Embarking, and his first Shipwreck on the Coast
of_ Spain.


The narrow Limits with which the Life of Man is circumscrib'd,
and the few Years he is capable of employing in cultivating and
perfecting the Arts and Sciences, glide away so soon, that no
wonder if the Progress he makes in either, turns to very little
Account. Nor is the Shortness of Life the only Obstacle which
thwarts our natural Desire of Universal Knowledge; the Loss of
Worldly Goods being another Bar equally insurmountable, the Truth
of which I learnt, to my Cost, long before I had finish'd my
Studies.

The Inclination I had from my Cradle to the _Belles Lettres_, to
Antiquity, and to the strange Rarities I saw brought home from
foreign Parts, made my Father resolve to put me early to School,
where I was such an apt Scholar that my Diligence and Memory got
me the Prize in all the Classes. The fine things my Masters said
in my Praise, and the Tenderness with which my Parents lov'd me,
redoubled my Emulation, insomuch that I gave my self no Respite,
and had made so good use of my Time that when I was but eighteen
Years old, I understood both _Latin_ and _Greek_, very well. In
short, I had gone thro' a Course of Philosophy, and was far
advanc'd in the Mathematics, when my Father _David Massey_, who
was Captain of a Ship, had the Misfortune to be blown up with his
Vessel by the Imprudence of a Sailor, who inadvertently set fire
to the Powder.

This fatal Blow happen'd to our Family in 1639, and of all the
Days in the Year, upon that very Day that our Army was beat by
the _Spaniards_ before _Thionville_; you must know that the good
Man was bound to the Factory at _Senegal_, and as the greatest
Part of the Lading was upon his own Account, my Mother was on a
sudden left a Widow with five Children, and scarce any thing to
maintain them. This Calamity however was so far from breaking her
Heart, that as soon as she receiv'd the News of it, she sent for
us, and said to us with a manly Air: 'Children, one of the worst
Misfortunes has happen'd to you that could fall out in humane
Life: One fatal Moment has not only robb'd me of my dear Husband,
but you of your Father, and all your fortunes. Nevertheless, be
not cast down, for the Divine Providence can work Miracles to
support his Creatures. Learn by this Fatality, not to place your
Trust in the Arm of Flesh; and be assur'd that God is a gracious
Being, who will not abandon you. Since I have not sufficient
Means left to bring you all up as we had intended, consider what
Professions each of you is most inclin'd to follow. For your
part, _James_, said she, I think you had best be a Surgeon,
which, since you seem to be fond of Travelling, like your Father,
is an Art that will favour your Design.' She likewise propos'd to
the biggest Children what Professions they should undertake; to
which every one of them consented with Tears, and apply'd with
Success.

My Mother, who was a Native of _Hedin_, where she had Relations
still living, left _Abbeville_, and went thither to settle. To my
very great joy, tho' contrary to my Expectation, I found many
People there who were sincerely concern'd for her Misfortune. One
of her Brothers took one of the Children off of her Hands; a
Father-in-law took another; and twenty People promis'd her that
they would never let her want. Nay, some would fain have
persuaded me to alter my Purpose, and pursue my Studies, in hopes
that in time I might have it in my Power to bring up the innocent
Children, who were not able to help themselves; but my
Resolution was form'd, and my Inclination fix'd.

I took Leave of my Family and my dearest Acquaintance, who were
sorry to part with me, and set out for _Paris_. The Grandeur,
Magnificence, and Variety, together with the vast Concourse of
People of all Ranks, which I saw on my Arrival at this fine
Place, did at the first Dash astonish me; every thing that
occur'd to my View, seem'd perfectly new to me; I thought my self
in another World; and M. _Rousseau_, the Surgeon, to whose
Tuition I had been recommended, had enough to do for near a
fortnight to answer the Questions I was continually putting to
him, to gratify my Curiosity. He likewise did me the Favour to
carry me to _Marli_, _Fontainbleu_, _St. Dennis_, _St. Germain_,
the _Louvre_, the _Tuilleries_, and many other Places, which are
the Admiration of foreigners. But as the Value of Things is
enhanc'd by their Rarity, and diminish'd by their Frequency, I
accustom'd my self at last to look upon all these Fineries with a
sort of Indifference, which by degrees turn'd to an Aversion; so
that I abandoned all those Curiosities to the Speculation of the
Idle and the Indolent, and began to apply my self carefully to
the Art I had purpos'd to study. M. _Rousseau_ had very good
Business, and great Experience, and the many Cures he perform'd,
open'd new Discoveries to me every Day.

Yet for all this, scarce a Day pass'd but I exercis'd my self
several Hours in those Languages and Sciences, in which I had
before spent all my Time. I was the more encourag'd to do so,
because Philosophy and the Mathematics seem'd to be much in
vogue, by the Application of all Gentlemen to them, of what Age
and Rank soever. At the same time there came out a Treatise of
Conic Sections, said to be written by the Son of M. _Pascal_, the
Intendant of Justice at _Roan_, at which, many Persons of
Learning were really surpris'd. I had the Curiosity to run it
over, but I found things in it which I thought above the Reach of
a Lad of Sixteen Years of Age, for in several Places it surpass'd
_Apollonius_. Many People were of my Opinion, especially when
they consider'd, that the Father of this pretended young Author
was a thorough Proficient in this Science, from whence the
Generality imagin'd, that he had a mind to give the Son the
Credit of it, to usher him into the World with the better Grace.
Be this as it will, 'tis certain that the Junior _Pascal_ was a
Man of a lively Imagination, and a great deal of Penetration and
Judgment, as it afterwards fully appear'd. M. _Morin_, whom I
took the Liberty to apply to, and who receiv'd me with
extraordinary Civility, procur'd me also the Acquaintance of M.
_Des Argues_, M. _Midorge_, and several other Mathematicians, who
sav'd me a great deal of Labour by the curious MSS. they put into
my Hands, and the clear and concise Methods they were pleas'd to
make me acquainted with. By means of these learned Personages, I
had Access likewise to the Reverend Father _Mercenne_. This
ingenious Gentleman was a great Help to me for the understanding
of several Questions in Natural Philosophy, and the
Metaphysics. As he was intimate with M. _Descartes_, who
was then in _Holland_, I propos'd nothing of Difficulty to him,
but he explain'd to me at one time or other; and he was the first
Man that ever put into my Hand the Six Meditations of that
celebrated Philosopher. I was so desirous of learning how to
demonstrate the Exigence of a God, the Immateriality of the Soul,
and its real Distinction from the Body, that I read them with all
the Attention I was capable of; but I frankly own that I was not
satisfy'd with them. His Method for the due conducting of Reason,
and finding out the Truth in the Sciences, his Dioptricks, his
Meteors, his Theory of the World, and every thing in general that
I had seen of his, charm'd me; but for his Metaphysics, as I said
before, I lik'd no Part of 'em, but the Subtilty of his
Arguments. This made me conclude, that we ought never to wade
above the Depth of our shallow Understandings, and that we should
confine our selves to Bodies, to explain their Nature, Form,
Number, Properties, the Alterations occasion'd by Motion, and
what may be most remarkable in them for our own Use, for the Good
of Society, and for the Understanding and Advancement of Humane
Knowledge, without pretending to make manifest and visible, as it
were, to the naked Eye, such things as are in their own Nature
_Arcana's_, and are, in all Probability, design'd to be for ever
the Objects of our Faith and Admiration. It appear'd in a very
little while, that I was not the only Person of that Opinion for
an anonymous Book was publish'd at the _Hague_, by an unknown
Author, with a View to explode the Philosophy of _Descartes_: At
the same time Father _Bourdin_ attack'd it in his public
_Theses_; and then came out the Objections of Messieurs _Hobbes_,
_Gassendi_, _Arnaud_, and others, to his Metaphysics. I was so
taken with that Author, that I was curious to see all his
Disputes, which cost me so much Time, that my Master often
reproach'd me for it, and said that I neglected the main Point,
for the sake of applying to things which cou'd be of no great Use
to me, and which, as to several of them, were not universally
approv'd of. He even went so far as to tell me one Day, that I
was in the high Road to Atheism, for that I had already embrac'd
an Opinion which had been lately condemn'd by the Tribunal of the
_Inquisition_, in the Person of _Galileo_, whom they had confin'd
in the Prisons of the _Holy Office_, after having caus'd his
Treatise of the _Circular Motion of the Earth_, according to the
Principles of _Copernicus_, to be burnt by the common Hangman.
But left these Reproaches might entirely discourage me, he took
care to season them with Commendations of my considerable Talents
for Surgery, and the Knowledge I had acquir'd in it,
notwithstanding the Time I devoted to other Occupations.

At length, when he found that all he could say did not put me out
of conceit with those fine Sciences, he resolv'd to enter me into
the State of Matrimony. He talk'd to me incessantly of a very
pretty Niece of his, who, after her Mother's Death, would have a
considerable Estate. He often gave me to understand, that he
shou'd not be sorry if I was marry'd to her; and that as he was
advanc'd in Years, it would be in his Power to put me into the
intire Possession of his Shop, which was well accustom'd: But
this was not the Mark I aim'd at. When he perceiv'd my
Indifference, he became more cold to me than before, insomuch
that he began to neglect me, and to conceal several things from
me, which I could not well learn without him; so that after
having serv'd two Years Apprenticeship, I went to _Diep_, where I
stay'd one Year more with M. _La Croix_, who was without Dispute
a very able Master.

I will not stop here to relate the minute Adventures which I had
in both those Towns, because I think them too inconsiderable; but
I cannot pass over in Silence, that while I was at this Port, a
Man arriv'd there whom the Vulgar call'd, _The Wandering Jew_. My
Master, who was a curious Man, and very courteous, after having
talk'd with him several times occasionally, invited him to Dinner
one Day, that he might have the Opportunity of hearing him
discourse. The first Thing he told us was, That he was
Cotemporary with Jesus Christ, and that he saw him crucify'd. My
Name, said he, is _Michob_, and I was one of _Pontius Pilate's_
Domestics. When that _Roman_ Judge pronounc'd Sentence against
Jesus, I stept up to this pretended Criminal (continued he) and
said to him, _What makes you stay here so long? Han't you heard
your Condemnation? Get off! Why do you delay?_ To which the Holy
Man reply'd to me, _I'll be gone, but you shall stay till I
return._ 'This is now above 1600 Years ago (said he) which I hope
is the greatest Part of the Time that I am to wander upon the
Earth. Most People are fond of Life, and few there are but wou'd
be glad to add an Age to the Years they have liv'd already, if it
were in their Power, but for my own part, I wish with all my
Heart I had dy'd a thousand Years ago.' As the Droll talk'd all
manner of Languages, had by consequence a happy Memory, and had
been a Traveller all his Life-time, it was a Pleasure to hear him
relate a thousand Stories, as clear and evident Truths, which
past Ages have transmitted to us in a very confused Light, and
after a very uncertain manner. There is no Corner of the World
but he affirm'd he had visited. He nam'd several Kingdoms and
Republics to us, that lie about the two Poles, which we had never
heard the mention of. All the Courts in the World were known to
him. He was not ignorant of the minutest Circumstance of the most
remarkable Revolutions of Empires, since he came into the World.
In short, the remotest Incidents seem'd to him as recent as if
they had just happen'd. But the Passage at which we all prick'd
up our Ears, was where he began to entertain us with an Account
of the Saints that rose again at the Crucifixion of Jesus Christ.
All _Jerusalem_, said he, was alarm'd when it was reported that
the People at the Burial-Places had seen the Earth move in
several Parts, the Graves open of themselves, and naked Bodies
appear, and make a thousand different Motions. The Spectators,
continued he, were so astonish'd at this unexpected Sight, that
they all trembled, and several dy'd with Fear. The most daring of
them were willing, however, to see the Issue of it, and they were
wonderfully surpris'd when, by and by, they saw Humane Creatures
start all at once out of their Graves, and press in a Hurry thro'
the Multitude, who made way for them by tumbling to the Ground,
as if they were all going to take Possession of their Sepulchres.
No one cou'd discern, added _Michob_, was he ever so attentive,
of what Sex the risen Bodies were, for they seem'd to be all of
the same Bigness, the same Age, and Complexion, and had no
visible Mark by which they cou'd be distinguish'd from one
another. They had not a Hair upon all their Bodies; their Bellies
were flat, and seem'd as if they stuck to their Ribs; several
held their Mouths open, but there were no Teeth to be seen; and
their round and smooth Fingers seem'd to be intirely bare of
Nails. This made him conclude, that all the Excremental Parts,
and those which serve to grind, to swallow and digest Food while
we are in a State of Mortality, will not accompany us to the
other World, where, in short, they would be useless. In fine,
according to his Discourse, it was never positively known what
became of those Persons; but it was reported some Days after,
that they were gone to _Galilee_, where they were to confer with
Jesus Christ, and from thence to be carry'd to the Mansion of the
Blessed. It may well be suppos'd that this curious Subject did
not fail to occasion a tedious Conversation: 'Twas Midnight when
our Guest left us, tho' my Master, notwithstanding the
Conversation he had had with him elsewhere, wou'd fain have kept
him till next Day. As the Magistrates look'd upon him to be a
Visionary, they did not much mind what he said, consequently he
was not a dangerous Person, and ask'd no favour of any Body; for
the common People, and abundance of credulous and superstitious
Gossips, who thought him a Prodigy, gave him what Necessaries he
wanted; besides that he stay'd but a little while in a Place, and
was no more than a Wanderer up and down in the World.

His Departure, added to all the fine Things I had heard him say
of Foreign Countries, very much whetted my natural Desire to
travel. I imparted my Design to M. _La Croix_, and as he had
already been so good as to watch all Opportunities of publishing
the Progress I had made in my Profession, it was not at all
difficult for me to enter my self as a Surgeon on Board the Ship
of Captain _Le Sage_, then preparing for a Voyage to _Martinico_.
We sail'd therefore from _Diep_ the 21st of _May_, 1643. Our Ship
carry'd but four Guns, and the Crew consisted but of Fifty-two
Persons. Tho' the Captain was a _Huguenot_, yet he was a perfect
honest Man, strictly just, and extremely devout. He wou'd not
suffer a Day to pass over his Head without Publick Prayers on
Board, every Morning and Evening, which were perform'd with great
Zeal and Edification by _Peter du Quesne_, a young Student in
Divinity, with whom, I can truly say, for my own part, I was so
affected, that I immediately conceiv'd an Esteem for him, and
that I had not been in his Company a Fortnight, but the
Veneration, which the Monks had impress'd me with for the holy
Men and Women in Paradise, was very much abated; but as ill Luck
would have it, the Benefit I receiv'd from the wholsom Lectures
of this agreeable Companion, was of no long Duration.

Twenty-seven Days after our Departure, when we were off of _Cape
Finisterre_, we perceiv'd that our Ship took in much more Water
than ordinary. The Carpenters, who were never idle, were as
diligent as possible to find out the Cause of this Disaster; but
notwithstanding all their Care, and the plying of the Pumps Day
and Night, they were never the nearer, and at the end of
Thirty-six Hours the Water was risen to such a Height, that it
run out at the Port-Holes. The Captain seeing there was no
Remedy, order'd us to put to Sea in the two Long-Boats, without
taking any thing with us but our Money, of which we had not much.
M. _Le Sage_ was still on Board, with the Master, the Pilots, and
four other young Gentlemen, who were only making a Voyage of
Pleasure, when the Ship sunk to the bottom like a Stone. Tho'
they were prepar'd for the Event, yet they were intangled in one
another; but as we were at hand, we gave them all the Assistance
in our Power, and had only the Misfortune to lose one of those
four Lads, _Colombier_, a young Gentleman of _Picardy_, who was
scarce Fifteen Years of Age.

We were oblig'd to be as easy as possible under our Loss, and to
consider what Course to steer next; for tho' we had try'd to make
to Land for above two Days, yet the Wind, which was at S.E.
hinder'd us. The most mortifying Circumstance of all was, that
thro' a Misconstruction of the Captain's Meaning, and for want of
Time to supply our selves, we had very little Provision, and no
Compass to guide us. The Sky was serene, the Sea calm, and the
Weather agreeable; but every one dreaded a Change. Mean time,
with the Light of the Sun by Day, and of the Stars by Night, we
us'd the utmost Diligence to get ashore, but cou'd not observe
that we made any considerable Advance; so that we began to
despair of our Lives, especially upon the third Day, when there
fell so thick a Fog, that it was impossible to see the Distance
of two Foot. At this very time, the little Long-Boat separated
from ours, which the Captain perceiving by the Cries we made to
one another, press'd the feeble Rowers to strain hard to rejoin
us, which they did indeed, with a Vengeance; for falling foul
upon our little Vessel, those on Board us were so alarm'd, that
they all rose up at once, and gave such a Shock to theirs, that
it turn'd Keel upwards. We had a great deal of Difficulty to save
them, and much more to make room for them; for we all lay one
upon another, and had not eat any thing for above Forty Eight
Hours.

In short, it pleased God that about Noon, when the Sun had
dispers'd the Fog, we discover'd several Sail coming towards us,
which agreeable Sight gave us Joy inexpressible. We tack'd about
immediately to meet them, and in three or four Hours time they
came up with us, when Captain _Davidson_ was so kind as to take
us on Board his Ship. He was bound from _Portsmouth_, as Convoy
to Seventeen _English_ Merchant Ships, that were going to
_Lisbon_. As our Bowels had been so much relax'd, and it being
the Opinion of the Physicians (whom, however, we did not go to
consult on purpose) that there was no danger in Eating and
Drinking heartily, no sooner were the Provisions brought, but we
were all glad to see our Beards wag. Every thing that was serv'd
up to us was absorb'd as quick as if it had been thrown into a
Well; but tho' our Bellies were full, we were not satisfy'd. We
had no sooner granted a Respite to our Jaws, but we fell into a
profound Sleep, and I question if there was one of us that did
not sleep at least Twenty Hours before he was thoroughly awake.
The Second Meal set us intirely to rights again. A Lieutenant of
the Ship who spoke _French_, would needs have me give him the
Particulars of our Misfortunes, some of which rais'd his Pity,
and others his Laughter. At last we arriv'd at a good Harbour,
and landed at _Lisbon_ the first of _July_, without the Loss of
one Man besides _Colombier_.




CHAP. II.

_The Author's Stay at_ Lisbon, _&c._


_Lisbon_ stands near the Mouth of the _Tagus_, in a Situation
extremely diverting; and certainly 'tis one of the finest Cities
in _Europe_. It has a considerable Trade, which renders it very
populous and wealthy. According, to the Calculation I made of it
in the Bulk, there cannot be less than 20000 Houses. There are
Thirty-five or Forty Gates for the Conveniency of the
Inhabitants; and I am very much mistaken if it be not two long
Leagues in Compass.

The Person to whom I made my Application, was one M. _Du Pre_, a
Surgeon by Profession, a Man who had a great deal of Practice,
and was capable of finding me Employment. In short, the good Man
receiv'd me with open Arms. I had been with him but a very little
while ere I discover'd that he was one of the Reformed, for he
went very seldom to Mass, often read Sermons to his Children, and
not a _Sunday_ went over his Head but he catechis'd them
privately: And he, for his part, quickly perceiv'd also that I
was very far from a Bigot; so that he confess'd to me he kept the
Bible at home for the Instruction of his Family, which he carry'd
me to see.

To speak the Truth, the first time that I gave it a Reading,
which was dispatch'd in a very little time, I took it for an
ill-concerted Romance, to which however I gave the Name of Sacred
Stories. The Book of _Genesis_ seem'd to me to be meer Fiction;
the _Jewish Law_ and _Ceremonies_ a Medley of Trifles and
Childish Vanities; the _Prophesies_ an Abyss of Obscurities, and
the most ridiculous Nonsense; and the _Gospel_ a pious Fraud,
invented to cajole silly Women, and captivate the Vulgar. What
shock'd me first of all was to find, that in the Work of the
Creation there was Light, before the Luminaries which produce it,
and without which all wou'd be Darkness and Obscurity. Then I
boggled at the Fatal Necessity Man was laid under to labour and
die, as a pretended Consequence of his Crime. Afterwards I
reflected on the Sentence pass'd upon the Woman, to bring forth
Children in Sorrow, and that on the Serpent, to creep on its
Belly, as if before it had Legs. The Rainbow, which was plac'd in
the Clouds after the Deluge, to dispossess Mankind of the Fear of
perishing by a second Flood: The Favour granted by Heaven to
_Lot_, to depart out of _Sodom_, that he might be at liberty to
go immediately and commit a double Incest with his Daughters: The
Amours of _Pharaoh_ and of _Sarah_ the Wife of _Abraham_; and the
Rape committed on her, when she was a decrepid old Woman, by
_Abimelech_ King of _Gerar_: The frequent Dialogues between the
Creature and his Creator: The Passage over the _Red Sea_, and the
many other Miracles wrought for the _Jews_: The Ass, whose Mouth
was open'd to say so little to the Purpose; and a thousand other
Difficulties of the same Nature, puzzled my Reason to a
prodigious Degree. I cou'd not comprehend how Effects cou'd
precede their Causes. I had been so often taught the contrary in
the Schools, and daily Experience had so many times confirm'd
this Truth to me in the Works of Nature, that I did not care so
much as once to think of it. I thought it altogether as absurd to
suppose that Man wou'd have been immortal, if he had not
disobey'd God, because I did not see any Appearance that the
Order and Constitution of his Parts wou'd have suffer'd any
Alteration, after he had receiv'd Life. Nor did I conceive how
the Earth wou'd have been in a Condition to bear its Fruits
continually in the same Abundance, without Cultivation, unless it
had been quite of another Nature then, than it is at present,
which is not probable: I had read a hundred Voyages, which
assur'd me that the Women in general, in the _East-Indies_, in
_Africa_, and in _America_, about the Line, scarce suffer any
Pain at all in the Delivery of the Humane Species into the World;
insomuch that the Women of _Brasil_ commonly go to be deliver'd
near some Spring or River, where they wash themselves, cleanse
the Infant, and then carry it to their Husbands, who immediately
take to their Beds, where they lie-in, and receive the
Compliments of the Gossips, while the Woman goes abroad for
Provision to regale them. On the other hand, among the People who
live towards the Poles, the Sex suffers a vast deal at such
times, and even many of them lose their Lives; so that this
varies proportionably to the Climates, and to Peoples
Constitutions. 'Tis the very same thing in Beasts, which for no
Crime by them committed, are equally subject to those different
Changes. In fine, for it wou'd require whole Volumes to exhaust
this Subject, when I consider'd the Cause of the Rainbow, and its
Bigness, and Colours, having made a hundred artificial ones my
self, which is easily done, by taking Water into one's Mouth and
squirting it abroad, in some Place opposite to the Sun Beams,
which has no very bright Objects beyond it, and by several other
ways; I cou'd not well digest the Account which _Moses_ gives us
of it, as a Meteor unknown before that time.

Nevertheless, all these Obstacles did not intirely discourage me;
for I undertook to run over this holy Book a second time, on
condition, however, that, as I went thro' it, I might desire my
Master to explain the difficult Passages. He consented to it, and
we were every Day deeply engag'd in Disputes, during which the
good Man frequently rav'd at me, and I was well off if he only
call'd me a Libertine, and a stubborn Unbeliever. I said to him
sometimes, that it was no strange thing to see a Crowd of
Swimmers follow the rapid Course of a wide deep River, because
'tis every whit as agreeable as 'tis easy; but as soon as any one
Man turns his Back to the others, cutting the Stream, and
hastening nimbly towards its Fountain, they are all surpris'd at
the Action; for which, some admire him, and others, especially
his Companions, envy him to such a degree, that they are ready to
burst with Spite, and do every thing they can imagine to
discredit and ruine him, because what he does is an evident Proof
of Skill and Vigour on his Part, and of meer Dastardy and Folly
on their Part. 'Tis the same thing as to our Sentiments
concerning the Sciences, and especially Religion; the first we
imbibe stick with us, so that we cannot bear to be contradicted.
We are disgusted with every thing that is not conformable to
them, and from the Moment that a Man talks of discarding them, he
is infallibly reckon'd a Mad-man, or a Knave. Mean time, I
declare to you, that as I entertain a much more favourable
Opinion of a Man who swims against the Stream, than of another
who suffers himself to be insensibly born away with it, so I am
infinitely more inclin'd to think well of that Man's Penetration
and solid Judgment, who examines every thing, and even sometimes
opposes Opinions long since receiv'd, than of those Men who hold
Sentiments, as by Right of Inheritance, from their Ancestors, and
who only retain them for the sake of their Age or their
Authority; because it seldom happens that People go out of the
common Road, without Reasons for so doing; whereas 'tis not so
much expected that Men shou'd give their Reasons for not
deviating from it.

At the beginning of our Conversation, another Affair happen'd,
which gave occasion to another Dispute. A Captain of a Ship
having brought some Negroes from _Africa_, made a Present of one
of the handsomest to a Friend of his, a Man of Figure and
Substance, but whimsical, and hard to be pleas'd. This Negro,
after having liv'd several Years with so rigid a Master, and
suffer'd a thousand Abuses from him, could bear it no longer, and
resolv'd, whatever might be the Consequence, to take Revenge in a
way the most dangerous that cou'd be. For this End, he went to
the Apothecary that serv'd the Family, and under pretence that
they were extremely pester'd with Rats, he desired two or three
Pennyworth of Arsenic. The Fellow was scarce got out of the Shop
to do some Errands, when the Apothecary sent to tell the
Gentleman, that since his Black came for the Ratsbane, he had
thought of an admirable Composition to destroy those Vermin, and
that if he pleas'd he would immediately send him the Receipt. The
Gentleman, who was naturally of an uneasy Temper, being surpris'd
at this Message, and the more because he very well remember'd
that he had us'd his Domestic barbarously but the Day before,
sent for him to know what he meant to do with that Poison, and
swore by all that's sacred he would murder him, if he gave him
the least Cause to suspect him. It happen'd that the Valet was
not then in the way, but as soon as he came home, a Servant-maid,
who dreaded that she shou'd see him broke upon the Wheel, gave
him secret Notice of what had pass'd. The Wretch was sadly
affrighted; and being conscious that he had not Courage enough to
stand the Test, he stole away, and without more ado, hang'd
himself. Mean time, his Master was out of all Patience because he
did not see him; and after having order'd Messengers to go and
find him out, at the Places to which he had sent him, a Footman
came and surpris'd him with the News, that he found him hanging
in the Corn-Loft.

The Notice of this tragical Action was quickly spread every
where. The Gentleman being one of my Master's best Patients, he
went to him immediately, and desired him for several Reasons to
order it so, that he might have the Body. The Gentleman, who was
a Person of no small Influence, made no Scruple to assure him he
should have it, and the very same Day he perform'd his Promise.
As soon as the Body was put into our Hands, we dissected it in
form. All the Parts of it were disposed like those of the Body of
a white Man, at least, we observ'd no Difference; but what
surpris'd us was, to find immediately under the _Epidermis_, a
very thin delicate Membrane, which my Master had never perceived
in other Bodies, and which I had never heard of before. He
immediately sent for a famous Physician of the Town, to whom he
imparted this Discovery, but the Doctor did not seem so much
surpris'd as I expected, for the same thing had happen'd to him
upon the like Occasion. We concluded that this must be the true
Cause of the Blackness of this Race of Men, forasmuch as this
Tunick stifles, and no doubt absorbs the Rays of Light; as on the
contrary, a Leaf of Quicksilver plac'd behind _Venice_ Glass,
makes them reflect, and strikes them back towards the Place from
whence they came. This gave occasion to a strong Debate
concerning the Origin of the _Ethiopians_, which, when we
consider this remarkable Difference, seems not to be the same
with other Men. Upon this Principle I was going to draw
Consequences which would have tended to no less than the intire
Subversion of the System of the Sacred Author in Debate. But I
was silenc'd by being told, That there were many things, which it
was the Will of Heaven we should admire, but are forbid to dive
into.

I was much delighted to hear this Doctor discourse upon the
Construction and Operations of the Humane Body. He spoke _Latin_
like _Cicero_, and was as good an Orator as _Demosthenes_. I was
charm'd with every thing he said, because the Terms in which he
express'd himself were Strong, and well-chosen; and he always
aim'd to be clear and intelligible.

Not to give you a Detail of the long Conversation we had upon
this fine Subject, I will only mention that he observ'd three
things to us, which spread themselves in general over the whole
Body; the one externally, which is the Skin; and the two others,
which are the Veins and Nerves, in the Internal, and less visible
Parts of the Corporeal Mass. The Skin, _said he_, is necessary to
the Creature, because, like a Shell, it covers, incloses, and
wraps about its Members on all Sides, in such a manner as to
defend every Part of us against the Injuries of the Air, as it
does the Face and Hands, if we were inur'd to expose the whole
Body in the like manner. The Veins and Arteries, those Rivulets,
in which flows the Blood, the true Principle and immediate Cause
of Life, derive their Streams from the Heart, and run thro' the
whole Machine, so that it is not possible to prick it in any
Place, be it ever so small, without piercing some of their
Branches; which is plain from the Vermilion Colour of the
Moisture that instantly starts out. In short, there is no Part in
us where we do not meet with Nerves; this is clear, and may
easily be prov'd, beyond all Contradiction or Question. All these
Nerves, without Exception, proceed from the Brain, where, like so
many Strings, Twigs, or hollow Tubes, their several Extremities
are so rang'd, one by another, that they form a sort of Sphere,
in the middle of which there is a small Glandule extremely
sensible and delicate; and to the Basis are fasten'd an infinite
Number of imperceptible Arteries, by which a prodigious Quantity
of Spirits flow to it from the Heart, which Spirits sweep the
Glandule in a continual Agitation, and ready to yield to the
least, extraneous Motion.

To illustrate this by an Example; Suppose I have in my Hands a
thousand Ends of Thread ty'd together, 'tis impossible that any
one shou'd be pluck'd without my perceiving it immediately, tho'
I can't point to the very Place where the Attraction is made.
Admitting therefore these Nerves, or the little Fibres of which
they are compos'd, to be full of Spirits, as indeed they always
are when we are awake, tho' they are partly depriv'd of 'em while
we sleep; if any Object whatsoever happen to strike against the
exterior End, or against any other Part of those Tubes, it is
evident, that when they are full, and by Consequence extended,
the other Extremity which is in the Brain, must be sensible of
the Shock, and communicate the Motion to the Glandule, which must
unavoidably be acknowledg'd to be the Seat of the Understanding.
And forasmuch as Experience has taught me from the Cradle, that
the Blows, Wounds, and other Ailments which my Body suffers,
generally come to it from without, as often as I perceive the
least Agitation in one of my Parts, I cannot but ascribe the
Cause of it to some external Agent, nor help believing that 'tis
really the Extremity of some Nerve, and no other Part, which was
touch'd. We are also by Nature so far prepossess'd in favour of
this Opinion, that those, for Example, who have had the
Misfortune to lose an Arm, complain they feel the Pain at their
Fingers, and in no other Place; which is a Truth that every Day's
Experience confirms. Whether therefore the Impulsion be made by
the Rays of Light on the Optic Nerves, or by the small Particles
of our Food upon the Nerves which communicate with the Tongue,
or by the imperceptible Effluvia from Bodies which we call
Scented, upon the Source of the Olfactory Nerves, or in what
other manner soever this be, it amounts to the same thing; the
Organs may be as different as they will, 'tis the Touch is the
sole Cause of all the Perceptions we are capable of. From hence
it appears, that neither they who limit the Number of the Senses
to Five, nor others, who not knowing under which of those Five to
place Hunger; Thirst, and the Pleasure of Love, increase them to
Eight; it appears, I say, that neither of 'em have a right Notion
of the Nature of the Senses, because 'tis manifest from what we
have said, that there is absolutely but one.

Moreover, _continued he_, I cou'd easily demonstrate,
Mathematically, and by the Help of a Geometrical Figure, that
'tis impossible, strictly speaking, to have more than one
Perception at a time, as perfectly as we are capable by Nature,
and that when two or three are form'd together, they must needs
be confus'd; for Experience tells us, that when we look upon an
Object, the only Part of it which we see perfectly and
distinctly, is the Point which corresponds with the Optic Axes,
our Perception of the other Parts being only more or less, in
Proportion to their Distance from the Center. Our Ideas or the
Images of our Thoughts, are no more different from one another,
than our Perceptions are; for tho' we admit of two sorts of them,
distinguish'd by the Terms, Conception and Imagination, 'tis
certain that _Touching_ is the sole Cause of both the one and the
other: 'Tis the only Source of all Human Knowledge, and also of
our Reason, which, when all is said and done, is nothing more nor
less than the Union or Disunion of Names, which, by common
Consent, we have impos'd upon Substances, as they appear to our
Comprehension to bear a Conformity to their Qualities, and not at
all to their Existence. Other Creatures having Organs like to
ours, have no doubt the same Perceptions, and 'tis only the
Degree of more or less, that can constitute the Difference. The
Beasts therefore have Reason; and tho' they don't shew it, 'tis
only for want, perhaps, of Speech to give Names, as we do, to
things which affect them by being put in Motion; for, in other
Matters, they are very capable of distinguishing----

Here our Physician was interrupted on a sudden, by a terrible
Shriek from the Maid-Servant. The poor Girl, as she was bringing
an Armful of Wood from the Corn-Loft, had made a false Step, and
fell from the Top of the Ladder to the Ground. We all ran out to
her Assistance, and found that she had broke her right Leg. The
Doctor, after having seen it dress'd the first time, went home,
to my very great Concern; for, besides some Objections which I
was ready to have offer'd, I should have been very glad to have
heard the Conclusion of so curious a Discourse; and was the more
mortify'd afterwards, because I could never get another
Opportunity to engage that ingenious Gentleman to talk with me
upon the same Subject.

To return therefore from this first Digression; I must say, that
tho' M. _Du Pre_ was far from being a Philosopher, yet the few
Hints I had from him, together with _Calvin_'s Commentaries,
which he put into my Hands, were of very great Service to me.
From hence I had an Opportunity of observing, That the Creation
of Light means nothing more than the Formation of that subtle
Matter of which the Stars were composed upon the fourth Day; and
that tho' _Moses_ spoke of Day and Night before that Day, it was
only by way of Anticipation, as he said in another Place, That
God made Man, Male and Female, before he had caus'd a profound
Sleep to fall upon _Adam_, and form'd a Companion for him out of
one of his Ribs. I also very easily comprehended, as well with
regard to the Penalties which were imposed upon our first
Parents, as with regard to the Rainbow, _&c_. That both the one
and the other were at first Natural Signs, which God chang'd at
that time into Signs of Institution; much like what we observe
with respect to the holy Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's
Supper. And as to the Term _Beginning_, at the Head of the Book
of _Genesis_, it did not perplex me, tho' it puzzles many others.
I knew very well, that in Philosophy we must distinguish External
Time from the Internal; as in Geometry, we distinguish an
External Dimension from an Internal one, if I may be indulg'd the
Expression; which is as much as to say, that we must make a
Difference between a thing which has been measured, and whose
Dimensions are known, and another which has not. My Chamber, for
Example, has its Dimensions, that's undeniable; but meer Theory
cannot ascertain the Contents, Practice must be added to it, and
some common Method must be made use of, which Men are agreed on
beforehand, ere we can be able to say exactly how many Feet,
Inches, or square Lines it contains. By this means, those
Dimensions which were at first internal and secret, become
external and known, with regard to the external Measures which
serv'd to determine the Contents. All Beings in Nature therefore
have an Internal Time, and an External Time; their Internal Time
is that Duration whereby they continue in their actual and real
Existence, which extends from the Beginning to the End of them;
their External Time is the Duration of the Earth, as far as its
Motion is imploy'd to measure it; so that the External Time of a
Thing is the same, with respect to its Internal Time, as the
Measure to the Thing measur'd. We can have no Idea of any but
Internal Time abstractedly, before the Creation of the World,
because then there was no Being existent, but God, the Being of
Beings, whose Duration is without Beginning or End, and cannot
properly be defin'd or measur'd: But the very Moment that the Sun
appear'd in the Firmament, and that the Earth was suppos'd to
turn round its Centre, which it does from West to East, in a
certain Space of Time, the Name of a Day Natural was given to
each of those Periods; and that of Hours, Minutes, _&c._ to the
lesser Parts, just as the Succession of seven Days is call'd a
Week; the Moon's Revolution from West to East, a Month; the
Revolution of the Earth round the Sun, a Year, _&c._ These common
Measures help us to mark out the Time, and by rendring what was
Internal in its own Nature, External for our Use, no wonder that
without going farther backwards, we confine our selves to this
Beginning, and only make a Computation of Time, since proper
Measures were thought of to fix the Duration of it.

The Solution of these Difficulties made the Explanation of others
more easy to me. I began to perceive the Connexion in the great
Work of Redemption, the Harmony and Relation betwixt the Passages
of the Old Testament and the New, and how the Antecedents and
Consequents reciprocally depend upon one another; so that at the
third Reading of the Bible I concluded, that the Creation of the
World, and the Fall of Man, the Deluge, and the Passage of the
Red Sea, the Ceremonial Law, and Circumcision, the Menaces and
Promises, the Dreams, Visions, and Prophecies, and the most
remarkable Transactions in the Republic of _Israel_, were only
Types, Allegories, Emblems, Figures, and Shadows, which referr'd
only to the New Covenant, ow'd their Lustre purely to the Light
of the Gospel, and had Christ for their real Body.

My Landlord was charm'd at this Metamorphosis. He admir'd to
observe the sudden Transition, from that Coldness which made me
look upon Things with Contempt, to a Zeal which prompted me to
consider them with Esteem. Every thing that I did attracted his
Applause; he had scarce ever seen my Fellow. But as there is
nothing in the World perfect, he observ'd one thing in me still
which gave him great Uneasiness. My Natural Complexion was fair;
my Mother had indulg'd me always to wear a great Head of Hair,
which cover'd my Shoulders; at which M. _Du Pre_ was sadly
scandalis'd. Is it possible, _said he once to me_, that a Youth
who is so very intent on the Solution of the most difficult
Passages of Scripture, shou'd not perceive that St. _Paul_
positively forbids the wearing of long Hair, and that he thinks
it a Shame for a Man to nourish, and take so much Care of it. I
turn'd off his Remonstrances to me, upon this Head, for a long
time, with Banter; but perceiving that he spoke to me of it every
Day with the more Earnestness, I said to him one Day in my Turn,
'Sir, Is it possible you shou'd not know, that as the Diversity
of the Seasons of the Year obliges us to clothe our selves
differently, according to the Heat or Coldness of the Weather, so
the Changes which happen in Society engage us to observe
different Maxims? Heretofore, _said I_, long Hair was a Mark of
Subjection. When a Slave was freed, his Head was shav'd as a
Token of the Liberty that had been granted him; and 'tis to this
that the Apostle alludes. Under the Law, we were Slaves to Sin,
he means, but we are made free by Grace. Why shou'd we still
carry the Marks of our old Bondage about us, as the Wife does,
who is dependent on her Husband? At that Time there were Slaves,
tho' the Use of them is now very much lost among the Christians.
I own the Text says, that we are taught by Nature not to pride
our selves in our Hair; but this Expression is not to be taken in
its Strictest Sense, for Nature there signifies nothing but
Custom. Naturally we have nothing that is superfluous. Our Hair
was given us for the Guard and Preservation of the Head, and the
upper Parts of the Body, as Nails are Weapons with which Nature
has provided us for our Defence. Nature, therefore, does not
oblige us to cut off the one, or pare the Other; but 'tis rather
what we call the Mode, Decency, and certain Civil Laws
establish'd among People, which at the long Run we look upon as
Natural. The Fashion of this Age authorises the wearing of long
Hair, and I don't think it any Harm to follow it, especially in
this Part of the World, where, by the Confession of People of the
best Sense, and the generality of Divines, the Thing is
absolutely a Matter of Indifference.' But all this was not enough
to convince my Master; so that to satisfy him, I was fain to
permit him to make use of his Scissors, and to crop my Hair even
to my Ears. This Change of Custom was an Uneasiness to me; but,
in short, what will not a Man do for the sake of Peace and a good
Understanding with his Neighbour? And really this Complaisance of
mine won me his Heart to such a Degree, that he wou'd have laid
down his Life for me upon occasion. His Person, his Family, his
Goods, all were at my Service and Disposal.

Besides these Advantages, which were very considerable for a
Foreigner, as I was, he procur'd me the Acquaintance of many of
his intimate Friends, and particularly of a Factor of the
_Dutch_ Company, who was indeed one of the most agreeable young
Men that I ever knew. He talk'd _French_ very well, and was
perfectly acquainted with his Religion, of which I took an
Opportunity to converse with him, whenever we saw one another,
which I endeavour'd shou'd be as often as possible. I had
moreover this Happiness, that he accommodated me with every thing
I wanted, and wou'd not suffer me for the World to be troublesome
to my Master, who, however, was a courteous good-natur'd
Gentleman. He never made an Entertainment, but he engag'd me to
be of the Party; and the worst on't was, he treated so liberally
that we had occasion to remember it generally for two Days after
it. One time he debauch'd me so, that next Day I was seiz'd with
a violent Fever, which really had like to have cost me my Life;
for it stuck to me three Weeks, and made me as lean as a
Skeleton, so that I was nothing but Skin and Bones; and my
Physician actually gave me over. However, by observing a regular
Diet, I at length recover'd. During this, I made continual
Reflections upon the severe Laws which Nature so punctually
executes upon poor Mortals; and being sensible that there are few
Excesses which she does not punish, I concluded in my Mind, that
Frugality and Temperance are the true Means of keeping the Mind
always free, and of securing the Body from all the Distempers to
which we are otherwise, almost all of us, subject. This made me
take a firm Resolution to be more temperate for the future than I
had been in time past, and never to be guilty of any thing with
which I might reproach my self afterwards. _Van Dyke_, which was
the _Dutchman's_ Name, had made the same Resolution before I knew
him, but his Generosity, when he had a mind to regale his
Friends, oblig'd him sometimes to recede from it, and not always
to put in practice the good Lessons which he scarce ever fail'd
to give when he was the Guest of his Friends. However, I made him
own at last, That when Health is at stake, it was better to be
reckon'd an Oeconomist, than a Man of Generosity and
Complaisance.

During this, the good Man had a troublesome Affair upon his
Hands, which gave me more Uneasiness than it did him. He receiv'd
a Letter from the Wife of one of his Merchants, which requir'd
him in her Husband's Absence, to furnish M. _Heudde_'s Son, who
was her Nephew, and then set out for _Lisbon_, with what
Necessaries he wanted to continue his Voyage; adding, that he
should be reimburs'd, and that for her own part, she shou'd be
much oblig'd to him for the Favour. In about a Fortnight after,
M. _Heudde_ arriv'd at _Van Dyke_'s, attended by a Valet de
Chambre, who were both very meanly accoutred. The first Question
he ask'd him was, Whether he had not receiv'd a Letter from his
Aunt, which the Factor no sooner own'd, than he entertain'd him
with a great many Particularities about several Persons of the
Factor's Acquaintance; after which, he told him his Design of
visiting _Portugal_, _Spain_, _Italy_, _France_, and of returning
home thro' the Island of _Great Britain_. At last he talk'd of
the Money he shou'd have occasion for, to make the Tour of so
many Countries. _Van Dyke_ told him what he thought would
suffice; and as he exhorted him not to be extravagant on the one
hand, so he wou'd not have him disparage himself on the other,
because he had Orders to accommodate him with what Monies he
wanted, not only at _Lisbon_, but wherever else he travell'd:
This the Factor cou'd easily do, because he had very good
Correspondence, either directly or indirectly, in most of the
chief Towns of _Europe_. M. _Heudde_, who seem'd very well
pleas'd with the Compliment, contented himself with the Sum of
15000 Livres, and good Recommendations; and after having staid a
few Days, continu'd his Journey. _Van Dyke_, who was a very
punctual Man in his Business, immediately certify'd his Principal
of what had pass'd betwixt him and his Nephew, and what Rout he
had taken. But in a Week after, to his great Surprise, who shou'd
he meet in the Street, but him that pretended to be M. _Heudde_'s
Valet de Chambre, and asking him if his Master was not gone; he
answer'd him to his farther Astonishment, not only that he cou'd
not tell what was become of him, but that he did not so much as
know who he was. I came hither, said he, some Days ago from
_Bourdeaux_, with a Design to make a Voyage to _America_; the
Gentleman, you speak of, happening to be on Board our Ship,
bargain'd with me to be his Servant, as long as he continued in
this City, for Twenty-pence a Day, besides my Expences, which he
paid me, but dismiss'd me last Week, and I have not since heard a
Word of him. This was somewhat alarming to my Friend; and tho'
he was not very sure that he was bubbled, he had the Precaution
to write immediately to all those to whom he had given the
Traveller his Recommendations, and desired them not to let him
have any thing till farther Orders. This sav'd him from any
farther Loss, but his 300 Ducats were gone past Recovery. The
Answer he receiv'd from _Holland_ was, That they knew not what he
meant, and that this pretended M. _Heudde_ was a Knave to be
sure, that wou'd come to the Gallows.

Tho' this Loss was a Trifle to the Wealth M. _Van Dyke_ had
acquir'd, yet it vex'd him a little, and he left no Stone
unturn'd to find out the Sharper, but all his Inquiry was to no
Purpose; and whether he ever heard of him in his Life, is more
than I know, because I left him not long after; for tho' I was
heartily welcome to him, yet I did not thoroughly like my Station
there, because my Profit was but small, and my principal View was
to see the World. The Friendships I had contracted, and the
Character my Master gave me, made my Departure the more easy.




CHAP. III.

_Of the Author's Second Voyage; and his Shipwreck upon an unknown
Coast._


I had an Opportunity of going on board a _Portuguese_ Ship, which
was bound to the _East Indies_, in Company with three others. It
was commanded by One _Don Pedro_, and carry'd only Twenty Guns,
but had 147 Men aboard, of which Number were a great many
_Frenchmen_, who however, to a Man, understood the _Portuguese_
Tongue. All things being ready, we set sail the Fifth of _June_,
1644, with a very favourable Wind. The first Ruffle we met with
was the Loss of our Captain, who was, to speak the Truth, a Man
of consummate Experience, but a very Brute and Deboshee. The
Tenth Day after we were under Sail, when he had taken his usual
Dose of Brandy, he fell into such a Passion with one of our
Seamen, that from hard Words he proceeded to Blows. The Mariner,
who was a meer Blunderbuss, laugh'd, and went to make his Escape
from him, at which _Don Pedro_ was so exasperated, that he
pursued him with a Lever in his Hand, wishing the Devil might
take him if he did not break his Neck; and as they were both
running, our Officer stumbled, reel'd, and fell with such a Force
against the Capstane, that he broke his left Arm, three Inches
above the Elbow. Thereupon I was call'd, and examining the Wound,
I perceiv'd that the Bone was intirely shiver'd, and after mature
Deliberation, I was absolutely for Sawing it off. But all that I
cou'd say, was of no weight with the Patient, who cou'd not be
persuaded by any means, to undergo the Operation; for he swore
that he wou'd rather die than submit to so desperate an
Extremity. I was therefore oblig'd, sorely against the Grain, to
manage him as he pleas'd; but what I foresaw, happen'd in two
Days time; the Wound was inflam'd, a Mortification ensu'd: upon
it, and the Fifth Day after his Fall he was a dead Man.

The Ship's Company was, to the last Degree, alarm'd at this Loss,
which we took for a bad Omen; however, we were forc'd to bear it,
and after the due Honours paid to his Corpse, it was thrown into
the Sea, while the Guns were fir'd as usual on such Occasions. In
the mean time we advanc'd in our Voyage; and tho' some little
Storms arose now and then, yet they were not dangerous. The
greatest Misfortune that befel us, was our being separated from
the Company of our other Ships, so that we heard no more of them.
When we made the Island of _Ascension_, we perceiv'd that our
Water was very much corrupted and consequently we resolv'd to go
to St. _Helena_, to take in fresh Water, left the Number of our
sick Men, which was already considerable, should be much greater,
if we did not stop some where before we came to the _Cape of Good
Hope_.

But when we had discover'd that Island at a great Distance, and
were congratulating each other upon it, we spy'd that which
Sailors call a _Wool-Pack_, seemingly as big as a great Cask
within Cannon-shot of our Ship. As I had never seen any but in
Pictures, and in Books of Travels; I consider'd this Phaenomenon
with all the Attention I was capable of, and concluded that it
must be really owing to Air that was agitated, and drove with
Impetuosity into the vast Region of our Atmosphere, which
happening to meet with another sort of Hurricane impell'd from
the opposite Part of the Atmosphere, whirls back towards its
Basis, and forms the Figure of a Cylinder, which lengthens it
self in an Instant, till it comes to the Surface of the Water:
The Sea being then press'd on all Sides, except just there, the
Matter which corresponds to the middle of this Column, like what
we observe with regard to Pumps, Syringes, and Cupping-Glasses,
must needs rise, which it does with so much Rapidity and Force,
even to the bearing away of great Fish, that to the Amazement of
us all, the Sky, as serene as it was before, was cover'd with
thick Clouds, which darken'd the Air in a Moment. The Winds began
to roar hideously, the Sea was in a Foam, the Waves swell'd, and
one wou'd have thought that Nature, in the Height of her
Indignation, wou'd have swallow'd us up. The Seamen, in the
utmost Hurry, furl'd all the Sails, the Main-Sail only excepted;
nevertheless the Ship was carry'd away with such Violence, that
we were also oblig'd to let down the Main-Sail for fear of being
drove upon some fatal Rocks. I cannot here prevail with my self
to set down every minute Particular from the Journal that I kept,
of what happen'd to us during this dreadful Tempest, which lasted
Twenty-two Days, because it would take up several Sheets of
Paper; and only raise the Reader's Pity and Concern. Not only the
Women and Children that were aboard gave such Shrieks, as were
enough to have pierc'd the most obdurate Hearts, but the
generality of the Men were frighted almost out of their Wits. Not
a Day pass'd but one or other of them dy'd; We also lost our
Pilot and the Mate, so that the only Man left capable of
conducting the Vessel, was the Master of it, and he too was in a
bad State of Health. During this bitter Storm, we were compell'd
to throw over-board, at several times, 12 of our Guns, and every
thing that we thought too heavy; we also lost most of our
Anchors, and ran adrift a long while at the Mercy of the Winds
and Currents, without knowing whither we were driving, any more
than if we had been at the bottom of the Ocean. At length it
pleased God, of his special Mercy, that on the Twenty-third Day,
a Day as mild as the others had been severe, we happen'd to run
ashore at a Place altogether unknown to us, where, after having
calculated the Meridian, examin'd our Watches, and made as
correct a Computation as we could, we found that we were in about
60 Degrees of Longitude, and 44 of S. Latitude, _i.e._ 1000 or
1200 Leagues from St. _Helena_. The biggest of our Boats having
been carry'd away by the Waves, which had wash'd our Decks a
thousand times, glad we were that we had preserved the least; we
immediately put ashore in her; and after having return'd Thanks
to God for having sav'd our Lives, we began to take our best
Clothes and Goods out of the Ship, together with what wou'd be
most necessary for us by Land. With some paltry Sails we made two
Tents; and some cut down the Branches of Trees, with, which they
built Barracks, in which the remainder of our Ship's Company,
consisting of Eighty-five Persons, lodg'd.

There were Forty of us that were as well as we cou'd be in our
present Circumstances, part of which Number look'd after the
Ship, and the rest went a marauding for what they could get.
Never were Fire-Arms, Powder, and Shot of more Service to us than
now. There was all sorts of Wild-Fowl in abundance, and
particularly Hens larger than Turkeys, which were fat, and very
nourishing. Nor did we want for Fish, because we had good store
of Nets, Hooks, and other Instruments to catch them. Here were
few Tortoises, but they were very good. We took some which I am
sure weigh'd from 400 to 500 Pound, and were enough for us all.
We thought the Flesh of them very excellent and the Fat was the
most delicate Food in the World. It serv'd us for all Purposes,
for Sauce, or to eat upon Bread, or to burn; and in general, for
almost every Necessity. In two Hours Walk from thence towards the
East, we found a River, which supply'd us with very good Water.
Notwithstanding these Refreshments, two more of our Men dy'd; but
it was not long before the others recover'd.

Mean time our Ship was so lighten'd, that we observ'd she
floated, so that we tow'd her to the River just now mention'd. As
soon as she was laid up, the Carpenters examin'd her very
nicely, and found that there was no likelihood of her being ever
in a Condition to serve us in the Pursuit of our Voyage, because
the Storm had intirely shatter'd her. We therefore resolv'd
unanimously to take her to pieces, and with the best of her
Materials to build a smaller, to return in to _Africa_. The
Captain wou'd have had us all in our turns put our Hands to the
Work; but we so fully convinc'd him that we were not all equally
fit for it, and that there was an absolute Necessity for some
body to provide the Kitchen with Victuals for feeding so many
Mouths, that Ten of us were appointed to go in quest of
Provisions. The Nine that were join'd with me, were very clever
Fellows, part of them being as it were Huntsmen, and the rest
Fishermen by Profession; consequently 'tis natural to imagine
that in such a Country as this, we did not find it a very hard
Matter to get Food for our Company. These agreeable Occupations,
which would have been a very great Pleasure to another Person,
delighted me for a few Days; but I was soon weary of this Life,
and my Curiosity to penetrate farther into a Country, where I did
not imagine any body had ever been, made me resolve to abandon my
Comrades, tho' I was not willing to put so rash a Design in
Execution by my self. I therefore communicated my Design to two,
that I thought the most resolute, who were overjoy'd with my
Proposal, and declar'd to me severally, that they had entertain'd
the same Thought, but were afraid to trust it to a third Person.
Accordingly the Affair was concluded, upon Oath not to divulge
it; and after we had promis'd to be true to each other, we went
to rest, fully purposing to be gone as soon as possible.




CHAP. IV.


_The Author, with only two Comrades, leaves the rest of the
Company, and penetrates into those unknown Countries. The
Obstacles he meets with in his Passage_, &c.


The next Day in the Morning, which was the 24th of _September_,
1644, and the 11th of our Arrival, we each took a Hatchet in our
Belts with a Gun, and whatsoever we thought necessary for an
Enterprise of this Nature, and without more ado enter'd the Wood,
leaving the others behind us, and made great Haste towards the
S.S.W. We travell'd at least four long Leagues before we talked
of resting. _La Foret_, who was one of my Comrades, as _Du Puis_
was the other, perceiving a Heath-cock about a hundred Paces from
us, shot him; while one pick'd it, I and the other fell to
cutting of Fuel, and making a Fire under the Tree, at which we
soon roasted our Fowl by a String. We made a hearty Dinner, only
we wanted Drink, for which we were oblig'd to wait a little
longer. As we proceeded in our Journey, we found a Pit of Water,
which tho' not very clear, yet we thought it excellent: We fill'd
our Flagons with it but made little or no Use of it, for about a
League and half further we came to a Brook, where the Water was
really as good as I ever met with in my Life. It was about two
Foot deep, and ran exactly across that Part of the Road we had
purpos'd to travel, by the help of a small Sun-Dial that I had in
my Pocket, which was of great Service to us. There being no
Bridge, nor other Conveniency, we pull'd off our Stockings, _&c._
and waded thro' the Rivulet, leaving it with great Regret, after
having drank our Bellies full, and laid in a Stock of it for time
to come. We hitherto found no Trace of Man or Beast. The Country
was all over Sand, Briars, and Forests, for a matter of Eight or
Ten Leagues that we had travell'd before Sun-set. In fine, we
pitch'd our Camp at the Foot of a little Hill, where there was a
Coppice so thick that we were as much out of the Wind, as if we
had been in a Tent. Then we eat for Supper what we left at
Dinner, and made the best shift we could to repose our selves for
Sleep.

The next Morning when we wak'd, we were surpris'd to see the
whole Firmament overcast, and threatning us with a heavy Storm;
we therefore thought fit to dig a Cave in this Hill, which was
pretty steep, on the Side where we were posted, in order to
shelter our selves from the bad Weather. In short, we found in a
trice, that by the Help of our Hatchets we had prepar'd a small
Lodging. The Rain, however, did, not begin till about Eleven of
the Clock, so that we had time enough to kill more Quails and
other small Birds, which for the most part were unknown to us,
than we could spend in a Week. There was a vast Multitude of
'em, and, generally speaking, they suffer'd themselves to be
kill'd, without stirring from the Place, which was another Reason
that induc'd us to think the Country cou'd not be, inhabited.
After all, we were oblig'd to stay here four Days, which to us
seem'd more tedious than four Weeks would have done elsewhere.
But this Chagrin of ours was alleviated afterwards, for we
enjoy'd fair Weather above a Month without Intermission.

When we had quitted our Lodging, we began to discover high
Mountains, and for fear we should not find Sustenance there, we
laid in a Stock of Provisions for several Days. We were not
mistaken in our Conjectures; one would have sworn it was another
_Greenland_, the Place being all dry and barren, so that in many
Parts there was neither Herb, nor Bush, nor any thing that could
give Nourishment to the minutest Animal; therefore we discover'd
nothing worth mentioning: The Birds also were very scarce, from
whence 'tis easy to imagine, that we spent our Time there very
ill; and had it not been that every now and then we went down
into certain little Valleys, where there were some paltry
Fruit-Trees, and Water to quench our Thirst, we had been in
danger of perishing.

The Ninth Day of our Journey, towards the Evening, we arriv'd in
a Vale, where, about a Quarter of a League from us, on the right
Hand, we saw a little Torrent that descended from a Rock into a
Hollow, from whence it ran into a Marsh, which form'd a
Semi-Circle, but extended in the Center farther than our Eyes
could reach. The Banks of this fine Water were high, and
somewhat steep, which gave us reason to think that the River was
then much lower than at another Season of the Year. As I drew
near it, in order to go into it, I was startled to find the
Ground give way all on a sudden under my Feet, so that I fell in
up to my Armpits. My Comrades seeing me stick there, fell a
laughing, however they help'd me out. At the same time ten or
twelve Birds, as big as our Geese, with Beaks as long and as
broad as ones Hand; flutter'd under my Feet, darted like an Arrow
into the Air, and sounded an Alarm by a Noise of _Quacou,
Quacou_, which was their natural Cry, and loud enough to be heard
at a great Distance. Before one could tell a Hundred, the Sky was
darkned with these Birds, which prodigious Number together with
the fearful Noise they made, scar'd us so, that we absolutely
knew not what to think of it;, especially when they accosted us
sometimes in Bodies, with desperate Cries, hovering within a
Pike's Length of our Heads, and threatning as were, to tear us
Limb from Limb; and tho' we shot at them, and brought several of
'em to the Ground, it was still the same; but when we saw that
they meant us no Harm, and that they actually began to found a
Retreat, we went to take some Refreshment.

_Du Puis_ presently remark'd, that the Place where I sunk in, was
a Nest to which some of those Birds were retired, by the Side of
which was a Second, then a Third, and so on, about the distance
of ten or twelve Foot from one another. The Mouth of these
subterraneous Nests was of an oval Form, the smallest of which
was a Foot in Diameter. I crept into the third, where I found a
Place as big as a little Room, it being above eight Foot square,
and at least three in Height. There were fifteen Nests round it,
all built in a circular Form, with small Boughs full of Leaves,
clay'd over, and they were three or four Feet in Circumference.
In each Nest were six speckled Eggs, as big as one's Fist. In the
middle of the Den, there was a sort of Trough much bigger than
those Nests, which was full of a certain Matter, divided into
little round Bits, some longer than the others, which I imagin'd
at first were their Excrements, but being so curious as to put it
to my Lips, I found it of an excellent Taste, exceeding our best
Macaroons, which it very much resembled. My Comrades, who were as
fond as my self to search for Novelties, went severally into
other Dens, where they found things in the very same Situation
and Order, as I have mention'd, only as the Cavities were not of
the same Bigness, there were more Nests in some than in others.
We infer'd from thence, That no wonder there were such Numbers of
these Birds, because they multiply to such a Degree, and there's
no body to destroy them.

Scarce were we recovered from our last surprize, but we were
infinitely more astonish'd at the Sight of one of these Caverns
about a hundred Paces off. The Entrance of it could not possibly
be the Fabrick of any Birds whatsoever, for three great Stones,
each a Foot long, plac'd in the Earth, one by another, form'd the
Threshold, and in the Door-way were large Flints, four Foot in
height, and above a hundred Weight each, with other Stones plac'd
in order, one behind another, which intirely shut it up. These
Productions of the Hand of Man made us hesitate whether we ought
to wish to find Humane Beings here or not; 'tis true we should
have rejoic'd to see Creatures of our own Species, but we were
afraid we should not be very well us'd by them. Tho' we were in
this sad Quandary, we advanc'd towards it, but took care to cry
out and make Noise enough, that we might be heard by any that
should happen to be within. _La Foret_ being quite out of
Patience to see what wry Faces we made, bid us stand on each Side
with our Hatchets in our Hands, while he wou'd remove the
Obstacles, and open the Passage, that he might go in and examine
what there was behind. He actually did so; but when he was in the
Inside, he found it too dark there to see anyone thing. All that
he told us when he came out was, that a Man might stand upright
in it, and that the Apartment was habitable, he having felt a
Bench there. Upon this we went and fell'd some Trees at a small
distance from us, where we cut as much Wood as we cou'd carry,
and made a Fire before our Cavern, and, when it was well lighted,
we enter'd into our Room, which was twice the Bigness of the
others, neatly pav'd with choice little Flints, and border'd all
round with a Bank of Turf.

But, O dreadful Sight! what should we see at the same time upon
the Bank, on the left, which was most shelter'd from the Wind,
but a Humane Corpse, which was from Head to Foot a very
Skeleton. Over it there was a kind of smooth Slate, fasten'd in
the Wall, on which was engrav'd in the Greek Language, and in
Capital Letters, [Greek: AGIO HO THEOS, AGIOS IECHUROS AGIOS KAI
ATHANATOS, ELEEISON HEIMAS.] _O holy God, holy and powerful, holy
and immortal, have Mercy upon us!_ Every one will naturally
imagine, that various were our Conjectures and Sentiments of this
Matter, which I will not therefore trouble my self to repeat.
Mean time, Hunger, which made us very sharp-set, oblig'd us to
take a Brace of the Birds we had kill'd, which we held over the
Flame to burn off the Feathers, instead of skinning them, as we
us'd to do, because we fancy'd the Skin to be as delicate a Part
as any; nor were we at all deceiv'd, for after having drawn them,
and wash'd 'em, we put 'em upon the Brands, where they were
roasted in a Moment, and as we had eat but very little all Day,
we scarce left any thing, besides Bones; for they were fat,
juicy, and very well tasted. After having made a very hearty
Supper, we settled our selves to sleep, as well as we could,
leaving the dead Man to his Cavern, without touching him, because
we had a mind to examine him more narrowly next Day.

It was hardly Day-break, when our impertinent Birds renew'd their
Noise, as they flew to and from their Holes, to such a degree,
that it was impossible for us to sleep any longer, tho' we were
heartily inclin'd to it. We staid, however, till the Sun was up;
but our Appearance did not at all alarm the Fowls which were all
as hard employ'd about their several Occasions, as if they had
actually been in Pay. We saw some with their Bills full of Earth,
which they brought, no doubt, from the most irregular Parts of
their Holes, in order to make them either larger or neater.
Others came with Materials for repairing their Nests, but the
generality carry'd those Cracknels, which I thought so good the
Night before. We ascended the Eminence, to see from whence they
brought this Food. As soon as we had lifted up our Eyes, we saw
upon a little Hill, within a Musket-shot of us, three Bodies of
the same Height and Bigness. We went to take a near View of them,
and found, in short, that they were three broken Pyramids, eight
Foot in Height, five in Diameter at the Base, and about three at
the Top, very regularly built of Flints neatly placed in Rows
upon one another.

The bare View of three such rare Monuments in a Desert Country,
did not satisfy us; we were resolv'd to take one of them to
pieces; But as soon as we had taken off about the thickness of a
Foot and half of the Stones at the top, we discover'd first the
Skull of a Humane Creature, then the Shoulder-Bones, Arm-Bones,
and in a word, the whole Carcase. We just discover'd the Head of
a Corpse, which was in the Second, but went no farther, because
probably it was all the same in the last. While we were
reflecting upon all this with a sort of Wonder, I went and
discover'd round the third Pyramid certain Characters, form'd
also of little Flints, almost like Pidgeons Eggs, which I took
for the following _Hebrew_ Letters; and they were rang'd on the
Ground in this Order, _Koph_, _Vau_, _Lamed_, _He_, _Teth_,
_Lamed_, _Koph_, _Pe_, _Gimel_, _Vau_, _Beth_, _Thau_, _Hajin_,
_Koph_, _Mem_, _Lamed_, _Aleph_, _Sajin_, _Samech_, _Resch_; but
they had no Points, nor any other Mark to explain them. I try'd
my utmost to find out the Meaning of them, and have thought on't
a thousand times since, but could never accomplish it, which way
soever I set about it. There was something of the like kind round
the two other Monuments, but I did not think it worth while to
take off the Stones that we had cast upon them. In all
Appearance, these were the Remains of four poor Devils like our
selves, who, after having rambled out of their Knowledge, and
seeing no Likelihood of coming to any better Place than this,
stopt here, dug a Cave after the manner of the Birds I mention'd,
or perhaps took Possession of one of their Nests, and so dy'd
there, one after another; first those we saw under the Monuments,
and then the last upon the Bench, where we found him, and where
Time had so consumed his Clothes and Flesh, that we did not see
the least Traces of either.

What further confirm'd us in this Opinion was, that not far from
hence there was a vast Number of Trees, as straight as a Bulrush,
whose Branches grew all in Pyramidical Stories, ending at the Top
in form of an Acorn, as big as an Egg. All the Branches of these
Trees were like so many Plumes of Ostrich-Feathers, that is to
say, garnish'd with small Leaves like Strings, on both Sides.
From one end to the other, and all round the Edge of this
Plumage, there was a Border of the Size of a Writing-Quill, and
over each Row of Branches a Ring, which encompass'd the Tree,
about the thickness of one's Finger, and was that excellent Food,
of which our great Birds seem'd so dainty, and which we imagin'd
the four poor Pilgrims eat instead of Bread.

Forasmuch as I had but just tasted this Bread the Night before, I
and my Comrades fell on it very heartily. It was who could climb
best to come at it, where any was left; for in several Places
there was none to be had. In fine, we cramm'd till we could
swallow no more, and we all lik'd it so well, that _Du Puis_
actually talk'd of building a Tabernacle, and dying there, as the
Owners of those Skeletons seem'd to have done. But while we were
talking of this Subject, we were overtaken with such a sudden
Drowsiness, that we could scarce heave our Legs from the Ground,
and we all lay down. Not one of us was bereft of his
Understanding, but our Members were all benumb'd, and we almost
lost the Use of Speech. We had been two Hours in this Condition,
when we fell asleep till the Afternoon.

_Du Puis_, who was the first that awak'd, felt something under
his right Hand, betwixt Sleeping and Waking, which he thought
naked, smooth, and as big as his Thigh. He imagin'd at first,
that he had roll'd in his Sleep upon one of us, but recovering
his Reason with the Revival of his Spirits, and opening his Eyes
for better Information, he was terribly astonish'd to see betwixt
him and _La Foret_, a Serpent, which was above twenty-five Foot
long. He was more depriv'd of the Use of his Members then, than
before, and could neither stir nor speak; in the mean time the
Serpent retreated, twin'd himself about one of the neighbouring
Trees, and crept up to taste the Cracknels. Upon this, my Friend
took Courage, jogg'd me, and when I awak'd, he shew'd me that
hideous Animal. As weak as I still found my self, I got up in a
Moment, and ran away as fast as I could. _Du Puis_ follow'd me,
and _La Foret_, upon our calling out to him, did the like
instantly. Glad we were that this Monster had not swallow'd us
up, the Fear of which was a strong Motive to our Resolution of
decamping forthwith; but we were forc'd to stay all Night to
recover our selves.




CHAP. V.

_Continuation of the Adventures of the Author and his Comrades,
till they came to an Inhabited Country._


Finding our selves fresh and brisk when we wak'd, we resolv'd to
shift our Quarters; and, despising this terrestrial Manna which
had so enervated us, after laying in a good Stock of the roasted
Fowls for our Provision, we bid adieu to the Monuments, and
advanc'd farther into the Country. We were then full fifty
Leagues from the Sea. We were inclinable to eat the first Night,
but tho' we had walk'd a great deal, and pass'd over a Mountain
of seven or eight Leagues, we had little or no Appetite; and it
was three Days before we could take any thing; which gave us
reason to think, that the Bread of the Tree must be extremely
nourishing, and that it could not but be good, when taken with
Moderation. Mean time, the Way prov'd worse and worse; but, to
our Comfort; the Nights were clear, and the Days long, and the
farther we advanc'd into the Spring of this Country, and the
farther we got from the Line, the more charming we thought the
Climate and the Soil; and either the one or the other was
generally the Subject of our Conversation.

_Du Puis_, above all things, seem'd to be charm'd with the Sun,
which, from its Rising to its Setting, continually smil'd on us
with its agreeable Rays. I do assure you, said he to us one Day,
If I had not been born in a Country where the People are so happy
as to be instructed in the Knowledge of their Creator, and if I
had never heard a Word about the Being of all Beings, the
Flambeau of Heaven would, without dispute, be the only Deity that
I should think worthy of my Adoration; not only, because of all
the visible Objects in the World 'tis the most agreeable, but
because without its Influence, no Plant nor Animal can subsist:
Every thing languishes the Moment that it departs; whereas its
Presence renders Vigour to what before seem'd dying. You are not
the only Man, said I, of that Opinion; there are intire Nations
that invoke this glorious Planet, as the prime Cause of all
things; and even those Ancients who acknowledge a Being of
Sovereign Perfection, could not help ascribing certain Epithets
to it, which plainly denoted their Esteem for it. _Orpheus_
call'd it the _Eye of Heaven_. _Homer_, the _Being which sees and
hears all things_. _Heraclitus_, the _Fountain of Celestial
Light_. St. _Ambrose_, the _Beauty of Heaven_. _Philo_, the
_Image of eternal Splendor_. _Plato_, the _Soul of the World_.
King _David_ extols its Excellency to a marvellous Degree,
especially in his 18th _Psalm_; and the holy Men of the _Old_ and
_New Testament_, make no Scruple to represent it to us as the
Model of the Divinity, whom they call in a hundred Places, the
_Day-spring from on high_, and the _Sun of righteousness_.

I laugh, continued _La Foret_, at what some People have said
concerning the Planets. I pray to God, and if I have any
Veneration for the Creatures, 'tis only for the Creator's sake,
who is marvellous in all his Works; but what surprises me most is
to hear of two Motions of the Sun, which are directly opposite to
each other, _viz._ its Daily Motion, from East to West; and its
Annual one, from West to East. 'Tis true, reply'd I, these two
Motions are directly contrary to one another, if they are
ascrib'd to the Sun, which is done by the Ancients universally;
but nothing is more natural, if we ascribe these two Motions to
the Earth, which makes a great Circle round the Sun in the space
of a Year, and turns once upon its own Center or Axis in
Twenty-four Hours, just as if you were to push a Bowl, or if you
please, a Turnep, from one end of an Alley to the other, which,
while it was rolling to the end of the Alley, would make several
Turns at the same time upon its own Axis. The Earth does the
very same thing; and its two different Motions were always of use
to Men to measure the Time of their Duration. The Tour which it
makes upon its own Axis, forms our Natural Day of Twenty-four
Hours; and the Time it takes in its grand Circle round the Sun,
makes our Year of 365 Days and 6 Hours, wanting a few Minutes.
'Tis true, that this Computation or Measure for the Year was not
known always alike to all Nations. The _Egyptians_, the
_Chaldeans_, the _Jews_, and other ancient People, computed their
Years differently, and made them longer or shorter, some than
others. Many of them regulated their Years rather by the Course
of the Moon, than that of the Earth, as several Nations do even
at this Day.

The Calendar now follow'd by the Nations of _Europe_, came from
the ancient _Romans_, but was not always so exactly regulated as
at present; for in the time of _Romulus_, the Founder of _Rome_,
the Year, which ought to be the Time that the Earth is making its
great Tour round the Sun, was computed at only 304 Days, included
in 10 Months: _March_, _May_, _July_, _October_, consisted each
of 31 Days, and the others of but 30. _Numa Pompilius_, his
Successor, added 51 to this Number, so that then the Year had 355
Days. Besides, he cut off a Day from every lesser Month, which he
added to those 51, and of these he instituted the Months of
_January_, consisting of 29, and _February_, of 28 Days. In fine,
_Julius Caesar_, the first of the _Roman_ Emperors, having
consulted the most skilful Astronomers of his Time, did, with
their Consent, change the Year, which was almost a Lunar Year,
into a Solar one by adding 10 more Days to it, which he
distributed in such manner, that _January_, _August_, and
_December_, had each two, and _April_, _June_, _September_, and
_November_, one. Nevertheless, as all this was not enough,
because the Year consists of 365 Days, 6 Hours, wanting about 11
Minutes, the Emperor would have every 4 Years, a Year of 366
Days, which additional Day should be plac'd between the 6th and
7th of the Calends of _March_, so that there were two 6th Days of
the Calends of _March_, in such a Year, which was therefore
call'd _Bissextile_, because the 6th Day was reckon'd twice
before they proceeded to the next.

This Correction, as just as it was thought to be, did
nevertheless occasion a Mistake in the Calendar, in process of
Time; for tho' the Year was then but about 11 Minutes too long,
whereas the Sun, as they said, enter'd in his Time (or 45 Years
before the Birth of Jesus Christ) into the Vernal Equinox, the
24th of _March_, it enter'd into it on the 21st, at the time of
the _Nicene_ Council, _Anno_ 327, and on the 11th of _March_ in
1582, in the Reign of Pope _Gregory_ XIII, who observing it,
suppress'd 10 Days of that Year, between the 4th and 15th of
_October_, because in that Space there were no Festivals nor
Saints Days. And for fear that Posterity should relapse into the
same Error, which was a Point of Consequence to the Equinoxes,
that in time would have made an entire Revolution thro' all the
Months of the Year, by such Retrogradation, he order'd, that for
the next three Centuries successively, the _Bissextile_ Year
should not be computed at their Expiration, but only at the End
of the Fourth, from whence it comes, that there must be 400
_Gregorian_ Years and three Days to equal 400 _Julian_ Years.

I am oblig'd to M. _Du Puis_, said _La Foret_, for having started
this Subject of Conversation; for I had been a long time desirous
to know what was meant by the _Bissextile_ Year, by _Old_ and
_New Style_, and what was the real Cause of all those
Alterations. They would not be satisfy'd till I had at several
times explain'd to them the Meaning of the Terms _Epact_, _Golden
Number_, _Solar Cycle_, _Roman Indiction_, _Ides_, _Calends_, and
every thing almost that is necessary to be known for the
Composition of an Almanack. What they most wonder'd at was, when
I assur'd them that the Sun, which to us seem'd so small, is
absolutely bigger than the whole Earth. Really, said _La Foret_,
this is beyond Imagination, and I can't think that all the
Stories told us of these things are any better than Dreams. _Du
Puis_, who aggravated every Objection made by his Comrade,
presum'd to tell me, that I talk'd very much at random, because I
maintain'd the Truth of it; so that I was under a Necessity, tho'
sorely against the Grain, to proceed to some Eclaircissements for
their Satisfaction.

I confess, said I, that 'tis impossible to determine the exact
Dimensions of the Celestial Luminaries; and all that have
pretended to it have been presumptuous Impostors. The Instruments
we make use of to measure the Parallax of the Sun, are too small,
and too ill divided, considering the prodigious Distance of that
Planet from the Earth. I never yet saw an Astrolabe divided into
Minutes, tho' it were necessary it should be divided into
Seconds, and perhaps into smaller Parts, which is impossible, or
it would be too large for the Purpose. And as a Proof how liable
we are to be mistaken for want of it, the most exact Astronomers,
who, not content with the Theory, have gone about to reduce this
Query to Practice, have been so grossly deceiv'd, that the wide
Difference of one Man's Opinion from another, is enough to bring
the Understanding of those Men in question, who would palm their
Conjectures upon the World for real Truths. _Tycho Brahe_, who
seems to have made a Circuit round the Heavens, as _Christopher
Columbus_ did round the Earth, affirms, that the Sun is 139 times
bigger than the Globe which we inhabit. _Copernicus_ makes the
Number to be 162; _Ptolemy_, 166; Father _Scheiner_, 434;
_Wendelinus_ 4096: And one of my Tutors affirm'd it to be three
Millions of times bigger than the Earth. Therefore we know
nothing positively of its Bigness, but that 'tis much larger than
this great Body, how big soever it appears to us, is a Certainty.
For in the first Place, supposing it to be of equal Bigness with
the Earth, 'tis evident that its Rays in their Passage over the
exterior Parts of this Terrestrial Sphere, would leave a Cylinder
of Obscurity beyond it, whose Sides would be parallel, so that
the Planets, in their way thro' that Opaque, receiving no Light,
and having none of their own, would be eclips'd. If the Sun was
Smaller than the Earth, its Rays, after having glanced over the
Earth, would grow wider, and form a Cone cut off by a Shadow,
with its Basis in the Firmament, and the Top on the Part of the
Earth opposite to the Sun; the Consequence of which is that a
still greater part of the Heavens would be darken'd, and all the
Planets there, as was just now observ'd, could give no Light. The
only Planet that ever we see eclips'd is the Moon; it appears,
therefore, that the Sun must be incomparably bigger than the
Earth, because its Rays, when they have pass'd over this great
Mass, unite again a little above the Moon, where the Cone, form'd
by the Shadow of the Earth, ends in a Point. To illustrate this
Explanation, I made a Figure in the Sand.

I confess, said _Du Puis_, this is demonstrative, as to the
Cause; but as to the Effects you speak of, or the Defects of the
Planets, I can't comprehend it, for I always thought that
Eclipses were things uncommon and unnatural. On the contrary, I
reply'd, there is nothing in them that is mysterious. The Planets
are hard opaque Bodies, which bear a good Resemblance to the
Earth, and are by many People thought to be inhabited, for they
give no Light but by Reflexion, after having receiv'd it from the
Sun. For this Reason it is that we have no Eclipse of the Moon,
except when this Planet is rising on the one hand, while the Sun
is setting on the other, and when the Earth happens to interpose
directly between them, and hinders their seeing each other Face
to Face. But if the Sun, said _La Foret_, be the Source of Light,
how happens it that at certain times it loses it? From whence
come those Eclipses which are so alarming to the World, and what
is it that restores its former Lustre to it? As the
Interposition of the Earth, said I, causes Eclipses of the Moon,
the Interposition of the Moon, in like manner, darkens the Sun;
that is to say, as often as the Moon is in Conjunction with the
Sun, and passes in a direct Line, betwixt it and the Earth, it
does the Office of a Curtain, and conceals that glorious Planet
from us; but this Privation can be of no long Continuance,
because of the different Motion of those Bodies. The Circle which
the Earth describes about the Sun, is incomparably greater than
that which the Moon describes round the Earth; and whereas the
former advances about 13 Degrees in a Day, the latter rids away
little more than one in Winter, and not quite so much in Summer,
so that they soon get clear of one another. What, said _La
Foret_, does the Earth go faster at one Season, than at another?
Yes, said I, in Appearance the Difference is about four Minutes,
because the Earth being much farther from the Sun in Summer, than
in Winter, it must necessarily seem to have a slower Motion
during the long Days, than the short ones; as a Waggon which is
not above 50 Paces off, seems to go much faster than when it is
at the Distance of 500.

But, said _Du Puis_, since you talk of Paces, is not the Heat of
one and the same Fire better felt at the Distance of two Paces,
than of ten? No doubt, said I. Then if the Sun, which is a Body
of Heat, reply'd he, is nearer the Earth in the Winter, than in
Summer, how comes it that the Heat is not felt in proportion to
its Distance, and what's the Reason that we shake with Cold at
the same time one might expect to be in a melting Sweat? You say
very well, I reply'd, and this Objection shews that Ignorance and
Reason are not incompatible, but while you think you have
hamper'd me, you are quite mistaken. I will not go about to prove
to you, that there are no such things in Nature as Heat, Cold,
Light, Smell, Sound, or Colours, nor any of the Qualities which
we perceive in Bodies; for it would be a Work of too much
Trouble, and perhaps too you would not understand me, because
this depends on certain Points of Knowledge, of which you have
not so much as the Principles. I will only observe to you, that
properly speaking, there is but one and the same sort of Matter,
which according as it's form'd or actuated, produces in us, by
means of our Organs, certain Effects which we ascribe to Bodies,
and which therefore we call Hot, Cold, Luminous, Colour'd, and so
of the others, tho' in effect Sounds Colour, Taste, _&c._ are
properly in us, and not in those Bodies; as the Pain or Smart
which proceeds from a Prick, is in our selves, and not at all in
the Thorn which occasion'd it. And to prove that your Comparison
is not just, even in the Sense that you your self would use it
in, consider, that the Top of the _Alpes_, which is so much
nearer to the Sun than the Foot, is cover'd with Snow in the
Summer, while the Valleys, which are so much farther from the
Sun, are quite burnt up with Heat: The true Reason of which is,
(that we may pass over nothing without some Right Explanation)
the Air, about a League from the Earth, is so thin, that it has
not Strength enough to dissipate the least Bodies; whereas 'tis
so gross upon the Surface, that 'tis capable of shaking our most
solid Parts, and to cause what we call excessive Heat.

All this is really fine, reply'd _La Foret_, but pardon me, if I
tell you, that I don't see you have yet settled the Point, with
respect to Summer and Winter. Very true, said I, that's a
Question of another Nature. When the Sun is ascended towards our
Zenith, as it does in Summer, tho' it be at a very great Distance
from us, yet it emits a great Number of Rays, almost
perpendicularly upon us; whereas in Winter, when it declines
lower towards the Horizon, most of its Rays, which can only come
sideways, reverberate upon the Surface of our Atmosphere, so that
very few pass and penetrate to our Bodies: Mean time, Heat and
Cold consist in the greater and lesser Number of those Rays, as
is easily to be prov'd by Mirrors and Burning-Glasses, whose
Effects are always proportion'd to the Number of Rays of Light
which they collect.

During this agreeable Conversation, which was carry'd on with a
View, rather to pass the Time, than to increase the Number of
Philosophers, because in that Case another Course must have been
taken, we had travell'd a good way, but at length we were oblig'd
to turn to another Subject. It was now Thirty-five Days that we
had left our Company, and we imagin'd that we could not have
travell'd less than 130 Leagues, when on a sudden, we found our
selves on the Brink of a Lake, which seem'd to be of a vast
Extent. This Obstacle in our way so confounded us, that for a
long time we knew not what to resolve upon. One talk'd of
returning back, another of staying where we were for a few Days,
and making the best shift we could to lodge our selves; but at
last we resolv'd to go straight along by the Side of this great
Water, in hopes of finding the End of it. After coasting it seven
or eight Leagues, we began to see Land on the other side of it,
and were overjoy'd to find that the farther we advanc'd we had
still a plainer View of the Objects on the other Shore; but then
we had a fresh Mortification to see our selves got insensibly
into a marshy Place, where the Ground was not only soft, but
stunk, and trembled under our Feet. All the Country about us was
flat and even; we saw no end of it, and every Step we took, which
way soever we turn'd, we sunk in half way the Leg. All that I
could say to encourage my Comrades, was in vain; there was no
going further, so that we were fain to return back as we came,
much against our Wills and tho' extremely fatigu'd, were forc'd
to travel two long Leagues before we durst make a Halt, because
we were sadly bemir'd, and had not yet met with any Fuel fit to
make a Fire to dry us.

After we had rested our selves sufficiently, we resolv'd to turn
still to the Left, and to see if there was any Rub on that Side.
We travell'd on four Days successively, 'till we came to a Forest
full of tall Oaks, of an extraordinary Bigness. We paus'd at
first whether we should enter it, and at length resolv'd to
venture into it, on condition of keeping as near as possible to
the Lake; but this did not hold long, for we had scarce advanc'd
three small Leagues but we came to the Foot of a Mountain, so
cragged, that it was impossible for any Creature to ascend it.
The Rock hung over the Lake, the Waters of which being sometimes
ruffled, had in all Probability gradually wash'd away the Bottom.
We try'd to ascend this Mountain on the other Side, for a whole
Day, without finding any Place where it was accessible, because
of Precipices and astonishing Hills. At the dismal Sight of so
many invincible Obstacles, our Patience left us, and my two
Comrades reproached me very heartily for having brought them into
this Disaster.

I confess, said I, that we have reason to bewail our unhappy
Fate; but you ought to consider that nothing happens by chance,
for there is a Providence which directs every thing according to
his own Pleasure. As 'tis this same wise Being who has brought us
hither, so he will not fail to hint some Means or other to
extricate us. 'Tis most certain that God never abandons his
People, let them go where they will; if we place our Confidence
in him, he will infallibly assist us, You know that it was
neither a View to Profit nor Honour that led us hither; we had
nothing to lose, and provided we escape with our Lives, we have
all that we brought along with us. Let us not be daunted at what
has happen'd to us hitherto; our principal Aim is to ramble in
search of new Things, which may give us Pleasure; I don't despair
of going farther still, and that we shall some Day or other find
out a way to get a comfortable Subsistence. Come on, my Lads, let
us lose no Time, said I, but return back to the Lake, and see if
we can't contrive how to pass it, without running too great a
Risque. By good Fortune we have Hatchets, and here's Timber in
abundance. If we venture over upon Floats, we shan't be the first
Adventurers of this sort, and if we are so happy as to get safe
to the other Side, I flatter my self we shall make more fortunate
Discoveries. Hitherto the Country is uninhabited, but, humanely
speaking, 'tis impossible it should be the same every where; and
who knows, but at last we may meet with some civiliz'd Nation,
whose kind Treatment of us may make us ample Amends for the
Fatigues and Dangers we have run thro' to find them out, and for
telling them if they don't know it already, that there are other
People in the World besides them.

My Comrades turn'd a deaf Ear to me; nothing I said could make
'em easy, and I am persuaded, that if they had seen the least
Probability of finding our Ship's Company again, where we left
them, they would undoubtedly have run all Hazards in quest of
them. In the mean time, there was a Necessity of resolving upon
something. We return'd to the Lake, and view'd it well in many
Parts, before we agreed what Place to put off at. These Motions
backwards and forwards took us up eight Days, and the ninth we
began to set our Hands to the Work. First, we cut down half a
score Trees, of seven or eight Inches Diameter, from which we
stripp'd the Branches, shorten'd them to the length of twenty
Foot, put them into the Water, and then fasten'd them together as
well as we could, partly with Rushes, but chiefly with the Bark
of Willow-Trees, which were very numerous on the Side of the
Lake, and of which we made a sort of Cordage, of what length we
pleas'd. After this, we provided a Score of other shorter Trees,
which we laid in a row, and bound across the former, and upon
these we laid a third Floor of the same Size and Length as those
of the first Lay. We also made five Oars, or rather Shovels,
which took us up more Time than all the rest.

Before we had finished our Carpenter's Work, _La Foret_ came and
told us, that at sixty Paces distance he saw something stir in
the Rushes, which were not very far from the Lake, and in short,
we were of his Opinion immediately, that it must be some great
Animal. _Du Puis_, and I, took each our Gun, and charging with
four Balls, we fir'd both at once, reserving a third Charge in
case of Necessity, as we had been taught to do by Experience in
our Travels, wherein we had like to have been torn to Pieces by
Bears, two or three times, because we had spent all our Fire at
once. Our Pieces were scarce discharg'd, when we were extremely
surpris'd and terrify'd with a hideous Howling, and prodigious
Rustle among the Reeds, so that we were a long time in Suspence,
whether we should go near to see what it was; but upon
consideration that what we heard and saw could be nothing else,
in all probability, but the Effect of a mortal Wound, which had
disabled the Beast from defending himself, we charg'd our Pieces
again, and approach'd, tho' with great Fear and Trembling, to the
Place where he made such a Stir. As soon as he perceiv'd us, he
made a greater Noise than before, and struggled hard to escape,
which Fear of his rais'd our Spirits, and _La Foret_ seeing him
lift up his Head, let fly at him so dexterously that he shot him
thro' and thro', and laid him flat on the Ground. Nevertheless,
we durst not approach him for some Moments, but perceiving he
had no Motion, we began to touch him with the Ends of our Pieces,
and at length dragg'd him out, when we found him to be of the
Otter Kind, with two very short Legs before, which either _Du
Puis_ or I maim'd at the first Discharge, whereby he was disabled
from getting away. This Creature could not weigh less than 150
Pound. We skinn'd him, roasted the best Part of him, and found
his Flesh to be good, and that it tasted not much unlike our
Ducks.

Next Day, which was the thirteenth since we arrived there, we
resolv'd to put off, but our Float was so heavy that we made very
little way; and two of us constantly ply'd the Oars by turns,
while the third rested. As good Luck would have it, the Weather
was very favourable, and the Season exceeding pleasant, so that I
can truly say, we were very much delighted in the Voyage, tho' we
did not know what would become of us when we undertook it. 'Twas
surprising to see the infinite Shoals of Fish in this fine Lake,
leaping and casting on both sides of our Float, which some of
them follow'd with their Heads above Water, and playing with
their Tails, as if they had been rejoic'd to see us. We were so
attentive at this dumb Sport, that we lay upon our Oars sometimes
for a great while together to enjoy it. We took up several of
them with our Hands, and then toss'd them back again into their
own Element, and might have caught what Number we had pleas'd. At
the Close of the Day, just as we lost Sight of the Shore we came
from, we were overjoy'd to discover that to which we were
steering our Course. This agreeable Sight gave us fresh Spirits;
we work'd lustily almost all Night, and I think it was next Day
about four of the Clock in the Afternoon, when we had the good
Luck to touch Land. As soon as we got ashore, we made use of all
the Tackle we had to moor our Machine, not only to great Stones
upon the Strand, but to a Post or Stump of a Tree, which we drove
into the Ground, and which we carry'd with us for that purpose,
being uncertain whether we should fare better elsewhere, and
whether we should not be oblig'd to come back again the same way.
We were so fatigu'd with our Voyage that we took up our Lodging
at the distance of an hundred Paces, and stay'd there till next
Morning, when we continu'd our Journey.

We had not travell'd half a League but we came to a Wood, as
thick as any we had yet met with, tho' we forc'd our way thro' it
in less than two Hours. But there we were stopt all on a sudden,
by steep Rocks altogether as difficult to ascend as a Wall. This
new Barrier occasion'd fresh wrangling betwixt us; my Comrades
murmur'd sadly, and I, as usual, did all I could to hearten them,
so that I was forc'd at last to assure them, that tho' my Ideas
were commonly so confus'd and irregular in my Slumbers, that I
could seldom tell what to make of my Dreams, yet I had one last
Night, the Connexion and Circumstances of which were so
particular, that it was an infallible Presage of something to our
Advantage; and thereupon I invented some Fictions _ex-tempore_,
which, tho' perhaps not very well concerted, had however all the
Effect I expected from them. In the Morning, said I, about an
Hour before Sun-rise, methoughts I heard a Rumbling, like the
Voice of Thunder, which said to me, _What have you to do there,
Child? Rise up, and walk, thy Deliverance is near at hand._ At
the same time a young Woman appear'd to me with a smiling
Countenance, dress'd in white Raiment, with her dishevell'd Hair
flowing about her Shoulders, her Legs bare even to the Knee, and
in her Hands a little Basket of fine Ozier, artfully interwoven
with all manner of fragrant Flowers, and full of uncommon
delicious Fruits, of which she invited me to eat. On my left Hand
there appear'd a Field, cover'd all over with Sheaves of the
finest Corn that the Earth ever bore; and on my right a Tree, in
the Trunk of which there was a Cleft, from whence there gush'd a
clear beautiful red Liquor, which smelt like musk. I turn'd about
to look behind me, and perceiving a frightful Monster, bristled
all over like a Porcupine, I was so affrighted at it, that tho'
it turn'd its Back upon me, I started out of my Sleep. To this
Dream I gave a favourable Interpretation, which contributed not a
little to quicken our Pace.

As we still kept along the East side of those Mountains, we at
last discover'd a narrow Passage, which we resolv'd to climb, but
the Difficulty we met with before we got up to the Top, was such
that I cannot express it. When we had conquer'd it, we sat down
to recover Breath, and take a little Food. Soon after we rose
again, we perceiv'd a Pond about a Quarter of a League in
Circumference, which was bounded on one side by the craggy Points
of a Rock, which hung over the Water, and on the other by a very
narrow rugged sort of Dyke, with a Precipice on the right hand,
of which there was no discovering the Bottom. These mocking
Objects made me as mute as a Fish; I had neither the Strength nor
Courage to speak, and to be frank, I wish'd then with all my
Heart I had never undertaken the Voyage. There was no Prospect of
going down the way that we ascended, and the Danger of going
farther was very great.

While we were at that Nonplus, I made a hard Struggle to climb to
the Top of a Rock which was behind us; as soon as I was got up to
it, my Sorrow was turn'd on a sudden into extravagant Joy, at the
Discovery of a fine Champain Country beyond these Hills, which
was interspers'd with Canals, and Trees regularly planted on the
Banks of them. I thought likewise that I saw Cattle grazing in
the Meads, and at a further distance great Bodies, which I took
to be the Habitations of Men. I beckon'd to my Comrades to follow
me, and signify'd to them by my Gestures and various Contortions
of Body, that our Deliverance was nigh. They were so fond to know
the good News, that they ventur'd after me, tho' they had like to
have broke their Necks as well as I; but then, on the other hand,
they were soon satisfy'd for their Pains, and agreed that this
Country was, without Dispute, inhabited. All the Difficulty was
how to come at it, a Difficulty, which we verily thought
insurmountable. From this Eminence we carefully survey'd all the
Country round; but there being no Appearance of Access to it, we
help'd one another down, and took another View of the Precipice
and Pond.

For my part, I was immediately of Opinion let the Danger be what
it wou'd, that we ought to return and cut down Timber in the
Forest where we had spent the Night, and to draw it up in the
best manner we could, in order to venture this short Passage over
the Pond. But _Du Puis_, thinking my Proposal impracticable,
said, that the Passage between the Lake and the Precipice seem'd
to be only two Foot broad in the narrowed Parts of it, that
therefore one might easily cross over it, and that he would
undertake to be our Guide. I was wonderfully pleas'd with his
Motion, and did not fail to second it by instancing in the
_Pyrenees_ and _Alpes_, of which I had read something in the
Memoirs of several Travellers; but _La Foret_, who was, as he
said, subject to Vertigoes, protested he would not go that way,
whatever was the Consequence, but that if we were resolv'd to
pass it, he would rather do it by Swimming. _Du Puis_ immediately
acquiesc'd, and engag'd to carry his Clothes, and mine too, if I
would take to the Water with him. No sooner said, but done, for
_La Foret_ and I stripp'd, bundled up our Clothes, and _Du Puis_
taking them along with him, set out. We resolv'd to leave our
Hatchets and Fowling-Pieces behind us, which indeed were of no
more Service to us, because we had not three Charges of Powder
left; nevertheless, _Du Puis_ was to return to fetch them, if he
found the Passage not so dangerous as we imagin'd. _La Foret_
and I being both very good Swimmers, we arriv'd quickly at the
other Shore, because we made choice of the narrowed Place; but
_Du Puis_, who had taken our Clothes, was oblig'd to take a large
Compass, before he came to the Place where he was to pass.

As soon as we got ashore, we ran to meet him, and glad we were to
see him briskly advancing to us, but by an unaccountable
Disaster, which I shall lament as long as I live, the poor Man
was within ten Paces of being upon _Terra Firma_, when a Piece of
the Rock giving way all on a sudden under his Feet, he cry'd out,
_Lord have Mercy upon me!_ and, and to our Astonishment,
disappear'd in an Instant. We ran hastily to see what became of
him, but alas! we neither saw nor heard him more.

I beg the kind Reader to pause here for a Moment, and seriously
to reflect upon our Misfortune. Our inconceivable Grief for the
Loss of our Friend, together with the pitiful Condition he left
us in, having neither Clothes to cover our Nakedness, nor any
Means possible to subsist us, so dispirited us, that we thought a
hundred times of casting our selves headlong after him, and by
that means to have put a sudden Period to the fatal Course of our
unfortunate Lives.




CHAP. VI.

_Of the Discovery of a very fine Country, its Inhabitants, their
Language, Manners and Customs_, &c. _and of the Esteem which our
Author and his Comrade gain'd there._


Mean time, the Surf was at the End of his Race, and we found our
selves very cold, which were two pressing Motives to induce us to
betake our selves to some Shelter. We descended the Mountain with
no great Difficulty, because on that side it was not very deep.
At the Foot of it was a broad deep Ditch, where we were again
forc'd to swim over. This was one of the Barriers of the Country,
and was destitute of Bridges, so that People could neither pass
in nor out of it.

The farther we went into the Country, the more of its Beauties we
discover'd, and a thousand things occur'd to convince us that it
was inhabited. The Creatures which we spy'd, as we thought, from
the Mountains, were Goats feeding in the Meadows, where the green
Herbage was so high, that it partly conceal'd them from our
Sight. In short, we were not a great way from one of the Herds,
when the Man that look'd after them, who was then lain down upon
the Grass, observing that they stretch'd out their Necks as if
they spy'd something that had affrighted them, rose up to see
what it was, and as soon as he perceiv'd us, ran away with all
the Speed he could; and we heard afterwards, that seeing two
such naked Men coming down the Mountain in the Evening, he took
us for Savages: His Goats also ran as if they had been pursu'd by
some Beast of Prey. Certain Shepherds who were not far off,
tending their Flocks of Sheep, knew not what to think of this
Alarm, but they had the Courage to join one another, and came
seven or eight in a Body to examine us. As soon as we thought
they could see us, we wrung our Hands, and endeavour'd by all the
Signs we could think of, to move them to Compassion. They
advanc'd, and perceiving that we were naked and unarm'd, came
within four Paces of us, each having a great Stick in his Hand,
and fell a talking to us. I told them in _Latin_, in _French_,
and in _Portuguese_, a Language which I understood pretty well,
considering the Time I was in _Portugal_, that we were two honest
_Europeans_, who believ'd in God, and at the same time lifted up
my Hands to Heaven, and then smote my Breast. But notwithstanding
all my various Looks and Actions, I plainly perceiv'd by their
Countenances, that they understood us no more than we did them;
upon which I fell prostrate at their Feet, and by trembling, and
extending my Arms, endeavour'd to give them to understand that I
was almost starv'd to Death with Cold. Then they talk'd with one
another a few Moments, but without giving the least Indication
that they intended us any Harm, and at length, after some
Deliberation, they beckon'd to us to follow them, and carry'd us
to a venerable Personage, who, after having survey'd us, first
gave each of us a great Robe, which cover'd us from Head to Foot,
for at the Top of it a Cap was fasten'd, in the manner of a
Monk's Cowl; then he interrogated us by Signs from whence we
came, whether from the East, the West, or from any other Part of
the Globe. We answer'd him in our own Language, and by the best
Signs we were capable of making, that we were neither Angels nor
Devils; that we came neither from Heaven nor Hell; that we were
rational Creatures like himself, who having put to Sea in a great
Machine of Wood, were cast away about 150 Leagues off; that of
all the Crew only three of us set out inquest of some Asylum to
pass the Remainder of our Days; but that we left one of our
Companions by the way, in the most tragical manner that could be;
and so of the rest. Then we begg'd him to take Pity of us, to put
us to work, and to give us Nourishment. Tho' I knew not whether
he understood what we said to him, yet he seem'd to be affected,
by his shedding of Tears. He gave us a Supper, and in an Hour
after we were carry'd to a Bed, which was all done in so handsome
a manner, that we were charm'd with our Entertainment. Next Day
it was as good as a Comedy to see the Crowds of People that came
from all Parts to gaze at us. Every one look'd upon us with
Amazement, because no body could comprehend from whence or which
way we came hither. These Visits held at least a Fortnight or
three Weeks. By hearing them talk much, we began to understand
some Words of their Language: The first we retain'd was the Word
_Mula_, which they seldom fail'd to pronounce, when with our Eyes
or Hands lifted up to Heaven, we utter'd the Name of God. We
learnt the Terms, _At_, to Eat; _Bouskin_, to Drink; _Kapan_, to
Sleep; _Pryn_, to Walk; _Tian_, to Work; _Touto_, Yes; _Touton_,
No; and a great many others, which we found afterwards to bear
the same Meaning as we imagin'd they had at first. What very much
contributed to make this Language familiar to us, was there being
but three Tenses in the Indicative Mood of every Verb, _viz._ the
_Present_, the _Praeterperfect_, indefinite or compound, and the
_Future_; that they have no _Imperative Mood_; that in their
_Subjunctive_ they have only the _Praeterimperfect_ and
_Praeterpluperfect_; and that besides these they have only the
_Infinitive Mood_ and _Participle_. They have also but three
_Persons_ in both the _Singular_ and _Plural Numbers_, and thus,
for Instance, they conjugate the Verb _At_:

      _Indicative Mood, Present Tense._

  _Ata_, I eat or We eat.
  _Ate_, Thou eatest, You eat.
  _At[ei]_, He eateth, They eat.

      _Praeterperfect Tense._

  _Atai_, I have eaten, We have eaten.
  _Atei_, Thou haft eaten, You have eaten.
  _Ati[ei]_, He has eaten, They have eaten.

      _Future Tense._

  _Ataio_, I shall or will eat, We will eat.
  _Ateio_, Thou wilt eat, You will eat.
  _At[ei]io_, He will eat, They will eat.

      _Infinitive Mood._

  _At_, To eat.

      _Praeterimperfect Tense of the Subjunctive Mood._

  _Atain_, I would eat, We would eat.
  _Atein_, Thou wouldn't eat, Ye would eat.
  _At[ei]in_, He would eat, They would eat.

      _Praeterpluperfect._

  _Atais_, I would have eaten, We would have eaten.
  _Ateis_, Thou would'st have eaten, You would have eaten.
  _At[ei]is_, He or she should have eaten, They would have eaten.

      _Participle of the Present Tense._

  _Atain_, Eating.

From thence are deriv'd the Words, _Ataus_, Kitchen; _Ata[ou]s_,
Food; _Ati[ou]_, Cook; _Atians_, Eater, or the Person that Eateth.

Their Alphabet consists of Twenty Characters, _viz._ Seven
Vowels, _a_, _e_, _i_, _o_, _u_, _[ei]_, _[ou]_, (the Sixth of which is
properly the _Aita_ of the Greeks, and the Seventh is equivalent
to the Dipthongue, _ou_) and Thirteen Consonants, _b_, _d_, _f_,
_g_, _h_, _k_, _l_, _m_, _n_, _p_, _r_, _s_, _t_. These same
Consonants serve them also for Numerals; as _b_, 1; _d_, 2; _f_,
3; _g_, 4; _h_, 5; _k_, 6; _l_, 7; _m_, 8; _n_, 9; _p_, 10; _pb_,
11; _pd_, 12; &c. _dp_, is equivalent to twice Ten, or Twenty;
_fp_, to thrice Ten, or Thirty; _fb_, 31; &c. _pp_, ten times
Ten, or 100; _r_, 1000; _pr_, 10000; _ppr_, 100000; _s_, a
Million; _ps_, 10 Millions; _pps_, 100 Millions; _ppps_, 1000
Millions; and so on, always adding one _p_ more.

It must likewise be observed, that their Nouns and Verbs are
deriv'd from one another, like the French, _Chat_, a Boar Cat;
_Chate_, a She Cat; _Chatons_, Kittlings; _Chatonner_, to Kitten.
Their Declensions are also very easy, of which this is an
Example:

    Nom. _Brol_,  }
    Gen. _Brul_,  } A Weather.
    Dat. _Brel_,  }

    Nom. _Brolu_, }
    Gen. _Brula_, } An Ewe or Sheep.
    Dat. _Brela_, }

    Nom. _Brol[ei]_, }
    Gen. _Brul[ei]_, } Weathers or Sheep.
    Dat. _Brel[ei]_, }

'Tis wonderful, that there is not one Exception in the
Conjugations and Declensions of this Language; and that when we
know the Variations of one Verb or Noun, it leads to the
Knowledge of all the rest; which Variation consists only in
adding the Letter _A_ to the Infinitive Mood to make the Present
Tense of the Indicative; as from _At_, comes _Ata_; from
_B[ou]skin_, _B[ou]skina_, &c. And to the Nouns they add _A_, to the
Nominative Case of the Masculine Gender, to make them Feminine in
_[ei]_ when they change them to the Plural Number, as is plain from
the foregoing Example. From hence it will not be thought strange,
that at the End of six Months we understood every thing they
said to us; and that they also understood what we said to them.
But to return to our former Subject.

Not many Days after our Arrival, we were awaken'd one Morning by
an extraordinary Hurly-burly in the House. We arose to see what
was the matter; but tho' we observ'd the minutest of their
Proceedings, we could not conceive the Meaning of the Hurry they
were all in from the the Highest to the Lowest; only we guess'd
there was to be a grand Dinner, because there was a great
Slaughter of Fowls, and abundance of Meat in the Kitchen. About
Ten of the Clock, the whole Family went out. Our Patron march'd
first, with a great Cock under his Arm, and we follow'd with the
rest of the Houshold. As we pass'd the Bridge over the Canal, we
saw that all our Neighbours did the same, every Family marching
out with a Cock. Our opposite Neighbour expos'd his Cock against
ours; and the others did the same thing, it being a general
Cock-match between the People of both sides the Canal. It is
incredible with what Courage and Fury, with what Vigor and Skill
these Creatures fought. My Landlord, whose Cock was kill'd, went
and took the Victor by the Hand, congratulated him on his
Conquest, and carry'd him to his House, follow'd by all his
Children and Domestics. The Provisions laid in at the other's
House, were brought to ours. We sat down to Table, and I can say,
that I had not been at such an Entertainment a long while. It was
a Feast truly Royal, and we drank to a very hearty Pitch; but the
worst on't was, we did not understand them.

Our People were every whit as alert next Day. As soon as the Sun
was risen, all the young Men of the Canton, that is to say, the
eldest Son of every Family, went out and took a straight Pole,
like to the Mast of a Ship, which they planted in the middle of
the Canal, and to the End of it they ty'd as many great Ropes as
there were Families present. All these Ropes were afterwards
extended, and wound about the several Trees which were planted on
the Bank of the Canal; and that there might be no Jealousy, or
any Cause of Complaint, there was a Noose made in each Rope, all
at the same Distance from the Pole. To the Top of this Pole,
which was not Thirty Foot from the Surface of the Water, a round
Board was nail'd, upon which an Eagle was plac'd, whose two Feet
were fasten'd separately with strong Packthread, to two
Cramp-Irons drove into the Timber.

When every thing was ready, each of the young Men laid hold of
one of the Ropes at the Place where the Noose was, and at the
first Signal, which was given by our Landlord, they drove who
could climb up fastest. They that came first up to the Eagle,
endeavour'd to lay hold of him, but they had a smart Reception,
for as their Hands were oblig'd to be bare, they were expos'd to
the Strokes of the Eagle's Beak, which made them all over bloody.
Besides, each Man had but one Hand at liberty to attack, because
with the other he was oblig'd to hold fast. And then, the Eagle
was not ty'd so short, but that he could rise at least two Foot
from his Board; so that whereas I thought at the Beginning, the
Battle would have been over in a Trice, when it had continued
two Hours 'twas like to hold all Day. Notwithstanding the Vigour
of the Assailants, their Situation was too fatiguing, and it was
impossible they could keep it long. Some rested themselves as
well as they could; others dropped into the Water, where they
were reliev'd immediately by Persons who were underneath in
little Boats, on purpose to catch them. In short, it was a wild
Skirmish; but I think they had been engag'd about six Hours, when
one of the Assailants nimbly seizing the Eagle, broke one of its
Legs, but another pushing him, made him let go his Prize for fear
of falling off of the Rope, grip'd the Bird with both his Hands,
flung himself desperately down the Rope, and fell, with the
dismembered Prey in his Arms, into the Water. At his Fall, the
Spectators shouted as much for Joy, as if the Safety of the
Publick had been the Matter in question. Those who were wet went
to shift their Clothes, and soon after repair'd to the Victor's
House, where every one paid him their Compliments. There they
supp'd together, and spent part of the Night in Merriment, while
the Parents of the Family treated one another reciprocally with
hearty good Cheer. The third Day was spent in Plays, Dances,
Races, and agreeable Diversions.

We knew not what all this meant; but afterwards we found that
they observ'd the same Ceremonies throughout the Kingdom, every
Year, at the Full Moon preceding the Solstice of _Capricorn_, and
that the young Man who carries off the Eagle, has that Year the
Choice of all the Girls in the Canton, in case he has a mind to
alter his Condition, so that there can be no Marriage without his
Consent, which however he seldom refuses; and therefore it may be
said, that it all terminates in a meer Formality and Punctilio of
Honour to the Conqueror. At all the other Full-Moons of the Year,
without Exception, they fight Cocks. They take their Pleasure in
Gondola's, during the Summer; and in the Winter they are drawn
upon the Snow in Sleds. For two Days they take all the innocent
Pleasures they are capable of, except that of the Eagle planted
on the Pole. The rest of the Month every body is at their
Business, and there are no other Feasts at all.

Having spent all this Time without putting our Hands to any
thing, we gave our Patron to understand that we should be glad of
some Business. At first they pretended not to give ear to it, but
seeing that we insisted on being employ'd, they gave us Wool to
cleanse, wash, beat, and card, as thinking that we were fit for
nothing else. We were soon weary of this Work. _La Foret_, who
was by Profession a Watchmaker, wanted to take a File in his
Hand, and to work on the Movement of a Watch; but there were no
such Machines in those Parts, and it would have been difficult to
have given them a Notion of such presently. When they perceiv'd
our Dissatisfaction, they were willing to make use of us for the
Rigging of a little Fleet.

There being Twenty-two Houses in our Canton or Village, of which
I shall give a Description hereafter, the Number of Vessels to
be equipp'd was the same. Every Master of a Family caus'd his
Vessel to be fitted, and the necessary Provisions to be put on
Board, to serve four Persons for three Weeks. In these Vessels
they put all manner of Provisions or Merchandise which they knew
to be proper for a Voyage; as for Instance, Cordage, Pullies,
Wheelbarrows, Hatchets, Spades, Mattocks, Pick-Axes, and other
Tools fit to turn up the Ground; but especially Robes, and other
Habits, Woollen and Linen. It was then the Month of _December_,
and by consequence in the Heart of Summer, and in the finest
Season of the Year. As the Goats are extremely large in that
Country, and as strong as our Horses, they are generally made use
of for Carriages. There were four of 'em to every Boat, of which
two drew for two Hours, while the others eat, and relied in the
Vessel. Thus they work'd alternately for fifteen or sixteen Hours
every Day, which was in a manner from Sun-rise to Sun-set, but at
Night there was a Halt, and a general Rest.

My Comrade and I could never see enough of the Beauties of this
inchanting Country, and the Riches of its Soil. Their Orchards
were adorn'd with fine Trees, some in Blossom, and others with
ripe Fruit, the most excellent in the World; their Arable Lands
were cover'd with Wheat, Barley, and other Grain; their Pastures
were full of Goats and Sheep, of an extraordinary Size (for as to
Horses and Cows, I never saw any there) and every thing was in
such Elegance, Order, and Regularity, that it perfectly charm'd
us.

The whole Country, which, as we were afterwards inform'd, extends
130 _French_ Leagues from East to West, and 80 at least from
North to South, is divided into Cantons or Villages. These
Cantons are exactly of the Form of a Quadrangle, each Side being
1500 Paces, or an _Italian_ Mile and Half in length, incompass'd
all round, and separated from one another by a Canal 20 Paces
broad, and a Royal Road on each side of it of 25 Paces, with two
Rows of Trees in the middle, which form a Walk of 25 Foot, or
five Geometrical Paces, that there may be free and commodious
Passage for the Creatures employed to draw the Boats.

Every Canton is also divided in the middle by a Ditch of 20
Paces, and by a Road on both sides, of 25; with Trees planted
after the same manner. Every one of these Roads contains 11
Habitations in length, each being 130 Geometrical Paces in Front,
and about 700 in Depth, which are also separated by little
Ditches five Foot over. At the Head of every one of these
Habitations, on the Side of the Ditch which divides the Village
into two equal Parts, there's a House only one Story high, but 60
Foot wide, with a Passage in the middle, which leads to all the
Apartments, Stables, Barns, and other Offices. The Reason why
they have no Upper Rooms is, because sometimes, tho' very seldom,
they are subject to violent high Winds, which throw down their
Houses to the Ground, for their Buildings are but slight.

From this Disposition that I have now describ'd, tis plain that
in one Canton there are 22 Habitations; or Houses, opposite to
one another, and all of the same Height and Breadth, 11 on one
side of the Canal, and 11 on the other. At each End of this
Water, on both Sides, there are Bridges to pass from one Village
to the other, besides some in the middle of each Canton, which
are all built of Free-Stone of fine Architecture, and kept in
very good Repair. In these Twenty-two Families, there were always
two of Distinction; one, that of the _Pap[ou]_ or Priest; and the
other, that of the _Kini_, or Judge of the Canton, which face the
middle Bridge, and are opposite to one another; and behind these
Houses there's an Apartment the breadth of the whole House, which
serve the one for the Church, the other for the Court or Senate.
But we shall have occasion to treat more of this perhaps
elsewhere, and therefore we return now to our Journey.

We stay'd nine Days upon the Road, and when we came within seven
or eight Leagues from the Place to which we were bound, we began
to discover the Highlands, where we saw nothing scarce but
Mountains, whose Tops seem'd to touch the Clouds, and dazzled our
Eyes with the Whiteness of the Snow, with which they are cover'd
all the Year round. The Canal where we were, ended about two
short Leagues from those Hills, so that there we were oblig'd to
halt. Part of our Company stay'd there in the Boats, and the rest
of us made our way to the Mountains. But before we came to them,
we were fain to pass thro' a very beautiful Forest.

The perpetual Din and Clatter, which we heard as we went on, made
me think more than once, of _Vulcan_ and his Cyclops. The Air
resounded with great Strokes of Hammers, and one would actually
have sworn that we were but three Paces from the Forges of Mount
_Gibel_, or the Anvils of _Brontes_, _Pyracmon_, and _Steropes_.
We were not vastly mistaken in our Conjecture, for the Men whom
we discover'd soon after were not much unlike Giants and Daemons;
some of them were monstrously tall, others as shagged as Bears,
and not one but was blacker than a _Newcastle_ Collier.

Some of our Company immediately apply'd to a Director, and told
him what Canton we were come from, what sort of Merchandise we
had brought, and what we came for in exchange. Then they
presented me and my Comrade to him, which we believed was to
desire him to conduct us to all those Places which he thought
worth seeing by People who had never been there; for he presently
gave Orders to one of his Footmen to accompany us wherever we
went, and five of our Companions join'd us.

The first thing he shew'd us was a large Pit, of a prodigious
Depth, where was an Iron Mine which had been work'd for thousands
of Years, and from whence so much Earth, _&c._ had been dug as
form'd several other Mountains near it. On the left side of this
Pit was a Descent of Steps, which the Workmen had made in the
Rock as they dug downwards, but tho' they were broad and easy, I
did not care to go down them. Over it they had erected a wooden
Machine, and a great Windlass, with a Pulley fasten'd to it three
Foot in Diameter, which drew up the Oar, by means of Baskets that
were fill'd by Men at the bottom, as often as they were let
down. On the right side of the Pit there was not a Hand at work,
but every thing seem'd in Disorder. Our Guide perceiving me stoop
to view the confused State of it, made Signs to me, by which he
gave me to understand, as well as he could, that not above five
Months ago a great part of the Mountain; which had perhaps been
undermin'd too far on that Side, broke away, and in the Fall
crush'd 360 Labourers that were at work.

After we had view'd that Place, he carry'd us to another, from
whence Coal was extracted after the same manner; but 'tis much
fatter than the _English_ Coal, and even than that Mineral which
is produc'd in the Country of _Liege_, for the Fire that is
commonly made of it burns twenty-four Hours, without laying on
fresh Coals.

Between these two Mines there was a Pond of Mineral Water, which
continually bubbled up. They make use of it to scour their
Bodies, Clothes, and Utensils; but they can't dress their
Victuals with it, 'tis so very ill-tasted. The Iron which they
steep in this hot Water becomes impenetrably hard, and is much
fitter than our Steel to make Springs of. I never was at a Loss
to account for the degree of Heat which is said to be in the
Mineral Waters of _Aix la Chapelle_, because they come thro' long
Subterranean Channels, where the Earth no doubt abounds with
bituminous and sulphureous Particles, which being themselves much
agitated, communicate a part of their Motion to them, as they
pass along; but here I really saw nothing like it. For this was a
little Lake of standing Water, which, as fast as it wafted by
Exhalations, and what was drawn off by People for their Use, was
supply'd by a Stone Pipe, which Nature seem'd to have form'd for
the Purpose, from whence there came a Thread of Water as clear as
Crystal, but colder than Marble; which made me think there must
be a prodigious Fire of Spirits underneath to give it that Heat
and Ferment.

We went also to see the Men that separated the Iron from the
Mine, the Furnaces where they melted it, and the Forges where
they extended it into Bars, to be work'd elsewhere; but all this
was so like the Practice in _Europe_, that there's no need to
describe it here.

I understood by what they told me afterwards, that this intire
Chain of Mountains, which serves instead of a Barrier to this
fine Country, is properly the Magazine from whence these People
have great part of their Wealth, and things which are generally
useful in Society; as Stones for Building, others for Lime; Salt,
which, tho' different from ours, is very good; very fine Pewter,
and red Copper, but in a very little Quantity, which at the same
time coils a great deal of Labour, and the Lives of very many
Men.

While I was taken up with viewing, all these Curiosities, our
People were busy in landing their Goods, bartering them, and
taking in their Ladings of such Goods as they had Orders to bring
away in exchange, which were carry'd off by Sledges, or little
flat long Carts, drawn by two, three, four, and even ten Goats at
a time, or on the Backs of Porters, and in which so many People
were imploy'd, that they made quick Work, tho' the Way was
pretty long, so that we were not there two whole Days. We carry'd
our Guide to our Barks, where we treated him in the best manner
we could, and made him so drunk, that as he got up to go away, he
fell all along and hurt his Shoulder, insomuch that the exquisite
Pain he felt made him call out upon the Name of Christ. I was
startled at the Expression, and should have been glad to have
known how he came to hear of the Saviour of Mankind, but for want
of knowing the Language, I contented my self with having raised
him on his Legs again, and glad I was to see that he had not hurt
himself dangerously.

Just as we were unmooring in order to return, it came into my
Head, that if instead of going back by the same Canal, we struck
into another two or three Cantons off, perhaps we should see
Novelties that would divert us, and make us amends for all our
Time and Labour. I communicated my Mind to _La Foret_, and he
join'd with me in persuading the others, who were so complaisant
that they consented to our Proposal, without any Scruple.
Thereupon we went Westward but when the Goats were to be
harness'd which were to draw our Boat, the oldest of 'em, which,
according to the Report of the Driver, was Forty-two Years of
Age, and had been that way I know not how often, finding that
they did not keep in the usual Track, was so unruly, that it was
impossible for the Guide to hold him in. He made so many Leaps
and Capers, that he broke the Rope with which he was harness'd,
and run away. Twenty People immediately pursu'd him, and call'd
out to others to stop him, which, as one was attempting to do,
the mad Creature leap'd fairly into the middle of the Water, at a
Place where the Banks are very high and sleep, so that he could
not possibly climb out. Our Guide getting a little before him,
stoop'd till he came by, and then throwing in a Rope with a
Noose, caught him by the Horns. At the same time the Goat being
affrighted, darted towards the other Shore, and whether the Rope
was twin'd round the Body of our Guide, or whether he chose to be
dragg'd into the Water, rather than let go his Hold, I know not,
but so it was that he fell in. The Company were immediately so
alarm'd that they all hurry'd to his Assistance; and while they
were busy in helping him out, the Creature made up to one of the
Steps of the next Bridge, by which he recover'd Land, and got
quite out of our Sight, so that we knew not what was become of
him. For my own part, I was heartily vex'd to lose him, and
wish'd almost that I had been Tongue-ty'd, ere I propos'd to come
this way, for I was afraid that my Patron would look upon us with
an evil Eye, and revenge himself upon those who had been so
complaisant as to hearken to us. We pursued our Purpose, however,
tho' some of the other Goats were resty for a little while, but
as soon as the foremost were in the Humour to go, the others
follow'd as gently as Lambs. Yet we were never the better for
this Voyage, for the Country is so uniform, that when you have
seen a Part of it, 'tis as well as if you had seen the whole,
there being really no remarkable Difference but in the People's
Faces, the same that you observe every where else; and indeed,
if there had been any Pleasure to have tasted, we were at that
time too uneasy to have partaken of it. But we were most
agreeably surpriz'd at our Arrival, to hear that the Goat had
been a Week in the Stables; so that this nimble Creature had ran
home in Thirty-five Hours. This welcome News banish'd all
melancholy, and made every one of us laugh very heartily.

The next Day the Boats were unladen, in Presence of all the
Inhabitants of the Canto. The Judge having call'd for the Bill of
Lading, and examin'd it, caus'd the Goods to be deliver'd to the
respective Proprietors, with so much Order, that it was
impossible for the least Thing to be lost. To make him amends for
this Trouble, every Family sends him next Day a Dish of the best
Fish they can catch in their Rivers, half of which is dress'd at
his own House, and the other half at the Priest's Apartment,
whither the Parents of the Family go to take part of it. This is
reckoned an Honour for these Gentlemen, but they pay dearly for
it, because all that they can save of the Fish, is not worth one
half of the Sauce, which they are oblig'd in Generosity to add to
it.

When all was over, the next thing to be thought of was, to return
to our Occupation; not that any Body gave us the least Hint of
it; for we perceiv'd on the contrary, that they did not care
whether we meddled with any thing or not; but because we hated
sauntering, tho' we had much rather have been imploy'd in any
thing else. _La Foret_, who was even more tir'd than I with the
Woollen Manufacture, did all he could to make our Landlord
understand, that as he was by Profession a Clockmaker, if he
would furnish him with the Metals and the necessary Tools, he
would make a Machine for him to shew the Time of the Day, and to
strike the Hour so as to be heard by all the Inhabitants of the
Village. As for me, who could be of no Service to them in the
Article of Surgery, because the Herbs of that Country differ for
most part from ours, and because there are few Minerals, and that
they mortally hate Bleeding, all that I had to do, was to applaud
what my Comrade said, in Hopes of being employed with him on the
same Work.

This proposition seem'd very miraculous to the Judge, who
immediately sent for the Priest to impart it to him. They had
heard Talk indeed of our Clocks, but not a Man of 'em had ever
seen one, and the Idea they had form'd of 'em was very confus'd;
so that they were very pressing with us, to set about one as soon
as we pleas'd, and to spare no Cost, the rather because their way
of dividing the Time was extremely troublesome; for, they tie a
Piece of Packthread to the Cieling, and at the End of it hang a
Ball of Pewter three Foot and two Inches in length, which serves
as a Pendulum, and putting it in Motion, they tell the Vibrations
to the Number of 7200, which by reason of the length of the Cord,
make just as many Seconds, and by consequence the 12th part of a
natural Day, or two of our Hours. I shall give an Account by and
by, who they make use of to count these Vibrations, and to go and
cry the Hour through the Village, as the Watchmen do by Night,
in many Parts of _Europe_, and particularly in _England_ and
_Holland_, where they hire Men for the Purpose. They furnish'd us
therefore with the necessary Materials for our Work. _La Foret_
bespoke some of the Tool that we had need of, and himself made
the others. At length we went to work, but we did not hurry
ourselves, for 'twas above a Year and half before we finish'd our
Clock.

When it was done, you can't imagine with what Admiration every
Body star'd at us. They could not conceive how it was possible
for this Machine to go by itself, and to sound all the Hours of
the Day. Being by this time so perfect in the Language of the
Country, that we explain'd ourselves with as much Ease as in the
_French_; we told them, that they ought to have a Tower built
over the House of the Priest or Judge, after the manner of the
Europeans, and so put up the Clock in it that every Body might
hear it strike. No sooner said, but done, and all Hands were set
to work to follow our Directions, till the Clock was hung up in
the Place which we appointed for it.

But to return to the Persons they make use of to take care of the
Pendulums, and to give. Notice to the People of the Time of the
Day. You must know, that hitherto no Person in this Country was
ever sentenc'd to die. Crimes indeed are prohibited, and the
Criminals punish'd, but not with Death; for they imagine, that as
the Life of Man is in the Power only of God who gave it, 'tis not
in Man's Power to take it away for any Cause whatsoever, not even
for the Murder of a Father or Mother. It was in vain to preach
to them, that the putting of Criminals to Death for such Capital
Offences, was a Maxim, observ'd by almost all Mankind, and
expresly commanded by our Law, of which we believe God himself
was the Dictator; all this tended only to exasperate them, and to
give them an Abhorrence for People whom they knew not, and whom
they thought unworthy to see the Light. 'Tis not likely, said
they, that a Man who kills another, is in his right Senses, and
it would be an Affront to the rest of his Species to suppose it.
But when we meet with Persons so extravagant and cruel, as to
deprive their Neighbour of a Life which they never gave him, we
ought to leave the Revenge to the _Universal Spirit_ (which is
the Name they call God by) and not to incroach upon his
Prerogatives by imitating their Barbarity, under the specious
Pretext of observing the Divine Laws, which in the main, say
they, are but the Ordonnances of an unnatural Tyrant. In the
Formation of Society, every Man may transfer the Right and
Authority which Nature has given him over himself to another, as
to his Prince or Sovereign, but he cannot give him any Power over
his own Life. 'Tis God who thro' the Means of our Parents has
made us without our Participation, and since we have not
contributed to our own Existence in any Manner whatsoever, 'tis
but just and lawful to leave it to that same God to unmake us,
and to content our selves with laying our Hands upon the other
Creatures which he seems to have left to our Disposal.

In conformity to these Principles, they only impose upon every
Criminal that Punishment which they think most adequate to his
Offence. Blasphemy against God is with them the most enormous
Sin, and those who commit it, are without Mercy condemned to hard
Labour as long as they live, in the Bottom of a dark Mine where
the Light of the Sun cannot enter. Murderers, Adulterers,
Fornicators and great Robbers are treated much after the same
manner: Some work at the Bottom, others at the Top; some are
condemn'd for 10 Years, others for more or less Time according as
the Crime is aggravated, and to the Age and Understanding of the
Offender. Peccadillos are not punish'd so severely, those who
commit them being generally confin'd to the Village. Some are
employ'd in fishing, and in making and mending of Nets, in which
they have full Employment, because their Rivers abound with Fish,
and they eat great Quantities of them. Some take care of the
Trees, and the Walks, and others cleanse the Canals. The Women
and Girls look after the Pendulums, being reliev'd every six
Hours, and the Boys go about constantly to cry the Hour of the
Day from the Time that the Sun comes to their Meridian to the
Time it returns. And when they have done this for a certain Term,
they are restor'd to their Liberty.

I said a while ago, that Blasphemy is the Crime they punish with
the greatest Severity, which gives me Occasion now to say two
Words concerning the poor Man, our Guide to the Mines, who when
he fell down, call'd out on the Name of _Christ_, as it were for
Help. When I found myself able to speak their Language, I let no
Opportunity slip of informing my self of the Things which I
desir'd to know. I told our Patron one Day the Circumstances of
the Journey we made to the Mountains, and when I mention'd the
venerable Personage, and what he said, I ask'd him, if they knew
a _Christ_ among them. He made me Answer, that about 300 or 400
Years ago, there came several People into their Country for much
the same Reasons that had brought us thither, that the last who
came, was a grave Man dress'd in a long Robe in such a manner,
that it was natural for me to think he was a Monk of some
mendicant Order. This Man, continued he, had Wit and Learning
too; he came to a Canton not far from this, but did not stay here
long. As soon as he understood a little of our Language, he often
shifted his Village. My Grandfather, as I have heard my Father
say, had lodg'd him here several times, and took a great deal of
Pleasure in hearing him talk. He was continually preaching up
Morality, and discoursing of a Resurrection, and happy
Immortality after this Life. Moreover, he affirmed, that God had
a Son ingender'd of his own Substance long before the World had a
Being, who manifested himself to Mankind several Ages past, as
born from a Virgin, or one who, if you please, had never known
Man: That this God-Man convers'd with Mankind that he suffer'd
the Death of a Robber to procure eternal Life for the rest of Men
who should be willing to embrace his Religion; and that this
Person who was call'd _Christ_, rose from the Dead, and fitteth
in Heaven at the Right Hand of God his Father, with him to govern
Heaven and Earth till the End of the World. As this was very
soothing Doctrine, the Monk found a great many People who were
hugely delighted with what he said, and others took Offence at
it, which coming to the King's Ears, he was sent for to Court,
and after having been strictly examin'd, was condemned like the
worst of Blasphemers, to spend the rest of his Days in the Bottom
of a Mine, where, not long after, he died. And as he had the Name
of _Christ_ in his Mouth at every Turn, some that work'd with
him, imitated him; and what you have now told me of your Guide,
added he, is a certain Proof that the Doctrine has found its way
to us.

Tho' this Discourse alarm'd me, I could not help telling him,
that I was of the same Belief as that Man; that the Maxims of the
Religion I profess'd, led me to it, and that I was surpriz'd to
think that Persons of their Wisdom and Humanity could find in
their Hearts to be so barbarous to a poor Friar, who no doubt was
sent to them by Heaven for their Salvation. Perhaps, said my
Landlord, it was owing in a great measure to State Policy.
Princes don't love great Alterations in Worship, for fear their
Persons should suffer by it, or that it should be prejudicial to
the Government. And then 'tis as sure on the other hand, that
your Sentiments are in many Respects contradictory, and that this
_Christ_ above all Things excites to Rebellion, and prodigiously
embarrasses humane Reason. I own, said I, 'tis an
incomprehensible Mystery, but we believe it; and we believe it
with the more Confidence and Steadiness, because we see it is for
our Advantage to believe it, and that 'tis interwoven with the
Oeconomy of Salvation; besides its being a Truth of which a
thousand Eye-Witnesses have given Evidence, and which has been
reveal'd to us by God himself.

To be sure, said the Judge, you were born in very happy Climates,
since the Divinity communicates himself there in such a manner to
the Inhabitants; or rather, the People of your Country must be
very vain and presumptuous to have the Impudence to give it out
in publick, that the universal Spirit condescends to become a
private Man, and to a Familiarity with a Worm of this Earth. To
me it seems intolerable, and if this same God was the least
concern'd for his own Honour, he would not fail to punish your
Arrogance with Severity. But, before I engage farther with you in
this Discourse, pray tell me, said he, how does this Revelation
come? Does God speak to you directly himself, does he employ
Heaven, Earth, or any other Creature in revealing it to you, in
what manner doth he do it?

I question, said I, whether 'tis worth while to talk with you on
this Subject; I perceive you are so wide from our Sentiments, and
so little dispos'd to give the least Credit to our Doctrines,
that I fear your Incredulity will stir up your Indignation, and
bring me into some Trouble. You need fear nothing, reply'd he, I
am your Friend, and a Man of Honour, and will allow you to say
what you please, only I will not give up the Right of judging for
myself. Upon this Condition, said I, I am willing to tell you as
much as my Age, Education, and Business have suffer'd me to know
of the Matter. But, for fear of rambling too far from the main
Point, or lest I should entertain you with what you know better
perhaps than I do, tell me if you please, first of all, what are
your Sentiments of God, of the World, of Man, and of his Origin,
as well as of his Dependance, and of what he ought to expect
after this Life.

You say well, reply'd the old Gentleman, I am ready to satisfy
you, as to my own particular, it being impossible that my
Confession should be general, because perhaps there are as many
Minds as there are Men. I for my part believe an increated
Substance, an universal Spirit, sovereignly wise, and perfectly
good and just, an independant and unchangeable Being, who made
Heaven and Earth, and all Things that are therein, who governs
and animates them, but in a Manner so secret, and so far above my
Nothingness, that I have but a very imperfect Idea of it. And
while we perceive the Necessity of his Existence and our
Dependance upon him, we think ourselves under an indispensable
Obligation to pay him our Homage and Adoration, never to speak of
him but with Respect, nor so much as to think of him but with
Trembling, which is one principal Part of our Worship; the other
is continually to render him Thanks for all the Favours he has
done us, without any Petition for Futurity, and much less for any
thing beyond the Grave, because then as our Existence will be at
an End, we shall have no more need of any thing whatsoever. And
'tis for this Purpose that we meet every Morning at the House of
our Priest, which you have been Witness of many times since you
came among us.

'Tis true, reply'd I, that you are very punctual in giving an
Hour of your Devotion every Day in the Year to God, for which you
are certainly very much to be commended; but I think it strange,
that you entirely reject Prayer, and make no Distinction of Days;
for we employ six Days in our domestick Affairs, and devote the
seventh to God, and the Exercises of our Religion.

We don't think, reply'd he, that one Day is a Jot better than
another. They are undoubtedly all alike, and though we are but
one Hour in the Morning in our Churches, yet we don't fail to
devote the rest of the Day to God, to meditate every Moment upon
his Greatness, and to admire his Goodness to all his Creatures.
But as to Prayer, 'tis absolutely needless, besides the offering
Violence as it were to his Nature, which being immutable, 'tis
evident that he cannot suffer any Shadow of Change.

Here Word was brought to the Judge, that the _Timeiou_, that is to
say, the Intendant or Governor was come to receive the Tribute of
the Canton. We have already observ'd, that each Village consists
of 22 Families govern'd by a Bailiff. Ten of the Cantons form one
Government, the eldest of whose Bailiffs is _Timeiou_, and
President of the nine others in the Assemblies which are held for
exercising Justice, and regulating the Police in those ten
Villages. Besides this, there's the Sovereign Court to which out
of the ten Governors one is deputed once a Year to the Assembly
which is held for at least twenty Days. The King presides in this
illustrious and numerous Body, which takes care of the Rights of
the Regale, and to which an Appeal may be made from all the other
Tribunals, when the Punishment of any capital Crime is the chief
thing in question.

The Intendant, who was come to receive the Gift of the People,
was perfectly well receiv'd by our Landlord, and a magnificent
Entertainment was made for him, to which the Priest and the two
Assessors of the Village were also invited. During the
Conversation, they did not forget to talk of Messieurs the
Clockmakers. The Governor who had the Curiosity to see our
Machine, admir'd the Invention of it, and said a thousand fine
Things in praise of us; but it had been better for us that he had
known nothing of the Matter, because in the Sequel it did not
turn out at all to our Advantage, as will be seen in its Place.




CHAP. VII.

_A curious Conversation between the Author, the Judge, and the
Priest of the Village concerning Religion._


After the Governor was gone, the Judge who had not forgot our
Conversation, was impatient to hear me talk of my Religion, and
that he might have the fairer Opportunity, he invited the Priest
next Day to Dinner for the Purpose, and sent for me and my
Comrade to be of the Party.

The first thing that gave occasion to the Priest to open the
Discourse, was our saying Grace before Meat. As I knew his
Opinion, and had before talk'd of it to my Landlord, I only told
him, that the Notion I had of God as a Being sovereignly
powerful, and perfectly good, inclin'd me to implore his Blessing
on the Food which he gave me for the Nourishment of my Body,
being convinced both from Reason and Experience, that his Word
was infinitely more satisfying than Bread. He talk'd on this
Subject much after the same Manner as the Judge did, and
pretended to evade the Stress of my Argument by instancing in his
Countrymen, and even most Animals who are as much nourish'd with
what they eat, as we who perform this Ceremony: So that the Drift
of what he said was the absolute abolishing of Prayer. Let us not
trouble our Heads to dispute about it, said I, 'tis a Question
that will resolve itself soon, and only depends on some other
Truths which I shall clearly demonstrate to you.

In the Conversation I had t'other Day with the Judge, he himself
own'd to me, that you unanimously confess the Existence of a God
of all Perfection, which is a Truth that might be very easily
prov'd to you by several undeniable Arguments, and especially by
that ascrib'd to one St. _Thomas_, which he calls _causalitas
causae efficientis_, because by it we infallibly trace Effects to
one first, intelligent, and necessary Cause of the Production of
all Things.

I know it, said the Priest, and a Man must be quite devoid of
Reason so much as to doubt of it. Well then, reply'd I, 'tis
clear that 'twas this same God, and no other who has created the
Universe, that is to say, Heaven, Earth, and in general every
thing that exists, out of nothing. As for that, said the Judge, I
don't well understand it, out of Nothing there comes Nothing. You
are right, said I, with regard to us; but as to God the Case is
quite otherwise; there is no supposing of Matter coexistent with
God, without a direct Contradiction; for then there would be two
Infinite, two independent Beings, which 'tis presum'd cannot be
reconcil'd. But to have done with infinite Things which are out
of our Reach, I think it sufficient in the main to know that God
has made all Things and not puzzle ourselves as to the Matter,
Manner, and Time.

We have a Book, I added, which tells us all this. _Moses_ assures
us that God made every thing by his Word, about 6000 Years ago;
and that after he had imploy'd Six Days in it, he rested from his
Labour. What did he do the first Day, reply'd the Judge? After
having created the Heaven and the Earth, he said, _Let there be
Light, and there was Light_, &c. On the Sixth Day he created Man
out of Clay, and breath'd into his Nostrils the Breath of Life,
_&c_. When he had endow'd him with Discernment, it was very just
that he should live in a Dependance upon him, and own him for the
only Lord of the Universe. He gave him Power over all things on
the Earth, and only forbad him not to touch one single Tree that
was planted in the midst of the delightful Garden in which
Providence had plac'd him. The Submission he ow'd to his Creator,
would no doubt have constrain'd him from contravening his Orders;
but the Woman which he gave him for a Companion, being the weaker
Vessel, and more inquisitive than he was, indulg'd her
Curiousity, took the admirable Fruit of this Tree into her Hand,
tasted it, and found it so excellent, that she gave it to her
Husband, who was so unfortunate as to eat of it, and by
consequence incurr'd the Penalty that was impos'd on him of dying
an everlasting Death, that is to say, of suffering eternal Pains
after his Death; a Punishment very harsh, and indeed cruel,
considering the Offence, and the Person that committed it, but
nevertheless very just, in consideration of the Majesty of the
Being that was offended.

Having ran over the History of the Creation, the Deluge, the
Patriarch, of _Moses_ and his brother _Aaron_, and of the
Miracles by which the Truth of this History was confirm'd, I
entertain'd them with an Account of the Prophets and their
Predictions, especially with regard to the Messiah; of our
Saviour's coming into the World, how he was the Son of God, and
by what means he redeem'd us from the Punishment we had deserv'd
in the Person of the First Man, our Father. I show'd them the
Necessity of Prayer, as well from the Dictates of Nature, as from
the Documents of holy Men, and in particular of Jesus Christ.
And, to conclude, I talk'd to them of the Resurrection of the
Body, and its being repossess'd by the Son, and of an everlasting
happy Life which the Son of God purchas'd for us, by suffering
the ignominious Death of the Cross.

I must own they heard me with a great deal of Patience, nay, they
seem'd to be pleas'd, and to acquiesce in the greatest part of
what I said. But I was very much surpris'd when the Priest ask'd
me, with a very serious Countenance, whether I believ'd it all.
Verily, said I, I believe every Tittle of it. Those who
question'd the Law of _Moses_, dy'd without Mercy; and the
Apostles assure us, that we cannot doubt of the Truth of Christ's
Words, and the whole Oeconomy of Salvation, without danger of
everlasting Punishment. But that which is the Motive to my
Belief, is not Force, but Evidence itself. What would you think
of me, continu'd I, if I told you exactly not only your most
secret Transactions past, but what you will do hereafter, and
what must happen to your Country? If I should cure the Sick,
raise the Dead to Life, pass the Seas dryshod, cleave the Rocks
with a Rod, and bring Water enough out of them to quench the
Thirst of a whole Nation, and if I work'd a thousand more such
Miracles? Would you not say, either that I was a God, of at least
an Instrument in the Hand of God, to work so many different
Miracles, since all this is above the Power of Mortals? And yet,
continu'd I, 'tis no more than what was done by the Prophets, the
Apostles, and especially by Jesus Christ, as I just now hinted;
so that we have no reason to doubt of the Truth of what they have
left us upon Record.

Your Consequence is not just, said the Priest. Pray, did you see
all those fine things? I own I did not, said I; but the Sight of
a Thing is not always necessary to the Belief of it. You never
saw _Europe_, its Kingdoms, Wars, Religions, and Customs, yet you
believe what we relate to you about it, because you take us for
honest Men, and because two or three other Travellers before us
inform'd your Ancestors almost the same things. When a Fact is
supported by the Testimony of several Persons of Probity, there's
no longer any Reason to call it in question. Now the Facts of
which I speak to you, are not only confirm'd by a sufficient
Number of wise and good Men, but by Clouds of Witnesses, by
intire Nations, which we cannot possibly suspect, because the
Worship of some of them is quite different from ours, and they
are our mortal Enemies into the Bargain: Even the _Jews_ know
after what manner God appear'd to our Fathers, one while in
Dreams, another while in a Burning Bush, and that at other times
he conducted them in the Form of a Cloud by Day, and a Pillar of
Fire by Night, and stopp'd where they were to encamp in the
Deserts[1], when he himself led them to the great Country, of
which he had promis'd them the Possession. Surely, after such
strong Evidence, I think we should be very much in the wrong to
be Unbelievers.

To be ingenuous with you, said the Judge, there's something in
all this which is surprising, and which, tho' supernatural, yet
appears very probable. Not so probable as you imagine, reply'd
the Priest; you know how our Ancestors were bubbled, much after
the same manner, by the Craft and Violence of our former Kings.
There's Parchment to write upon at all times, and the Punishments
inflicted on those who don't subscribe to pretended Facts which
are given out as Truths, force People to be silent, who would
otherwise take a Pride in talking big. The Creation you was just
now speaking of, continued he, looking on me willfully, is a meer
Allegory, which I think very gross of its kind, and form'd by an
Author altogether ignorant of the Nature of things, insomuch that
he makes Effects precede the Cause; for, according to what you
have said, Light was created on the very first Day, and the
Luminaries from whence that Light comes to us, not till the
fourth. Besides, 'tis certain that the Idea of a God who labours,
and rests from his Labour, is what cannot be digested by any, but
very stupid ignorant People, such as dare not say their Souls are
their own, and over whom this _Moses_ you speak of, aim'd to be
temporal Lord, while his Brother _Aaron_ domineer'd without Mercy
over their Consciences.

[Footnote 1: _I have heard of a learned_ English _gentleman, who
lately publish'd a Dissertation to prove that there's nothing
miraculous, nor even extraordinary, in this Pillar of Fire, by
which the_ Israelites _were conducted into the Wilderness; and to
shew them from the best Authors, ancient and modern, that it was
always the Custom in Deserts of this kind; to make use of a Fire
to direct Armies or Multitudes of People in their March, by
causing it to be carry'd before them in such a manner that the
whole Company might see the Smoke by Day, and the Flame by Night.
He pretends that the Person who had the Direction of this Fire,
and serv'd as a Guide to the_ Israelites, _was only_ Hobab, _the
Father-in-law of_ Moses; _which he endeavours to prove from the
29th and 30th Verses of the Tenth Chapter of Numbers, and from
many other Passages of the sacred Scriptures_.]

I dare not tell you after what manner he treated Jesus Christ and
his Mother: But as to the Soul, that Spiritual Substance in us,
of which they said they had no Notion, I can't help observing to
you an Objection that was started by the Priest, when we talk'd
about the Resurrection of the Dead. 'Tis certain, said he, that
the Earth is compos'd of innumerable small Particles whose
Figures are extremely different, as appears from the variety of
Things which this same Earth produces. Certain Parcels of Earth
which are proper to form one sort of Fruit, would not be at all
proper for the Production of some others. What is good to make
Copper, is worth nothing for Iron. From hence it comes, that if
Wheat be sow'd for several Years together in one and the same
Field, it appears at last that all the Parts of Matter which were
proper to yield us Wheat, being spent, and no more of it left,
the Earth will absolutely bear no more Wheat till 'tis dung'd.
We'll apply this Example to Man: The Particles which are proper
for the Composition of Human Flesh, are not more infinite than
those of Corn; and undoubtedly in this Kingdom there are no more
than what will form a certain determinate Number of Persons. Now
make this Number as great as you please, I don't think 'tis equal
to that of all the Men that have liv'd since the Beginning of the
World. Nay, said he, I know not if there be not reason to
question whether there are enough of these Parts here for the
People that have been born in it for only ten Centuries. They who
have studied the Nature of Beings ever so little, know, that as
the Hair and Nails grow, wear away, and fall off, the external
Parts of the Fibres of our Body wear in like manner, while the
Blood has its Pulsation, and augments the internal Parts. 'Tis
incredible what a Dissipation is occasion'd every Day by that
thing only which is call'd Perspiration; but then there is this
Advantage, that the Loss of the Parts one way is supply'd
another. So that if all that we lose were to be transported into
another Country, without any Return to ours, 'tis probable that a
Famine and Mortality wou'd happen among us every now and then, to
the end that the Parts of those who dy'd might serve for the
Increase of the others, till in short there be no more left. From
hence, said he, I infer, that if we were to rise again, it is
impossible that of the Parts proper for the Construction of Man,
there would be enough left to distribute to all that have liv'd
so much as is absolutely necessary for forming a Body of a
middling Stature; and God knows whether there would be enough of
the other Parts, because if all that have dy'd for the several
thousands of Years past which the World has subsisted, were laid
together in a Heap, 'tis probable that the Bulk would even exceed
that of the Earth, from whence they deriv'd their Origin.

We will illustrate this Paradox by a general Calculation, as
follows. We have in this Country 41600 Villages, and computing
Twenty-two Families in each Village, at the rate of nine Persons
in every Family, one with another, every Village will contain
near 200 Inhabitants; so that throughout the Kingdom we may
suppose 8323000. Now we'll allow to every Humane Body, consider'd
under the Form of a Parallelopepid of five Foot high, and half a
Foot broad and thick, one with another (you see I take it at the
least Computation) it will appear on the Day of Resurrection that
8323000 Bodies will contain about 10400000 Cubic Feet of Flesh.
Suppose again, that this Number of Men be renew'd every fifty
Years, then there must be 208 Millions of Cubic Feet of Flesh,
for the People that have liv'd in the Space of only 1000 Years,
and 2080 Millions for the People within 10000 Years. Continue
this Multiplication, and consider what a vast Length it will run;
but, said he, with a great Exclamation, what would it not amount
to, if the Opinion of some learned Men be true, which, as you
told your Landlord, passes for certain, that the very Seed of
most, if not of all Animals, is compounded of innumerable
Animalcules which have Life and Motion, so that in a Body no
bigger than a Grain of Millet, there are thousands which, small
as they are, yet are Individuals of the same Species as the
Animals by which they were engender'd, and must consequently
partake of the same Advantages as the others, tho' they surpass
them as much in Bigness, as the highest Mountain does a Grain of
Sand; in which Case 'tis manifest that your Opinion is
ridiculous, and a palpable Contradiction.

You talk of thousands of Years, _said I_, as if they were but so
many Minutes, and according to you, the World must be much more
ancient than it is. I make use of a definite Term, _said he_, to
denote an indefinite Number; there's no Necessity for being so
very strict. Be the World ancient or not, that does not alter the
Nature of Things; 'tis certain that we believe it to have
subsisted, Time out of mind, which we cannot express either by
Words or Figures. You are not the only People, _I reply'd_, that
have been deceiv'd in this Matter. The _Chinese_ have
Chronologies for above 40000 Years, and the _AEgyptians_ carry
theirs at least as far back. That ancient Philosopher, _Plato_,
introduces an _AEgyptian_ Priest, who, in a Discourse with
_Solon_, tells him that 'twas 9000 Years since _Minerva_ built
_Sais_. _Diodorus_ reckons 23000 Years from _Osiris_ and _Isis_,
to the time of _Alexander the Great_. _Laertius_ speaks of a Term
of 49000 Years, during which they had calculated all the
Eclipses. They pretended, according to a Remark by St. _Austin_,
to have observ'd the Stars for 100000 Years; and by the Report of
_Cicero_, they had done it for 570000 Years. But all this is
advanced without any Foundation, and from a Principle of Vanity
to challenge a Superiority over the other Nations of the Earth.
As for us, we adhere to _Moses_'s Account, who assures us that
the World has not subsisted above 6000 Years. And really, if we
give our selves the trouble to reflect: upon this Matter ever so
little, there is no room to question the Truth of his Assertion.
One undeniable Proof that the World is not very ancient, is that
we have no Histories which go above 4000 Years back. The Arts are
also very modern. We don't find that above 500 Years ago they had
any Knowledge of the Mariner's Compass, of the printing of Books,
of Gunpowder, Fire-Arms, Perspectives, Microscopes, and other
fine Inventions. 'Tis certain likewise that the Use of Money was
unknown to the ancient Writers. Clocks, Watches, Glass, Paper,
temper'd Steel, and abundance of other things, are of a very
modern Date. I infer therefore, that in this, as well as in other
Matters, 'tis absolutely necessary to be guided by the Word of
God.

I told you before, said the Priest, that none of us pretends to
determine the Age of the World. We are persuaded that it had a
Beginning, but we know not when, and all that I can say is, that
it was a vast while ago. The first Man has not remark'd it, nor
have we any thing like a Register of the Time; all that we know
of it is by Tradition. Most of the Arts that you have now
mention'd are unknown to us, and yet for all this, our Part of
the World is as old as yours: We may be here a Million of Years
without knowing them, because we have no need of them, and 'tis
not impossible but others may do without them a long time, as
well as we. Necessity, or the like Causes, have been the Mother
of Inventions within 100 Years, which were unthought of before
in as many Ages. But all this is not conclusive. What I know is,
that from Father to Son we always hand it down, that the Years
which we have continu'd are not to be number'd: And it is
certain, that notwithstanding the vast Quantity Of Wood which we
burn, the Mountains of Coal which we have already levell'd are so
considerable, that if we were to compute them, this alone would
be sufficient to confirm us in our Opinions. But the most
remarkable thing of all is that about 7000 Years ago, as the Men
were digging in one of those Mountains, they found within 30 Foot
of the Top, a double Hook of Iron of above 1500 Weight, which we
still keep, and which the Foreigners that have been here from
time to time, affirm is one of those Instruments that are us'd at
Sea to stop great Ships; from whence one would think that the
Ocean was in possession of this fine Country before us, and that
perhaps our highest Mountains only serv'd then to break its
Billows.

Besides this, who knows but those Arts, of which you pretend to
the Invention, were not known to your Predecessors? I plainly
observe here that the Sciences are upon the Decay. My Great
Grandfather was much better skill'd than my Father in Astronomy:
I know even less of it than both; and by what I learn from them,
the Knowledge they had of it was very obscure in comparison of
what their Ancestors knew. 'Tis the very same in all other
Families. There are Sciences which are cultivated at certain
times, in complaisance to the Mode that then prevails, but are
intirely neglected at others; and 'tis possible they may be so
far bury'd in Oblivion, that those who are born afterwards,
seeing no Trace of them, imagine when they come to the Exercise
of 'em, that they are the first Inventors.

That may be, I reply'd, in your Country, where you have no
Communication with other Parts of the World; but with us, if the
Sciences decay in one Place by Wars and Conflagrations, or by the
Indolence and Indifference of some People, of which we have
several Instances, yet they are advanc'd else where to a higher
Degree of Perfection thro' the Diligence of others; and I
question whether any considerable Part of former Inventions is
lost; whereas on the contrary, every Day produces some Discovery
or other that is curious and advantageous to Society.

I would have explain'd to him that which he thought a
Contradiction in _Genesis_, with regard to the Luminaries, and to
Light; and have shewn how far he was mistaken concerning the
Resurrection; but he laugh'd at me, and all my Arguments: Indeed
he was for admitting the Omnipotence of God, but then in this
Case he did not think it necessary. For why, said he, should
there be a Resurrection after this Life? What Necessity for
exterminating the Race of Man, to bring them to Life again
hereafter? If Christ was God, could not he have exempted Man from
that Death, as well as from the other? And besides, if we were
all to be living at one time, which way should we subsist? There
would not be Provision enough for a Breakfast thro' the whole
Country. But, said I, our Bodies will be of another Nature; we
shall neither eat, nor drink, nor be subject: to any natural
Infirmity; and moreover, God will translate us into the Heaven of
Heavens, where we shall be fill'd with his Glory.

What! are you to be mounted above the Sky? Pray, Friend, what
Notion have you then, continued he, of Heaven? As for our parts,
we believe that the Air we breathe is infinitely more gross than
that which is above, and that the higher we are from the Earth,
Matter is more subtil. This being so, the Heaven of the Blessed
must be like a Vacuum, in comparison with the lower Heavens, as
to the Matter which fills it. Farewell then to the Lungs, because
there will be no more Breathing; farewell to the Use of the
Larynx for Speech; farewell to the Intestines, and in a Word, to
the whole Body, which the Blood, for want of being cool'd, will
throw into a burning Fever that will soon consume it. But suppose
that all this be retain'd as a very useless Load, what is it to
rest upon? What is it will sustain such material heavy Bodies?
They will be sustain'd, said I, by the Almighty Power of God. I
am weary to hear you talk so much, reply'd he, of the Power of
God. I plainly perceive that you practise the very same thing in
your Religion, that we observe in our Mysteries of Nature; when
we are at a Loss to give a Reason for a Thing, we say that 'tis
the Effect of some latent Power. I say it again, I make no manner
of question of God's Power; but I don't see the Necessity of
inventing Chimeras in order to have recourse to it. If yours
indeed were a Paradise of Pleasures, well and good; but a Place
intirely devoid of every thing, where the Body shall absolutely
enjoy no Pleasure, where there shall be no Object to affect the
Senses, no Odours to please the Sense of Smelling, no Viands to
stimulate the Palate, no Instrument of Music to tickle the Ear,
nothing to divert the Eye; surely this is miraculous. Certainly
you must be extremely sensual, because notwithstanding the
Eternity you attribute to your Souls, which you believe to be
capable of subsisting independently from the Body, you choose
rather to embarras the Soul again, and to clog it with a terrible
Weight, which, by the way, according to you, is to have no Basis
to rest on, rather than leave it at full Scope, and abandon this
Lump of Flesh to that Corruption from which it cannot possibly be
exempt.

'Tis not the Soul alone, I reply'd, that does Good or Evil. The
Body and the Mind both contribute to it, and they must equally
partake of the Rewards or the Punishments which the Sovereign
Judge of the World shall think them worthy of. All this, said he,
is not enough to convince me. Our Bodies are every Moment
changing, and no Man ever liv'd to Twenty-five Years of Age, that
retain'd any one thing that he brought into the World. The Blood,
Flesh, Skin, Nerves, and Bones, are continually diminishing on
one hand, and increasing on the other, and the whole Machine is
every now and then renew'd. Our Inclinations vary also according
to our Age and Constitution; for we are often great Deboshees at
Thirty Years of Age, and at Sixty extremely devout and retired.
With which of these two Bodies, pray, are we to rise again? With
the old decrepid and weak Body which has liv'd perfectly well,
and whose Actions have been exemplary to the Youth and edifying
to those advanced in Years? Or are we to rise again with that
juvenile, straight, vigorous, handsome Body, which deserv'd
twenty times to be doom'd to the Mines? You see plainly that take
it which way you will, 'tis extremely perplexing, and that 'tis
pretty evident that whoever was the Author of this Opinion, he
did not foresee all those Inconveniences. If I were for the
Resurrection, t'would be a Matter of Indifference to me what
Parts the Body was to be composed of when it rose again, for 'tis
the same thing to the Soul; and I should lay it down for a
certain Maxim, That would be the Condition, and not the Place,
that was to make us happy; but all these things are meer Trifles,
unworthy of a Man of Sense.

But I must own to you, he added, that tho' I don't comprehend
what you mean by a Soul, by a Spiritual Substance destitute of
all Matter, or by a Spirit properly constituted by Thought, and
yet confin'd in a Body, where its Powers are limited to prompt or
make him to act according to its Will, and in a Body too which
'tis not oblig'd at all to for its Existence, yet as the Idea you
form of it is agreeable, in that it gives you hopes of another
Life, I am not surpris'd that there are People who acquiesce in
your Opinion. They are undoubtedly of the common Class of
Understandings, yet nevertheless they are happy; for Felicity,
generally speaking, consists meerly in the Imagination. They who
are full of this Opinion, that Death is but a Passage to a Life
of Glory, cannot be so loth to leave the World as others
(especially where they are so wedded to that Opinion, as I
observe they are in your Parts) and must have some Taste
beforehand of that pretended Eternal Felicity. So that whether it
be true, or not, the Thing is all one to them, neither more nor
less than my Satisfaction would be, supposing I have 10000 _Kal[ei]_
in my Coffer, which I shall never want, and which I firmly
believe to be of the best Metal that is dug out of our Mines,
tho' they are all the while but Iron.

My Comrade, who was a religious Man, was enrag'd to hear this
Pagan call in question the Mysteries of a Worship founded upon
the pure Word of God; he gave me to understand several times,
that he could hardly contain himself, and that he wanted at least
to reprove him by plain Passages out of holy Scripture. But I
always dissuaded him from it, because the other deny'd that they
were divine Writings, and as he also pretended they were but a
Medley of very ill-concerted Fictions, it would have disgusted
him to have talk'd any more to him about it.

I told them, however, with a real Design to alarm them, that I
was not only persuaded of an eternal State of Happiness for those
who did good Works, and had Faith, but that there were also
Torments and a Hell prepar'd for the Wicked and Unbelievers, and
that every one would infallibly be dealt with according to the
Good or Evil that he had done in this Life.

What you have already said, reply'd the Priest, tends to as much;
but this is an Error as gross as the former; for besides that
'tis making God the most cruel of all Beings, to have created Man
in order to damn him everlastingly, on pretence that he infring'd
one of his Commands, and a Command too which was only that he
should not eat an Apple, the very Thought of which really makes
me shrink with Horror; I deny that any body is capable of doing
Good or Evil, with respect to God; and I ask you seriously,
whether you your self believe it? Undoubtedly, I do, said I; and
methinks it is so clear, that one cannot question it without
shocking common Sense.

What, said I, are not Whoredom, Murder, Theft, and Blasphemy,
Crimes of Offence against the Majesty of the Almighty? Not at
all, reply'd the Priest; for in the first Place, if Whoredom was
a Sin, God himself would be the Author of it, and, what is worse,
of Incest it self, because, according to you and your great
_Moses_, as there were at first but one Man and one Woman, their
Descendants must have committed several Acts of Incest before
there were Persons enough living for them to avoid it: And as to
the pretended Necessity of it at that time, I can't bear to hear
it, for God could as easily have created a hundred Persons, as
only one. We are all Children of the first Man. There are Degrees
of Consanguinity among us, but in the Sight of God 'tis not so.
Women and Goods were in common at first, as Air and Water are
now. But Men, who seem to have been form'd for Society, observing
the Disorder which this occasion'd, thought it proper that every
Father of a Family should have one or more Women, a certain
Extent of Ground, and a particular Number of Cattle, at his sole
Disposal. They were also oblig'd afterwards by common Consent, to
make Laws imposing Penalties on those who did not observe them.
So that if any body is offended by the Transgression of those
Laws, 'tis properly the Society, or the Heads that represent it,
and not at all the universal Spirit, who can by no means be
offended by any Person. The same thing may be said of Robbery and
Murder, whereby, properly speaking, no Hurt is done to any Being
but to the Person whose Life or Property is taken away. And as to
Blasphemy, tho' we punish it more severely than other Crimes,
'tis not because we think that God is offended at it; not at all;
it would be a Weakness in him, if he were capable of it; but 'tis
because we cannot tolerate Ingratitude, of which the blackest
Instance that Man can be guilty of, is to affront or not to pay
due Respect to him who is the Author of his Being, and of all the
Benefits he is capable of receiving; besides, that it sets an ill
Example to Children and Inferiors, with regard to their Parents
and Matters.

As much as I dislik'd this Discourse, I was willing to hear him
out; but upon his stopping I reply'd: You yourself acknowledge
that Men seem to have been form'd for Society; and from hence I
argue, that God, who form'd them for this Purpose, must will and
intend, that they should avoid all those Actions which introduce
Disorder and Confusion in Society, as you allow Whoredom, Murder,
Theft, _&c._ to do. Does it not follow then, that God must be
offended by these Actions which are so directly contrary to his
Will and Intention? Give me a Reason why the Society, or Heads
that represent it, should be offended by such Crimes, which will
not hold as strongly for God's being so? Is it because their
Will, express'd by their Laws, is offended and transgress'd? And
is not the Will of God, express'd plainly in his forming us for
Society, equally offended and transgress'd? When we speak of
God's being offended or angry, we do not mean that he suffers
what Men suffer on those Occasions: Anger is call'd a Passion,
and it would be a Weakness in God (as you say) if that could be
properly apply'd to him: but when we speak of him as angry or
offended by our Actions, we consider his Disposition of Mind, on
such Occasions, only with regard to the Effects of it towards us:
we mean to signify not what he feels inwardly, but what we may
expect to feel as the Punishment of our Crimes. Upon these and
other Considerations, I, for my part, am firmly persuaded, that
God may and must be offended by such Actions as you just now
instanced in.

Do you believe, continued I, that God, who is a God of Order, and
hates Confusion, has prescrib'd Rules to Man, and given him Laws,
by which he is oblig'd to conduct himself and regulate his
Actions? No, said he, in the Sense that you take it, I don't
believe it, nor was it necessary, because he gave him Will and
Understanding whereby to conduct himself, as you see we do. As
there, is no Pride, Vanity, Jealousy or Desire, of Dominion in
the Beasts, so God has not made them subject to any Civil Laws,
nor would there have been any greater Need of such for rational
Creatures, than there is for the Brutes, only as soon as some
endeavour'd to impose upon the Weakness or Good-nature of others,
there was a Necessity of inventing Punishments for those who
transgress'd certain Rules, and these Rules were multiply'd as
fall as the unbridled Licentiousness of some turbulent Spirits
gave occasion for them.

You are very right there, said I, but pardon me if I presume to
say that I deny that God had I no Concern in them. 'Tis
unreasonable to suppose that Providence would bring a rational
Creature into the World, and afterwards leave him intirely to
himself. He is the Father of him, and is also inclin'd to be his
Director and Preserver. Good Sense tells us this, and his Word,
for that is what I always recur to, assures us of it so
positively, that there is no Possibility of doubting it; I wish
to God, cry'd I, that you could but see that Word. It carries
with it so many Marks of the Dictator that you would be the first
to read it with Veneration if it fell into your Hands; and I
don't despair of its being brought to you one Day or other by
some unhappy Wretch, or else by an intire Nation, which shall
come to settle with you by the Appointment of Heaven, in order to
facilitate the Conversion of a People so honest and humane.

I should be glad, said he, to see the Book you speak so much of,
but very sorry that it should be brought to us by a Host of
People, whom your own Laws, as sacred as you think 'em, would
not restrain from tyrannizing over us. We had much rather that
things should continue as they are. Be you but content with your
Lot, as you see we are with ours, and you'll be more happy than
you really are. But no more of this; methinks, said he, 'tis time
to have done. I retire. Adieu.

After our Priest was gone, we convers'd a few Moments longer
concerning the Immortality of the Soul, the Resurrection of the
Dead, and Life Eternal, because the Judge took a Liking to the
Discourse; and by the Notice I took, if I am not deceiv'd, it
would be easy to bring those People into a good Opinion of our
Religion.

Before we parted, my Landlord ask'd me if I did not see the
Burning Mountain when I was at the Mines. I did not so much as
hear any mention of it, said I. Probably, said he, it did not
burn at that time, for otherwise you would infallibly have
observ'd it. I should have been glad to have seen it, said I to
him, but this is no Rarity in our Country. There's _Hecla_ in
_Iceland_, _AEtna_ in _Sicily_, _Vesuvius_ in _Naples_, and
several other such Mountains elsewhere, which burn also at times;
but there's no approaching very near them, even when they don't
burn, because of the Sulphureous Exhalations that arise out of
them, the prodigious Quantity of Ashes that encompasses them, and
the Danger there is of sinking into the Ground in several Places,
where it is soft, trembling, or hollow.

Perhaps, said he, the _Europeans_ who have been here before you,
related the same thing to our Ancestors, and that the People
came by that means to be undeceiv'd in the mistaken Notion they
had entertain'd of the Cause of this Prodigy. For 'tis certain
that the simple Vulgar were always of Opinion, that when God
created the World, and determin'd to make certain Beings which
should have Life and Motion, he erected a Laboratory under the
burning Mountain, with an Oven, and a monstrous large Crucible in
it, at the Mouth of which was a Bar that divided it into two
equal Parts, and to this Bar there belong'd a Lamp. This great
Workman, said they, every now and then fill'd this Vessel with
Earth, which he took up behind him, in the Place of which there
is now a great Lake, and when this Earth was become liquid by the
Force of the Fire, he took out a small Portion of it, by means of
a hollow Tube that he made use of for the purpose, at one end of
which he only blew, and there immediately appear'd at the other
an Animal, which he sent into the wide World. He had made but a
small Number of them, when he observ'd his Lamp set Fire to the
Mountain under which it hung. This unexpected Inconvenience soon
made him change his Post, for fear of burning the whole Earth. He
had not fought long, ere he found a deep Pit betwixt two
Mountains, which he thought fit to fill with Water, to the end
that the Fire might not spread, while he work'd underneath it.
Mean time, as this Water soon attain'd to a very considerable
Degree of Heat, which would have presently chang'd it into a
Vapour, he pierc'd a neighbouring Mountain, in order that a
Stream of fresh Water might issue from it to cool the Heat of
the boiling Lake, which is undoubtedly the same that you tell me
you saw, and which still retains the same Qualities.

There was an Addition to this Story, that under that very Place
God form'd all other living Creatures in the same manner, except
Man, who deriv'd his Origin elsewhere, as I may perhaps shew you
another time, when I am more at leisure. Lastly, it was pretended
that the Matter which was in the Crucible, being in a violent
Agitation, the Sulphur, Mercury, and other mineral and metallic
Parts, which evaporated in Smoke, were carry'd with Rapidity
under the Arch of the neighbouring Mountains, into which they
penetrated, and in some form'd Coal, and in others, Iron, or the
Minerals and Metals that we find there.

This Fable, as gross as it is, and invented no doubt in honour to
the Gentlemen Chymists, gave me occasion to think that Glass was
not always unknown to them, and that formerly they had Blowers
among them. Be this as it will, there the Conversation ended,
because it grew late, and every one seem'd desirous to go to
rest.

Some Days after this Discourse, the Priest was resolv'd to make
an Entertainment for our Landlord, and we too were of the Party.
Then he made an Apology for having been so outrageous against our
Opinions; and to make us Amends, desired _La Foret_, who had read
both the _Old_ and _New Testament_ more than I had done, to give
him the most circumstantial Account he could remember of the
Contents of the Bible. My Comrade did so, and he thank'd him,
seeming to be very well satisfy'd with it, tho' I know full well
that he only made a Jest of it; whereas I thought the Judge
extremely edify'd with it: So that Affairs would have gone on
very well, if we had always continued together; but to my great
Sorrow, it was not the Will of Heaven it should be so.




CHAP. VIII.


_The Author is carry'd to the King's Court. He traces the Origin
of those Monarchs; describes the Royal Palace, Temple, &c._


The Governor, who, I said a while ago, came to levy the Tribute,
went afterwards and carry'd it to the King, to whom he related
how he met with a couple of Foreigners at such a Village, who
knew how to make Machines that exactly measur'd Time, and divided
a Day Natural into Twenty-four Parts, which they call'd Hours;
and that the most wonderful thing of all, and of great
Conveniency to the Inhabitants, was, that at every Hour, there
was a Bowl of Metal on which a Hammer fell, denoting by a certain
Number of Strokes the particular Time of the Day. The King seem'd
surpris'd at this Account, and express'd his Desire to see us.
Accordingly, we were very much alarm'd one Day, by the Arrival of
two of this Prince's Domestics that came to demand us of our
Landlord, who having no Excuse to make for detaining us, gave us
up with some Regret into their Hands.

Tho' we were extremely sorry to leave the Judge, who made us
infinitely more welcome than I could have desir'd to have been in
_Europe_, yet we did not fail to express great Joy for the Honour
the King had done us to send for us. In the mean time we ask'd
our Guides several times, what might be the Reason of it, but
they protested to us they did not know. All that they could
assure us of, was, that we were talk'd of at Court as Persons of
great Distinction, and that we should not fail of being well
entertain'd there. But I was afraid that the King having heard of
the Disputes we had held with the Priest, Judge, _&c._ had taken
Exceptions against us, and intended to treat us as Seducers of
his Subjects, and People that aim'd at the Subversion of his
Government; yet it prov'd quite otherwise.

We were no sooner arriv'd, but the King sent for us to his
Presence. After having made our Reverences, we were going to bend
the Knee before we spoke to him, pursuant to a Hint that had been
given us for that Purpose; but he would not permit it, and
order'd a Joint-Stool to be brought for each of us, on which he
commanded us to sit down; while all the others that were present
were either standing or kneeling. The King was seated in a
magnificent Chair of State which was ascended to by three Steps,
and cover'd with a Canopy of admirable Sculpture. He ask'd us
from whence we came, and how we got into his Country. We were
oblig'd to gratify his Curiosity by an exact Detail of all our
Adventures. He seem'd to be very glad that our Misfortunes had
procur'd him the Pleasure of seeing us. At length, he came to the
Article of our Science, which he extoll'd mightily, and after
having told us, that he had heard we had made a Clock in our
Village, he gave us to understand, that the chief reason of his
sending for us, was to desire us, to make one for him, and
promis'd to reward our Performance with the tenderest Marks of
his Friendship, and by granting whatever we should desire at his
Hands. We answer'd with a profound Obeisance, that we were not
accustom'd to be so treated by our Sovereigns, that his Majesty
did us a great deal of Honour to think us worthy of being
employ'd in his Service, and that we would discharge ourselves in
the best manner we could.

Upon this we were conducted into a very fine Apartment, which was
to be our own, where Care was taken to serve and accommodate us
as if we had been Persons of great Quality. Next Day, we gave
Orders for fetching our Tools from the Place where we left them,
caus'd several others to be made, such as my Comrade directed,
and set about the Work with all possible Speed, because the King
was impatient to see us at it.

The Monarch who then reign'd, was call'd _Bustrol_. He was a
sober, modest, affable Prince, and, if he is still living, as I
hope he is, one who is much more admir'd for his shining Virtues
than for Pomp and Grandeur. He had a large full Robe on of the
finest Goats-Hair, dy'd red, that was in all the Country, and he
had a Fringe round it above a Foot deep. He wore a five-corner'd
Cap with a Copper Button on it, an Inch and half in Diameter,
which is the principal Mark of his Royalty, if you except his
Gravity, Stature, and good Air.

The Governors are also cloth'd in red Robes, but they are of
Woollen, and every way less. Other Men without Exception, wear
Woollen Robes of mix'd Colours. The Judges only are distinguish'd
by their Caps. As to the Women, they all have Habits or Veils of
fine Linen for their upper Garments, under which they wear others
more or less according to the Season.

The Children of the King have no Prerogatives above others, and
tho' a greater Deference is paid them, 'tis purely voluntary. The
eldest only is honour'd, and dress'd almost like his Father, only
he does not wear the Button.

The King may have 12 Wives, whom he either causes to be chose, or
else chooses himself from among the People when he takes a Tour
Abroad to shew himself, and they durst not refuse him any Woman
tho' she is actually promis'd to another. The Governors may have
three, the Judges two, and the People one. The Priests are
likewise permitted to have two Wives at a time; but whether they
have both at one time or not, they are allow'd but two in all as
long as they live, for if they happen to survive them, they are
prohibited to marry again.

The most magnificent Thing belonging to the King is his Palace
situated in the middle of the Royal Canton, which is of the same
Extent as the others. It fronts to the N.N.E. is 36 Geometrical
Paces in Breadth, and 20 in Depth. The first Floor, which is ten
Foot above the Foundation, is divided into several Apartments
well roof'd, where there's no want of Pilasters, nor of Marble of
various Sorts and Colours. The Pavement is red, the Pillars
black, and the Roof-work white. The second Story being 20 Foot
from the first, has on the Outside opposite to the Portal, a
Stair-Case in form of an half Oval, with 20 Steps, each half a
Foot in height. The first Room we enter, is a spacious
Antichamber, behind which is the Chamber of Audience: From the
Antichamber there run two narrow Passages, one on the Right, the
other on the Left, which divide the main Body of the Building
into two Parts, so that there are four stately Salons on each
Side, and in the whole ten Apartments with the finest Cielings in
the World, and Wainscotting than which I never saw any more
curiously carv'd. Over this second Story there is a third divided
almost in the same Manner as the former, only that instead of a
Chamber of Audience, there is the Bed-Chamber where his Majesty
lies. Then we come to a Platform cover'd with Pewter, and a
Ballustrade all round of massy Copper. In the middle of it there
is a round Pavilion cover'd with Copper also, and the whole is so
well polish'd, that when the Sun shines on it, it dazzles ones
Eyes. At the Top there is a Globe of 20 Foot Circumference, and a
square Pyramid upon it which is one Foot in the Base and five in
height, supported by twelve Pillars of Agate. In the whole
Building there is nothing to be seen scarce but Marble, Agate,
Jasper, and such exquisite fine Stones wonderfully well polish'd
and wrought; the whole built according to an Order which comes
pretty near to the _Corinthian_, except the Columns of the
Cellars which are properly in the _Tuscan_ Taste.

There being no Glass in this Country, they use instead of it the
Skins of the Pol[ei], which they rasp and dress in such a manner,
that they last for ever, and give so free a Passage to the Light,
that you have as much of it within Doors as without. This
Parchment they put up in their Windows in the form of Quarrels,
but as good and fine as it is, it must be own'd that our Glass
surpasses it by far.

Behind the Palace there is a Dome of the Roman Order, 150 Foot
Diameter, cover'd also with Copper, and of the same Materials and
Magnificence as the Palace. This Place serves for two Uses, the
Temple and the Senate. The King's Throne is on the South Side
over-against the Gate, and is rais'd six Foot upon a Stage of
four which is cover'd with a magnificent Carpet; for 'tis certain
these People infinitely surpass the _Turks_ in the Weaving of
their Tapistry. In the middle of the Cieling, there's a very
large Copper Sun, the Body of which is not perhaps above 10 or
12, Foot Diameter, but its Rays extend to a vast Distance. The
Cone upon the Top of the Dome is broad and high. The whole is of
Copper, and supported by six great Pillars or Towers, in each of
which there is a Stair-case that leads to the Galleries of this
stately Edifice.

All round the Canton there are Rows of Lodgings built with
Pavilions upon the Angles, and two upon each Front or Side,
equidistant from one another, so that in all there are twelve.
Twelve Arches are also built between those Pavilions, which are
like so many Gates open to go out of the Canton by 12 Bridges
with Ballustrades of wrought Copper over-against them. Within
these Lodgings in short, which are for the King's twelve Wives,
and for some of the Domesticks of the Court, there runs a Gallery
all round supported by Pillars of Jasper cover'd with Pewter like
the rest of the Lodgings, except the Pavilions which are of
Copper, and extraordinary beautiful. The void Spaces between all
these Buildings are full of Obelisks, Pyramids, Statues upon
magnificent Pedestals, Pots full of all manner of Flowers
according to the Season, Cages full of Birds of all the Colours
in the Rainbow, which make very agreeable Melody, and in a Word,
here is every thing to please the Senses, so that this Place is
properly an inchanted Paradise.

The Canton which lies to the South of the Palace, is a Park full
of Goats, Stags, which are very small in this Country, Bucks,
Does, _&c._ and especially a Sort of Animals call'd Pol[ei], which
have long Hair, a Horn on their Heads, two Ears flat and broad as
ones Hand, a short Tail but very broad, and great flat Feet,
which is the Reason that they commonly stand upright. This Animal
is about the bigness of our little Asses; the Flesh of it is very
delicate, but there's scarce any to be seen except in the King's
Parks, tho' the Damage is not very great, by reason there are few
People who do not scruple to eat it, because it very much
resembles a Man, and seems indeed to be endow'd with some
Reason.

The Canton to the South which is our North, is one continued
Flower-Garden water'd with 1000 little artificial Fountains. The
two others on the Right and Left are design'd for Fruit-trees,
Pulse, and Pot-herbs; and besides those fine Cantons there are
twenty more, twelve of which are for the Queen's, and for their
Children and Domestics, and the eight others for Tillage,
Pasturage, _&c._

The King's Revenues consist in the annual Payment of a piece of
Copper by every Master of a Family, which is about the Size of a
Guinea. I mention'd it once before by the Name of _Kala_, and it
has Inscriptions engrav'd on it, signifying _Our Hearts to God_
on one Side, and _Our Estates to the King_ on the other. I cannot
tell what these Pieces are worth, but I have observ'd that they
make as much of 'em in that Country as we do of _Lewis d'Or_'s in
_France_, The current Coin here is of Pewter, of which there are
Pieces of all Sizes with each a different Stamp. With this Coin
they pay all the Officers of the State; tho' the Gain to
particular Persons is but a Trifle, yet as there are 41600
Villages or 41575 deducting the 25 Villages of the Royal Family,
yet this Article amounts to 831500 Kal[ei], not reckoning the Judges
and Priests who are exempt from paying the Tribute which, setting
aside the Honour of their Posts, is all they get by them.

But I was then inform'd, that Things had not been fix'd on that
Foot above 345 Years. Before then, the Kingly Power had been Time
immemorial, or to speak in their Language, eternally in one and
the same Family. These Kings were call'd Sons of the Sun and
Earth, which Descent made them very ambitious, and the Children
grew worse and worse from Generation to Generation. They
degenerated so far as to demand Homage and Adoration from their
Subjects. They abus'd their Wives and Daughters, prey'd upon
their Estates, and talk'd of nothing less than cutting their
Throats, when they gave the least Indications that they were not
pleas'd with their Tyranny.

At last, as good Luck would have it for those wretched People, it
happen'd I know not how, that a _Portuguese_ arriv'd there, who
having learnt their Language, told them, that after having been
drove ashore upon their Coast, as we had been, he settled there
with his Comrades, who were all dead within four Years Time,
except one only, with whom he chose by the help of a very little
Boat, to go up the River which ran thereabouts into the Sea. To
this he added, that they were 8 Months in the Voyage, and that
after having surmounted inconceivable Difficulties, they arriv'd
at a Gulph of the Mountain from whence this River flow'd. They
try'd to enter it several times, but it was so dark, and there
were so many Rocks, Blind Holes, and Obstacles of all kinds, that
they despair'd of passing it. At length however, they
accomplish'd their Design, for after having gone above two
Leagues under Ground, they arriv'd in the Country so jaded and
fatigued, that they had not Strength to stir; and when this
_Portuguese_ had set his Foot upon Land, the other trying to do
the same, fell backwards into the Boat, which at the same time
drove from Shore, insomuch that this Man who was landed, not
being able to reach to him, he had the Mortification to see him
return into the Gulph from whence he never came out again. The
Priest, to whom he told this Story, was as much astonish'd at it,
as he was at his coming. He made him repeat it several times,
thinking to catch him tripping, 'till having no more room to
doubt of the Truth of a Relation so well circumstantiated, he
went and imparted it to the Judge, who communicated it to the
principal Men of the other neighbouring Cantons, so that in a
very little time the whole Kingdom knew that their Kings had been
Knaves and Villains, in that under pretence of a very particular
and miraculous Birth, which set them infinitely above their
Subjects, they treated them as Slaves, and were in a fair way in
time to have us'd 'em like Dogs. But before six Weeks were gone
and past, they shook off the Yoke, the King was depos'd, and sent
to the Mines for his Life: And in his Place they chose the eldest
Governor of the Country, with a Promise to let his Children reign
after him, so long as they were humane, virtuous, and equitable.

Tho' this banish'd Prince was a wicked Man, yet in one respect he
was to be pity'd, because he protested to his Dying-Day that he
believ'd what was publish'd concerning the Origin of his
Ancestors, of whom he knew nothing but by Tradition. This
Tradition however made the whole Race very insolent, and to value
themselves infinitely above other Mortals; and indeed it was
enough to puff them up, and to impress the People's Minds with a
very profound Respect for their Persons, while both were
persuaded of the Truth of the Fact, which was related to me in
the following Manner by Persons that might be depended on.

God, said they, was from all Eternity, but Heaven and Earth are
not so ancient. As soon as the World was created, the Earth which
is an animated Body, being charm'd with the shining Beauty of the
Sun, became desperately in Love with him, made divers Attempts to
mount up to him, but its Efforts were in vain, because the Weight
of its Mass was such a Clog to it, that it rose but a very little
way. The Sun perceiving how it shook and trembled, took Pity of
it, and hiding himself in Clouds extremely thick, for fear of
inflaming it more, and scorching it quite up, drew near to it,
pierc'd it with his Rays to its very Bowels, and immediately
retir'd. The Earth that Moment conceiv'd, and in 365 Days 1/4
after, was deliver'd of a Man and a Woman both surprizingly
beautiful and majestick. This charming Couple advancing into the
Country where they met with all manner of Trees without number
bearing the choicest Fruits, had the Curiosity to ramble all over
the Earth where 'twas accessible, till at length being arriv'd at
the Southern Extremities of this vast Country, they found it
bounded by unpassable Mountains. There it was, that _Mol_ and his
Wife _Mola_, by which Names, 'tis said, they were call'd, had
some Contention. She it seems was for turning to the Right Hand,
or else for going back the same Way they came, and he was for
pushing on further, but being oblig'd to alter his Purpose by the
Obstinacy of his Wife, he was in such a Passion, that he struck
the Rock so hard with his Foot that it made a Gap, out of which
Water flow'd in abundance, and form'd a River, which ran like a
Torrent into a Pit, from whence there came out two Twins. This so
cool'd the Matrix of the Earth, that it never more desir'd to be
in Conjunction with its Lover the Sun, and consequently never had
any more Children.

To this fine Tale they added, that from the two Persons were
descended the Inhabitants of their Country, which they thought
was the only Part of the World that was inhabited. But as soon as
the _Portuguese_ arriv'd, and told his Adventures, they were
convinc'd, that they were not the only People of the World, and
that the pretended Labour of the Earth was a meer Fable; which
was follow'd by the Revolution that I just now mention'd. From
that Time, the Kings and their Subjects liv'd in great
Tranquillity and Harmony, spoke extremely well of one another,
and indeed, I always observ'd that the People had an infinite
Respect for their Sovereign, and that the King on his Part was
fond of giving Demonstrations of his Tenderness to all that
approach'd his Presence. He was civil to all Men in general, and
as to us in particular, 'tis certain that he was so beyond
measure.




CHAP. IX.

_Which contains several very curious Conversations betwixt the
King and our Author._


'Tis not to be imagin'd how assiduous this Monarch was at first
to see us at work, and how attentive to hear us talk of our Part
of the World. Above all, he took an unspeakable Pleasure in
conversing about the Sciences, and particularly Philosophy, in
which he exercis'd himself very much: And we were seldom
together, but he put some Question to me in Natural Philosophy,
and Mechanics, or Astronomy.

He was mightily fond of the System of _Copernicus_, and to his
Praise be it spoken, I made him easily comprehend all the
different Motions which the Earth was under a Necessity of making
to answer the apparent Motions according to the Opinion of the
Vulgar, which are distinguish'd by Diurnal from West to East, by
annual round the Sun, the Motion of the fix'd Stars, and the two
Motions of Vibration ascrib'd heretofore to the Crystalline
Heavens. For I took a Bowl, and having mark'd on it the chief
Points and Circles of a Terrestrial Globe, I shew'd him how the
Earth turn'd from West to East round its Centre in a Natural Day,
and in the Space of 365 Days 6 Hours wanting 11 Minutes, round
the Sun, which I plac'd in the Centre of the World. I afterwards
observ'd to him how this annual Motion was not perform'd upon the
Equator but according to the Ecliptic, because the Axis of the
Earth, instead of being perpendicular to the Plan of the annual
Circle, inclines to it on both Sides 23 Degrees 30 Minutes which
we call the Motion of Parallelism. Then we discours'd of the
fourth Motion occasion'd by the Impulsion or Pressure which the
Earth feels more or less according to the Places where it passes
in its Tour; for by that means it happens that its Axis rises or
falls sometimes several Minutes, and that consequently the
Ecliptic appears nearer the Equator at certain Times than at
others. This is also explain'd perfectly well by the subtile
Matter which enters and passes by the Vortexes; but I did not
choose then to expatiate upon a Point which perhaps would have
puzzled him, or at least requir'd more Time. As to the
Calculation of Eclipses, this Prince understood it as well as
_Copernicus_ himself; he reason'd very well about Comets,
Planets, Meteors, and all the most agreeable Parts of Natural
Philosophy. But he was absolutely ignorant of the Cause of the
Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, which he had indeed scarce ever
heard of; and he was all in Admiration to hear of the Proportion
of Spaces which Falling Bodies pass through in certain determin'd
Times, of the Vibration of Pendulums, of the Force of the Lever,
and in general of every thing relating to Statics.

Fire-Arms were also quite unknown to him, but the bad Use that
they were put to, took off his liking to them. Nothing affected
him with so much Horror as the Narratives I gave him now and
then, of our Wars and bloody Battles. He could not conceive how
People could be so silly as to rush into Slaughter, and to the
Destruction of their Species, for such trifling Causes, and often
only for gratifying the Covetousness, Ambition, or Caprice of one
Man. 'Tis near four Centuries ago, he said to me one Day, that
the King then reigning was declar'd incapable, because under
pretence of his Origin and such a miraculous Birth, as
distinguish'd him from other Men, he treated his Subjects at his
Will and Pleasure. You would have said, added he, that his Vanity
was sufficient to excite him to great Undertakings in order to
maintain himself on the Throne; but so far from it, that he
scarce said a Word in his own Vindication, and to appease the
Wrath of those who sent him to the Mines; and when he heard it
was his People's Will, he instantly obey'd. And I swear to you,
that instead of exposing Armies to the Fury of my Enemies, I
would rather by a thousand times be the meanest Man in my
Kingdom, than keep the Sovereignty at the Expence of one single
Man's Life.

I own, said I, that there is something cruel and inhuman in War;
but just Wars are often enter'd into, and then God himself gives
a Sanction to them, and as a Mark that he takes Pleasure in them,
he has term'd himself the _God of Hosts_. O Heavens! said the
King, What's that you say? I am angry to hear you talk so. 'Tis
very well for you that none of our Judges hears you, for tho' you
are but a Stranger, you would pass your Time very ill; because,
according to our Principles, you could not have utter'd a more
enormous Blasphemy. I ask your Pardon, Sir, said I; the most holy
Men that have written our Law, affect in many Places thus to
characterise the Deity: To him alone they ascribe all the
Victories and Conquests obtained by the _Jews_, and they put him
at the Head of their Troops like a formidable General, who
demolishes every thing in his way. I am far from thinking it a
Crime to tread in the Steps of such great Men, and to have their
Lives, Precepts, and Sentiments in Veneration; yet I have so much
Respect for your Person, that I had rather be for ever silent,
than give you any Cause of Disgust. What, said the King, do your
Legislators talk in this Strain? Really, I think it very
extraordinary that a God, who, according to you, forbids the
shedding of one Man's Blood, should authorise a general Slaughter
of whole Nations. There is undoubtedly a great deal of Passion
and Cruelty in your Laws; the very Thought of it makes me shiver.
Let us talk no more of it, for fear I should say more than you
would choose to hear. I am really charm'd with your Sciences, but
your Religion and your Politicks don't please me at all. That's
because you don't understand 'em, Sir, said I; I want Books, and
am not a Divine good enough to convert you; but we have a
thousand Doctors in our Country capable of pointing out so many
Marks of the Divinity in our Bible, and to shew you the Contents
of it so clearly that you wou'd be forc'd to give your Consent to
it as much as to any Demonstration in the Mathematics.

Very well, reply'd the King; but till such time as we see one,
tell me, how those Armies which you talk to me so much of, are
compos'd and subsisted, how they fight, what Reward the
Conquerors have, and what Profit the Widows and Orphans; whether
such Wars have no End, and whether you never have a Peace. Very
seldom, Sir, said I: The Earth is immensely great, in comparison
to your Empire; there's a vast Number of such Kingdoms in the
Parts from whence we came. So many great Lords cannot possibly
live long without a Misunderstanding: The Interests of the Royal
Families, more than those of private Men, often cause Broils.
Jealousy, the Desire of Aggrandisement, Precedence, the Diversity
of Religions almost in every Kingdom; all these things are Causes
of Ruptures, which are seldom accommodated till there has been a
great Effusion of Blood. We have an Empire call'd _Spain_, in the
Bowels of which a War broke out some time ago, which rag'd fifty
or sixty Years, and cost the Lives of a Million of Men.

The prevailing Religion of that Country, and in which I was born,
is the Christian, which differs extremely from all others; nor
have all that profess it the same Sentiments in every respect.
The greatest part pretend, 'tis not sufficient to worship one
God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, but that Prayers should
also be made to the departed Saints, to the end that they may
intercede for us in Paradise. The Prelates of this Church injoin
the Necessity of believing Purgatory, which is a Place full of
Fire and Brimstone, where, after Death, Souls are to fry in
Torment, for a certain Number of Years, more or less, according
to the Crimes they have committed, that they may be enabled to
appear pure and undefiled before the Throne of God. This same
Church demands a Confession that Jesus Christ is alive still in
Flesh and Bones, and altogether as large, as when he was
crucify'd, in a Wafer or Piece of Paste no bigger than the Palm
of one's Hand, which the Priest gives to every Layman on certain
Days of the Year appropriated to that Ceremony, _&c_. Many People
finding these Maxims as inconsistent with common Sense, as they
are with the Precepts contain'd in the sacred Book of our Laws,
thought in their Consciences they should be to blame if they
observ'd them. The Clergy perceiving this Disorder in the Church,
erected a severe Tribunal, which impos'd great Penalties on those
that took the Liberty to reform the Divine Worship. To this we
must add, that besides the Clergy who drain'd the People's
Purses, and took their Money for reading Prayers, by which they
pretended effectually to deliver the Souls of their Ancestors out
of Purgatory, the King's Officers loaded them every Day with new
Taxes, insomuch that the most resolute Inhabitants, in order to
shake off the Yoke, form'd secret Cabals, and made themselves
Masters of some wall'd Cantons or Cities. Thereupon Commerce
decay'd, the Labourers suffer'd for want of Work, and a Foreign
Prince puts himself at the Head of the Malecontents, who are
join'd by other Monarchs jealous of the King of _Spain_'s
Greatness, who only seek to raise themselves upon his Ruin.
Companies of Tradesmen are form'd, who are glad to serve for
their Subsistence. Of these Companies, which consist of 100 Men,
more or less, with their proper Officers, are form'd Regiments,
and of these Regiments Armies, which are commanded by Generals
experienced in the Art of War, who take care to furnish them with
Arms, Clothes, and all sorts of Ammunition, at the Expence of the
Public, whom the Magistrates charge with Subsidies for that
Purpose. When the Forces are ready in the Field, a thousand
Artifices and Stratagems are invented and made use of to surprise
the Enemy; at length they come to close Engagement, and after
they have fought a whole Day many times, it happens sometimes
that the greatest Advantage which the Conqueror has to boast of
is, having kept the Field of Battle, which costs him upon those
Occasions 15 or 20000 fighting Men, while perhaps his Enemy
retreats about 500 Paces, with the Loss of not half that Number.
When the one has intirely defeated the other, he improves his
Victory by gaining Countries and Towns, where sometimes he lays
all waste with Fire and Sword. Mean time his Adversary endeavours
to recruit himself, either by raising new Troops, or by
contracting Alliances with other Princes whom he draws into his
Party. Then he returns to the Charge, when Fortune declares
sometimes for the one, sometimes for the other, till their Men
and Money are exhausted, and they are forc'd to come to an
Accommodation; which is sure to last not long, because there are
turbulent Spirits that never want Pretences to disturb the
Tranquillity.

But what becomes of those Troops? said the King. They are
disbanded, I reply'd. That's well, continu'd he, for the Ease of
the People; but are Men who are accustom'd in War-time to a
licentious way of living, and undoubtedly to all sorts of
Pleasures, are such fit for any other Imployment? and how do they
subsist when their Pay is at an end? I have already told your
Majesty, said I, that there's an infinite Number of Countries in
the World, govern'd by different Princes, so that when Troubles
are over in one Place, they generally begin again in another, to
which the Soldiers repair for Employment; or else they return
home to their Callings. I confess, however, that there's a great
Number, who having lost the Spirit of Industry, or not knowing
any Trade to follow, beg from Door to Door with their Wives and
Children (and if they dy'd in the Wars, their Widows and Orphans
do the same), or else abandon themselves to ill Courses for a
better Livelihood. Some rob upon the Highway, others coin Money,
and some keep company with lewd Women, whom they help to ruine,
and sometimes to murder such as haunt the Stews. In short, there
are no Intrigues but what they commit to support their idle
Courses, which obliges honest People to take very great care that
they ben't gull'd by them, as they but too often are. I could
confirm this Truth by a hundred shocking Instances, but one shall
suffice at present, to give you an Idea of the rest.

About eight Months before I left _Paris_, that famous City,
which is the Metropolis of the finest Kingdom in _Europe_, a
Counsellor of the Parliament travelling in his Coach, in a
By-Street, where there was but little Trade, spy'd a very pretty
young Woman at a distance, who by extending her Arms, joining her
Hands, and lifting up her Eyes sometimes to Heaven, and then
calling them down to the Earth, gave Proofs that she was in some
very great Agonies of Grief. The Noise of the Coach-Wheels and
the Horses, made her stop all of a sudden, so that she
immediately wiped her Face, and with a slow Pace walk'd on. The
Counsellor, who soon overtook her, halted, and ask'd her very
civilly, what was the Matter. I see, said he, you have been
weeping plentifully, has any Disaster happen'd to your Family?
Speak freely, you are happily fallen into good Hands; there are
many People who would take an Advantage of the Confusion you are
in, but from me you have nothing to fear. I am a frank honest
Man, of some Reputation, and if I can be of Service to you in any
thing, I will exert my self with all the Zeal I'm capable of.
Tho' the Girl was no more than sixteen or seventeen Years old,
she put on a serious Air at first, and held it out stifly for a
long time, that she ail'd nothing, that she did not want his
Protection, tho' however she was oblig'd to him for the Offer,
and that all she desired of him was, that he would let her
proceed. But at length, after many Intreaties, which were the
real Effect of the Gentleman's compassionate Temper, the young
Woman falling again into Tears, which she could refrain no
longer, said to him, You are in the right, Sir, I am not my self,
I am disorder'd in my Mind, I run up and down like one mad, and
am within an Ace sometimes of making away with my self. I am the
only Daughter of a Father who perfectly ador'd me. My Will was a
Law to him, which he took a Pleasure in observing, whatever it
was; so that I never ask'd him any thing but he immediately
granted it. But about a Twelvemonth ago, when he was in the Prime
of his Years, God call'd him to himself, at which time the
Thoughts of our Separation gave him a thousand times more
Uneasiness than the Prospect of Death. He was so loth to leave
me, that he recommended me, in the most earnest manner, to the
Care of his Wife, my Mother-in-law, who promis'd him whatever he
desir'd, embrac'd me in his Presence, and swore by an Oath,
accompany'd with a Torrent of Tears, that I should for ever have
a Share in her tenderest Friendship. But alas! my poor Father had
scarce clos'd his Eyes, when she began to tyrannize over me in
such a manner, that there is scarce a Moment but she insults and
threatens me; from Menaces she often proceeds to Blows; and this
very Day, after having us'd me extremely ill, she turn'd me out
of Doors. That's bad indeed, said the Counsellor; you have
reason, without dispute, to complain; come into my Coach, if you
please; I must make you Friends, if possible, or at least know
what's the Cause of such a dangerous Quarrel. She express'd a
Reluctance against taking him home with her; she was very fearful
of being seen, and her Mother-in-law's Indignation made her
tremble; but she was fain to comply at last. The Widow's House
made a goodly Appearance, and was separated from the Street by a
strong Wall, and a large Yard before the Door. The Counsellor
having sent in to know whether the Gentlewoman was at leisure,
was carry'd into a fine Hall, hung with Tapestry, to which Madam
came in a Moment. He was surpris'd to find her a tall handsome
Woman, about fifty Years of Age, with a sweet engaging
Countenance, and the Porte of a Queen, rather than the Widow of a
private Man. After mutual Compliments, he gave her an exact
Account of what had pass'd betwixt him and her Daughter, shew'd
her what would be the Consequence, and having begg'd her Pardon
for the Liberty he took to intermeddle in an Affair which was
properly Domestic, he intreated her very courteously to tell him
the Reason of the Difference. The old Lady thank'd him for the
kind Concern he shew'd for her Family, and did not spare to
reproach her Daughter-in-law; but at length, in Complaisance to
the Arbitrator, Miss was sent for in, restor'd to Madam's good
Graces, and they made reciprocal Promises, the one to be very
obedient for the future, the other to be more indulgent, and to
shew all the tender Regard that a Mother is capable of to a Child
of her own, which was very much to the Satisfaction of the
Counsellor, who was glad at his Heart that he had been so
successful a Mediator. Then the Daughter was order'd to withdraw,
and Madam took that Opportunity to confess her vast Obligation to
the Counsellor. She earnestly intreated him to bring her into the
Acquaintance of his Lady, that she might have more Opportunities
of being benefited by his wholesome Counsels: She hop'd he would
vouchsafe to honour her with his Company at Dinner, the rather
because the Cloth was already laid, and as she had invited some
Friends, she was the better prepar'd to regale him with three or
four good Dishes. This Compliment was utter'd with so good a
Grace, that the Counsellor gave his Consent, order'd his
Coachman to go home and tell his Family not to wait for him, and
bid him return again with the Coach in two Hours. Mean time the
Lady, with his Leave, retir'd to give Orders concerning the
Dinner. As he was walking alone, expecting her Return, he
accidentally struck his Elbow against the Hangings, and found a
void Space, which excited his Curiosity to lift them up, when, to
his great Astonishment, he saw the naked Corps of a Man all
bloody, who seem'd to have been but lately murder'd, extended at
full length upon a Bed of Straw contriv'd in the Wall. This
horrid Spectacle, which threaten'd him with the like Fate, made
him run precipitantly out of the Room, and when he was got into
the middle of the Yard, some body saw him and call'd to him,
intreating him to have a little Patience, adding, that the old
Lady would be with him in a Trice, that every thing was ready to
be serv'd up, _&c_. But all these fine Words could not stop him.
He told them, as he ran out, that something was just come into
his Head which would admit of no Delay, that he would be back
again almost as soon as gone, and that fall to as soon as they
pleas'd, there would be enough left for him. Just as he was got
out of the Gate, who shou'd enter but four great cut-throat
Villains, who were hir'd no doubt to reward him for his good
Offices; but they came a little too late, so that the honest Man
escap'd the Snare that was laid for him, and the old Bawd and the
young Whore had the Mortification to find that they had acted
their Parts in vain.

Verily, said the King, that was a Stratagem deep enough to have
caught the wisest Man in the World; but what was the Consequence
of it? Was no Search made after the Criminals, that they might be
punish'd for an Example to such Ruffians? None at all, said I.
People who are too busy upon such Occasions, generally come off
very scurvily. The Gangs of those Villains are so numerous, that
the least Disturbance you give any one of 'em, is sure to be
doubly reveng'd sooner or later, by the rest of them, either by
Day or by Night, upon you and yours, in one manner or another.
And is this all that you get, said the King, by the Wars to which
you are expos'd? I pity your Fate; for at this rate you are only
a Prey to the Wicked, and wretched Victims to the Ambition and
Self-Interest of your Sovereigns. The very Dogs have a better
time on't in my Country, than Men have in yours. You reason upon
your own Principles, said I, and we act according to ours: Every
one thinks his own Opinion the best, and is offended with those
that differ from him. 'Tis true, he reply'd, that Education has a
great Ascendant over our Minds. Our Ancestors would have been
content to be sacrificed rather than admit of the least Doubt of
the Excellence of their Origin. The Sun had engender'd them, as
they believ'd, and the Earth had brought them forth; but now, a
Man would be sent to the Mines that should go about to maintain
that Opinion. What we suck in with our Milk, we retain; the first
Lessons of our Preceptors are the most prevalent, and take such
deep Root, that the Winds of a contrary Opinion are not able to
shake them.

But as to your Ancestors, said I, were they all so ignorant of
the Nature of Things, that not one of them doubted of the Reality
of this pretended miraculous Birth? For, in short, nothing can be
more obvious than the impossibility of the Union of the Sun with
the Earth, and that those two inanimate Creatures, being
destitute of Understanding and Thought, are incapable of the
Effects which are so absurdly ascrib'd to them. Indeed, said the
King, there were some of a contrary Opinion, but no body durst
declare it, because if they had, the Populace were so
prepossess'd in favour of this idle Notion, that they would have
been ready to have cut 'em in pieces. Besides, the Kings, every
now and then, made use of a very extraordinary Stratagem to put
them out of the World, which contributed not a little to fortify
the others in their Opinion. They had contriv'd a subterraneous
Passage from the Palace to the Temple, under this Footstool,
where there was a great deep Well, and when any Person was
accus'd of having said any thing tending to invalidate the
Mystery of the Birth of the first Man, which was accounted no
less than Blasphemy, he was oblig'd to appear before the Court,
where the Governors never fail'd to condemn him to the Mines: But
the King, in order to be reputed a merciful Prince, immediately
revok'd the Sentence, on pretence that it had not been pass'd in
due Form, and according to the Rules of Equity, and order'd the
Assembly to repair to the Senate at Midnight, with all that had
a mind to be Spectators, nor did he fail to be upon his Throne at
the Time appointed. Then one of his Sons, Brothers, or nearest
Kindred, brought the Criminal before him, with his Hands ty'd
behind his Back, and made him sit upon the Footstool just now
mentioned: And the King, with his Eyes fix'd on the Ground,
pronounc'd four Verses with a loud Voice, in which, after
applauding the Justice of his Mother Earth, he call'd on her
instantly to swallow up either of the two that was most guilty in
the Sight of Heaven.

At that same time, a Person that lay conceal'd under the Stage,
unbolted a Trap-Door made on purpose in the Footstool, and the
poor Victim sunk down all at once into the deep Well underneath,
which was done so suddenly and dexterously, that the Door was
shut again as soon as open'd, so that it was hardly to be
perceiv'd. Nevertheless, in order to play their Game sure, they
took care that the Place should not be very much illuminated;
besides, as the Footstool was plac'd high, the Governors and
others present, who were sitting or kneeling, could not well see
what pass'd above, where, one of those concern'd in the Secret,
pretending as if he saw the Earth open, made a great Noise,
started back, and cry'd out as loud as if he was really afraid of
being swallow'd up alive with the guilty Person.

But how were those Impostures discover'd, said I? The King's
Priests, reply'd _Bustrol_, seeing their Master banish'd, and the
Face of Affairs quite chang'd, propos'd, on condition that they
might not be punish'd, to discover every pernicious Thing they
knew, for they were not only privy to the Secret, but engag'd by
an Oath to assist in those cruel Executions. The subterraneous
Passage is still in being, and when you please I'll shew it to
you. As to the Well, it is quite fill'd up, and the Trap-Door was
chang'd with the rest, and made a Part of the Cieling.

Another Imposture which was carry'd on several Centuries, is
this. When there happen'd to be any great Debates betwixt the
Sovereign and his Subjects, which threaten'd his Family with some
fatal Revolution, a Person who could be trusted with the Secret,
us'd to steal up into the Dome, between the Cupola and the
Cieling, where, when the Council was assembled, he bawl'd out as
loud as he could, thro' a Hole made for the Purpose, which
answer'd the Centre of the Copper Sun in the middle of the
Edifice, _My Son is righteous, and you are wicked_. This Voice,
which rattled over their Heads like Thunder, was extremely
surprising to the Assembly, and never fail'd of the desired
Effect. Some of them perhaps might have a Suspicion, but the
Generality were ready to swear that those Words were utter'd by
the Sun himself; and perhaps they would not have suffer'd any Man
that had but seem'd to entertain the least Suspicion, to have
gone unpunish'd.




CHAP. X.

_Containing the Ceremonies at the Births and Burials in this
Country, the manner of administring Justice, and many other
Remarkables._


Our Discourse was interrupted by a Domestic who came in puffing
and blowing, to tell the King that _Mela_ was brought to Bed of a
Male Child. He had been marry'd but two Years to his first Wife,
so that he was Twenty-seven Years of Age, which I mention,
because it must be noted, that the King cannot marry but at
Twenty-five, nor other Men till they are Thirty, whereas the
Females are marrigeable at Twenty. Since that time he had marry'd
two more. He had two Daughters by the first Wife, and one by the
Second. She that had now brought him a Son, and whose Father was
Marshal of one of the neighbouring Cantons, was the Third, and as
she is the lawful Queen, we will distinguish her from the rest by
the Title of Empress, according to the Law of the Country, which
properly gives this Title to none but that Wife of the Sovereign
who brings him a Successor to the Crown. We congratulated the
King on the Birth of this young Prince, and gave him to
understand that we heartily wish'd he might reign happily after
him. He seem'd to be pleas'd at our Compliment, and in order to
convince us of it the more, order'd us to follow him, that we
might be Witnesses of the Ceremony which Custom oblig'd him to
observe for giving a Name to the Infant.

He went out, accompany'd by two of his Brothers, his Cook, whose
Employment is very considerable, and his Steward. The Empress
expected him in a magnificent Bed, as well for the Sculpture, as
other Ornaments with which it was enrich'd. As soon as she saw
him, she sat upright, and Care was taken to cover her Shoulders
with a Mantle of red Goats Hair, fring'd and embroider'd, and
lin'd with Ermin as white as Snow. After she had desired the King
to permit her to kiss his Hand, she express'd her Joy that God
had granted her a Son, because it gave her the Honour of being
Empress of so great a Kingdom. Then a Chaplain stepp'd forwards,
who, according to his Orders, thank'd God in the Name of the
King, Queen, and all the People, for the Favour he had now
granted them; and I can truly say, that his Eloquence, added to
the Submission and Zeal with which he acquitted himself, pierc'd
my very Soul. He expatiated at large upon the Nothingness of Man,
upon the infinite Greatness of the Monarch of the World, upon the
Care which his Providence continually takes of his Creatures,
notwithstanding their Disproportion, and the immense Distance
which separates Beings so different. He shew'd wherein that Care
consisted, and there he took occasion to treat of the Virtues
necessarily requisite for a good King, and how God had given them
one who in every respect deserv'd the sincere Affections of his
People. Then he talk'd concerning the young Prince; whom he had
now granted them, of the Obligations they ow'd him for so many
Benefits, and concluded with a Million of Thanks: So that this
Act of Devotion continu'd at least an Hour. Afterwards the Infant
was presented to the King, who call'd him _Baiol_, i.e. _Benign_.
Then they serv'd up preserv'd Fruits, and Sweetmeats confected
with Honey, which is certainly better than the best Sugar in
_America_. Besides this, we drank most excellent Metheglin, and
other Liquors not a whit inferior to ours, Wine only excepted, of
which they have not a Drop, there being not so much as a Vine
thro' the whole Country, The Ceremony of the Empress's Coronation
was put off till after her Lying-in, which was over at the end of
eighteen Days, but as, like the former, is consisted only of
Thanksgiving, 'tis needless for me to repeat it. Mean time, this
is not only observ'd in the King's Palace, but in all the Cantons
of the Kingdom, the Moment they receive the News.

As to the Method of spreading their News, this is the Place, if I
am not mistaken, where I ought to observe, that every Day from
Twelve at Noon to One o' Clock, each Village sends two Men into
every Road of the neighbouring Cantons, on which Pillars are set
up at equal distance, within the Sound of a Speaking-Trumpet from
one to the other. If therefore any thing happens extraordinary at
Court, that is capable of being express'd in a few Words, as for
Instance, the Death, Marriage, or Sickness of the King, the Birth
of a Prince, _&c._ those who are sent from Court publish it to
their Neighbours, and they to others, so that from the one to the
other it flies with such Speed, that in less than a Hour 'tis
known all over the Kingdom. When there is no News they only say,
_All is well_. In like manner, when the Cantons have any thing to
make known to the Court, their Trumpeters make use of the very
same Methods. If there are any Packets or Letters to carry, there
are Messengers for the Purpose, who set out with them from Court
at Five of the Clock in the Morning, to the neighbouring
Villages, from whence others set out at Six, and carry what they
have to others that start at Seven, and so of the rest. As for
great Burdens they make use of Boats, which go backwards and
forwards very regularly, and without Expence to any one, because
the Children or Domestics of every Family are employ'd in
navigating them by turns.

Soon after the Empress was brought to Bed; the States or Deputies
of the Governors repair'd to Court to exercise Justice, and to
put all things in order. This Assembly continues Twenty-two Days,
and abundance of Business was dispatch'd in it, in most of which
I may say without Vanity, I had indirectly some Share. As these
Gentlemen met only in a Morning, and devoted their Afternoons
partly to Pleasure, and partly to the Consideration of the Points
which were to come before them next Session, the King could not
help coming as usual to spend some Moments in the Evening with
us, not so much to see our Works as to converse with us freely
concerning the Business that was to come upon the Tapis next Day,
as to which, he never fail'd to ask us what would be done in such
a Case in _Europe_.

One Day amongst the rest, he told us, how a young Man of a very
remote Canton, being often ill us'd by his Father, who seem'd to
bear a mortal Hatred to him, took the Opportunity, as they went
out together in a Gondola to catch Fish, to throw him into the
Canal, and seeing him paddling just under Water, he held him down
with the End of his Oar, for fear he should rise, and punish him
for his Rashness. The Father who was quite stunn'd at first,
recovered his Spirits by Degrees, and as he could swim perfectly
well, he div'd to the Bottom, and then rising about two Paces
distance, he struck away with all the Speed he could make to the
other Shore, in order to escape his Son's Fury. While the one was
endeavouring to escape, and the other resolving to pursue him,
and knock out his Brains, an old Pine-Tree planted on the Side of
this Canal, fell in all at once as if the Earth had broke away,
and so entangled the Bay in the Gondola with its Branches, that
it was impossible for him to stir, tho' he was not hurt in any
one Part. The old Man, who was got Ashore by this time, seeing
the Boat under the Tree, and no Sign of his Son, was touch'd with
Pity, and did not doubt but the Fall of the Tree had kill'd him.
He went and knock'd at the first House he came to, and having
rais'd the People out of their Beds, it being then pretty early
in the Morning, he told them, that as he was going to such a
Place with his Boat, a great rotten Tree broke away all on a
sudden, and fell upon him with such Violence, that it had knock'd
him into the Water, and bruis'd his Son to Pieces. At this, all
the People ran to see what was the Matter, and three of them
went in their Wherry to relieve the Lad if he happen'd to be
alive. The Fellow who had not open'd his Lips all the while,
finding himself taken in a manner before he was aware, and that
the Men were busy to separate the Boughs of the Tree that they
might see what was become of him, fell a crying, and said, _O
Father! pray don't kill me, I own I was to blame, and that I
deserve your Hatred with a Vengeance, for 'tis no Thanks to me
that you are not dead at this Instant, but I beg your Pardon a
thousand times_. The more he cry'd out, the more the others
struggled to disintangle him, and the stronger was the poor
Wretch's Opinion that they were come to cut his Throat. _Mercy,
dear Father! Mercy!_ said he again, _it was not I, properly
speaking, but a cursed Fit of Passion which I abhor, that
prompted me to lay my sacrilegious Hands upon your Person. In the
Name of God be pacify'd_. The Father who heard all this, knew not
what Countenance to put on; he would gladly have punish'd his
Child, but he did not care that the People should know the Cause
of it, which was however impossible. Tho' the Gondola was clear
of the Branches of the Tree, and the young Man saw a multitude
who upon the Rumor of his Disaster came to assist him, and who,
to be sure, would not have suffer'd the Father to sacrifice him
on the Spot to his Vengeance, he made so many Shrugs and
Wrigglings, and us'd such Expressions, that he condemn'd himself
in Presence of 100 Witnesses; so that it was not in the Power of
the Father to disculpate him as he would gladly have done.
Several Fathers of Families who were there, apprehensive of what
might be the Consequence, seiz'd the young Fellow, and carry'd
him before a Judge, who, after having sent for the Father, and
examin'd them both first Face to Face, and then separately,
condemn'd the Lad to the Mines for 20 Years. The Father was
dissatisfy'd with the Sentence, because he knew in his Conscience
he had provok'd his Son to Wrath, by his rough Treatment of him,
and therefore he advis'd him privately to appeal to the Governor
of their particular Precinct, and if he should confirm the
Sentence, to appeal at last to the Court itself. The Governor,
_said the King_, to whom the Cause was referr'd, was not willing
to decide it, and for this Reason it is to be argued To-morrow
before me; but in good Truth, I scarce know how to determine it.
What Age is the young Man? _said I_, He is twenty two, _reply'd
the King_. Very well, Sir, _said I_, he would be put to Death in
our Parts, and nothing could save him. But since you are not so
severe here, since the Son detests what he has done, begs Pardon
for it with all his Heart, and since the Father confesses he was
the Cause of putting the Son into such a Passion; 'tis my
Opinion, with Submission to your Majesty, that it would be
sufficient if the Lad was whipp'd with Rods, and sentenc'd to
carry a Label on his Forehead with these Words in large
Characters, REBEL TO HIS FATHER, on Condition however that if he
behave well, he shall be discharg'd from that Ignominy at a
Year's End. Your Advice is excellent, _said the King_, and if I
have any Credit, that shall be the Sentence. As soon as the
Council was assembled, the Offence was mention'd, and every one
gave their several Opinions. Some were for confirming the former
Sentence, others would have it that the young Man ought to make
_Amende honourable_, and have one of his Hands cut off before he
was banish'd. Some were for sending him to the Bottom of the Mine
for his Life; and others were of another Opinion. But when the
King had heard what they all had to say, he propos'd his Opinion
which was approv'd by the Assembly, and executed that very Day.
Both Parties went to Court to express their Obligations for
pronouncing so mild a Sentence. The King who was willing that I
should have the Honour of it, told them, that if they had any
Body to thank, it was I, and no Body else. Accordingly they came
to thank me in the most civil and submissive Manner that could
be, and then they return'd home, where, as I was told afterwards,
they liv'd together in perfect Harmony.

'Tis not to be conceiv'd, how considerable this Trifle made us
appear to the Deputies. _Solomon_'s Award was nothing compar'd to
ours, and if some of them could have had their Wills, we should
have been created extraordinary Members of their Body. By that
time they assembled again, our Clockwork was in a manner
finish'd. Every one had the Curiosity to come and see it, and
thought they could not praise it too much. _La Foret_ was a very
good Engraver, and tho' he knew how to gild, he had acquainted
himself so well with the Custom of the Country to gild with
Copper, which is much finer there than it is in our Parts, that
the minutest Piece had a wonderful Lustre infinitely beyond the
Clock which we had made for our Canton. But it had quite another
Appearance a Year after, when they saw the Clock erected over the
Dome of the King's House with six Sun-Dials round it pointing to
the Hours, which was what we omitted in the former, besides that
the Basin or Bell which was of Pewter and Copper mix'd, was at
least three times bigger, and had a much better Sound. As a
Gratuity for this fine Piece of Work, the King honour'd each of
us with a Governor's Robe, and gave Orders that we should have
the same Regard paid to us as they had. And in short, we were
treated with as much Respect as if we had been Princes. The Cooks
and the Butler took care that nothing was wanting at our Table.
Beer, Cider, Metheglin, and Peious were as plenty with us as
River-Water. The latter is a delicious Tipple, of which one may
drink to Eternity and be never the worse, and 'tis made of an
admirable Fruit, in form like to a _Spanish_ Melon. There's no
sort of Ragoo, Tarts or Pasties but what we had every Day, and as
Partridges, which weigh here at least four Pounds, and the T[ou]l[ei],
those great Hens I have made mention of elsewhere, are very
common here; we had Fowls of one sort or other almost at every
Meal; not to mention the excellent Fish which was infallibly
serv'd up at every Dinner. The King himself also took us Abroad
with him three Days successively, in our Habits of Ceremony which
is the greatest Honour that this Monarch does to his Subjects.

One Morning as we were passing by the West Side of the Temple, a
Lad who went up to see his Father work at the Dome, leaning over
the Gallery to see us pass along, fell down flat upon his
Stomach, and kill'd himself. The King, who would never let me
rest, took Occasion from this unexpected Fall, to start an
Objection to me concerning the Circular Motion of the Earth. It
put a Thought into my Head, _said he_, which never enter'd there
before, _viz._ That if the Earth had its Revolution, as you would
fain persuade me it has; the Boy, if he had fallen ever so quick,
must have pitch'd at a considerable distance from the Wall of
this Structure, whereas, if I am not mistaken, he touch'd it with
one of his Arms. For, in short, the Globe of the Earth is very
large, and supposing it makes one compleat Tour in 24 Hours, its
Parts must needs pass extremely swift. 'Tis easy, Sir, said I, to
solve this Objection. A Terrestrial Degree, you know, contains 60
Miles, by which Number if you only multiply 360 Degrees, the
Circumference of the Earth under the Equator will be 21600
_Italian_ Miles, or 21,600000 Geometrical Paces. Now divide this
Sum by 24 Hours, and the 900000 which will result from that
Operation by 60 Minutes, you will perceive that the Earth must
make an Arch of 15000 Paces in a Minute of an Hour, and
consequently one of 250 Paces in a Second, which is less Time
than a Body can take in falling from the Height of this great
Structure. But, Sir, _continued I_, you ought not to consider the
Air as independent on the Earth, for it turns equally with it, no
more nor no less than the Water of the Sea which is confin'd
within its own Limits, and both the one and the other make a
Part of this great Whole, so that to fall into either, is in this
respect the same Thing. Mean time, there's another Reason
confirm'd by Experience, which tells us, that every Body
defending by its own Motion, or by a Motion which may be deem'd
voluntary, must necessarily pitch upon that very Point to which
it corresponded the first Moment of its Fall. Therefore supposing
I were at the Top-Mast Head of one of the tallest Masts that our
Men of War carry in _Europe_, and should let fall a Bullet of
what Size you please, 'tis certain that it will always keep at
the same Distance from the Mast, 'till it falls upon the Deck, be
the Wind and Tide which carry the Ship ever so rapid, from whence
it follows, that this Body does not fall perpendicularly as it
seems, but necessarily runs thro' a parabolical Line, because
tho' it descends by a single Motion in Appearance, yet it
partakes of two Motions at once, _viz._ the artificial one of the
Ship, which is form'd according to the Plan of the Horizon, and
its natural Motion from Top to Bottom. Which is so true, that if
the Vessel was to stop short, the very Moment that the Bullet was
dropp'd, it would not in that Case fall down perpendicularly by
the Side of the Mast, but a considerable Distance before it. So
it often happens to the Horsemen in our Country, who when they
are galloping at full Speed, perhaps the skittish Beast
frighten'd at some Object makes a sudden Stand which shakes the
Rider, who is still suppos'd to be leaning forwards, out of his
Saddle, and throws him several Paces over his Head. 'Tis for this
Reason also that your clever Sportsmen, tho' perhaps they don't
know why, seldom shoot flying without taking their Aim a little
before the Bird, to the End that the Bullet or Arrow may thereby
acquire a Side Motion, which together with the direct Motion
forms a Curve Line by means of which it certainly hits the Mark.
I understand all this very plain, _said the King_, and there is
nothing extraordinary in it, because the same Thing happens to
Bodies which are punish'd with Violence from any Height, by a
Line parallel to the Horizon; for 'tis evident, that the very
Moment they come out of the Hand that throws them, they fall and
must, as you say, before they come to the Ground, describe a Line
like to those which are form'd by the Section of a Cone which is
parallel to its opposite Side.

You are in the right, Sir, _said I_, but there's something
wonderful in this which to many People appears a Paradox, _viz._
That if you take one of those Pieces of Ordnance so common with
us, I mean a Cannon, levell'd at one of the highest Towers, and
if at the very Instant of discharging it, a Bullet be let fall of
the same Form and Size as that which the Cannon is charg'd with,
notwithstanding the one is shot a Mile off, and the other falls
down limply by a perpendicular Line, yet they will both come to
the Ground at the same Instant. Indeed, _said the King_, that is
surprizing, and I own, I should never have thought it; but I see
very plainly now, that it must needs be so, because tho' the
Bullet is carry'd a great Way, nevertheless its Motion from Top
to Bottom must have its Course, and be every whit as rapid.

Yet these fine Examples don't set me clear enough in the Point of
the Earth's Motion. Pray, how comes it that so violent an
Agitation does not shake it into a Million of Pieces? Well, Sir,
_said I_, take a Confectioner's Vessel made of white Earth; let
it be of a round Form, and the Sides low and perpendicular to the
Bottom. Put into it a Thimblefull or two of clear Water, and in
this Water a small Quantity of the Filings of Copper, fine Sand,
and the Grating of red Wax; and to supply the Place of Glass, of
which you have none in this Country, cover the Vessel with a Lid
very close, then cement it with a little Potter's Clay, and put
it upon an Axis, to which you shall give Motion. When this Vessel
has been turn'd about a little, if you take off the Lid, which
was only plac'd on to hinder the Water from going out during its
Agitation, you will see that all the Parts of the Matter put into
it stick to the Sides of the Vessel. An evident Proof that if the
Heavens turn'd which are here represented by these Sides, the
Earth would necessarily be forc'd to quit its present Situation,
and range itself against their concave Superficies or their
Extremities. And another undeniable Proof which confirms the
former, is, that if the Whirl be stopp'd, so that the Firmament
or the Side of the Ship turns no more, the Water, which continues
its Motion, and by consequence departs in Proportion, from the
Centre of the Vessel which contains it, forces the Particles of
Copper, Sand, and Wax to quit the Sides to which they stuck so
fast, and to approach to the Centre where they form a round Mass,
the lowest Region of which is Copper, the second Sand, and the
last Wax. From hence it appears, that if the subtile Matter which
encompasses the Earth be put in Agitation, 'tis sufficient to
oblige all the Terrestrial Parts to rendezvous in one Globe
towards their Centre: Which likewise shews us by the way, that
'tis impossible for a Stone cast into this subtile Matter, to
rest in it one Moment, but must for the same Reasons abandon the
Aerial Region, and repair to other Bodies of its own Species, in
which properly consists Gravitation.

Really, _said the King_, you have often talk'd to me about
Vortexes, the Alterations which Astronomers observe in the
different Aspects of the Planets, the Motion of the Sun round its
own Centre, the Spots upon the Face of it which are a
Confirmation of that Motion, because as this advances, they
change their Situation, as well as about the Periods which the
other Planets describe either round themselves, or round the Sun;
but I never yet heard any Assertion so bold as what you have just
now advanc'd. I should be glad if you would let me have the
Machine you spoke of, to the end that by examining it nicely, we
may be able to talk of it a little, more particularly: But it
were to be wish'd that the Lid you put upon the Vessel was
transparent, because then one might easily see what pass'd in the
Vessel without taking it off. I will obey your Orders, Sir, _said
I_, and if our Parchment won't do for the Purpose, I will supply
it by a round Hole of an Inch or two in Diameter, which I will
make in the middle of the Lid; for I am of Opinion that the rest
will be sufficient to hinder the Water from spurting out in its
most vehement Agitation.

During this, one of the King's Brothers fell sick, and died. I
thought to have seen some Particularity at his Funeral, but was
very much surpriz'd, that I did not observe the least
Circumstance at it more than at common Interments. They only wrap
up the Corps in a Robe of fine Linen, and then put it on a Bier,
which is carry'd by two Men preceded by four of the nearest
Relations, and attended by two Men and two Women, marry'd or not
marry'd, and by four young Persons of both Sexes who mourn all
the Way, and converse about his good Qualities. When they come to
the End of the Place where the Deceas'd liv'd, they throw him
into a Grave made for the Purpose, which they immediately close
up again, and erect a little Pyramid of Wood upon it, on which
are mark'd the Name and Age of the Person underneath, after which
every one goes Home, and they never talk of him more than if
there had been no such Person in the World, The King's Brother
was bury'd after the same Manner; two of his Brothers (for the
Prince is exempt from it) with his Mother, and one of his Sisters
were the only Persons of the Convoy, besides the Mourners who are
People that attend on these Occasions purely for the sake of a
Meal's Meat. Then it was that I heard that the Brothers and
Sisters of the Kings of this Country are forbid to marry, which
is only permitted to the eldest Son of the Royal Family, and even
he can have but one Wife before he is King.

As to a Wife, I can't avoid telling you here how our Monarch
recover'd one in my Presence worthy to wear a Diadem. He had
form'd a Design a long time to make a Visit to the West Part of
the Kingdom; but as he intended that we should accompany him, and
the Work we had in hand was too exquisite in his Opinion to be
interrupted, there was a Necessity for staying 'till it was
finish'd; then came bad Weather, afterwards the Diet; but when
this was broke up, and the fine Season was advanc'd, the King was
resolv'd to lay hold of it. He made up but a small Equipage, and
only took 10 Persons along with us in his Retinue. He was mounted
on a small but magnificent Chaise with two Wheels drawn by four
white He-Goats, which had each a great black Beard, and Horns of
a prodigious Size. His Train and Baggage were in two Gondolas, in
each of which were four Rowers, and four to relieve them.

I was overjoy'd to be of this Party, because I had never yet
travell'd this Way. Most of the Inhabitants of this Frontier are
employ'd in making Bricks, Potters Ware, and all Sorts of
Porcelane according as the Soil is proper for the different Sorts
of Work. We pass'd thro' no Village but all the People of
Consequence came out to see the King, who sometimes alighted for
the Purpose, and walk'd very slowly that they might have the
better Opportunity of viewing him. One Day as we were at a Place
where there was such a Crowd about him that he could scarce get
out of it, he spy'd a young Woman whose Charms made him fall in
Love with her. He call'd her to him, and having survey'd her
from Head to Foot, and found her more charming near at hand than
at a Distance, he sent for the Father, and ask'd him what Age she
was? The honest Man having already promis'd her to another, and
guessing at the King's intention, knew not what Answer to make,
but after a small Pause, he said to him, Sir, She is not yet
marriageable, and by consequence neither to be sold nor given
away. The Girl being more ambitious of the Title of Queen than of
the Wife of a Carpenter, which was the Craft of the Fellow that
was to have her, said very pertly, 'Tis true, Sir, I am not
marriageable, but I want only two Days to be 20 Years old. Very
well, _reply'd the King_, we will stay, honest Man, 'till the
Term is expir'd, rather than break in upon the Laws; but after
To-morrow, bring your Daughter to Court that I may make her my
Wife, and take care that no Body comes near her. Tho' the old Man
thought it a great Honour to have the King for his Son-in-law,
yet he was sorry that he could not keep his Word with the
Carpenter, which I chose to mention here only to shew the
Simplicity and Sincerity of the People of this Country. P[ei]o,
which was the Person's Name, was ready at the Time and Place
appointed, and three Days after we arriv'd, he begg'd an
Audience, and presented his Daughter to the King in Presence of
his Chaplain, who return'd Thanks to God for it on the Spot. The
Nuptials lasted three Days, after which P[ei]o return'd Home with
100 Kal[ei], or Pieces of Copper in his Pocket, as Pay for his
Daughter; but the poor young Woman having never had the
Small-Pox, was seiz'd with it three Months after, and died.

'Tis a prodigious Thing to consider the Multitudes of People
which this plaguy Distemper carries off, there not being one in
ten that escapes. The Generality of the Living never had it, and
be they ever so old, so few are excus'd from it, that they seldom
die of any other Disease. If this were not the Case, the Country
would in all Appearance be exceeding populous, whereas at present
'tis but thinly inhabited, considering the Goodness of the Soil,
and the Purity of the Air.

Not long after this, the King made two or three other Conquests,
so that in four Years after his first Marriage, he had seven
Wives. My Comrade and I were at all those Solemnities, and had
great Share of the Pleasures of them. Wherever we came, we were
sure to be commended upon Account of our Clocks, tho' many People
knew that I had the least Share in them.

That I might not go without my Reward, I told the King, that we
had indeed adorn'd his Palace with a Machine, with which he had
the Goodness to seem pleas'd, but that if he desir'd it, I would
make him another to put up at the Front of the Temple which
should be subject to no Variation, and be regulated by the Course
of the Sun. I am convinc'd, _said the Monarch_, from the little
Knowlege I have of Astronomy, that it would not be impossible to
divide an artificial Day into any equal Parts by the Shade, which
might be form'd from a Body in the Sun-shine, but we have had no
Body here that I know of, who ever apply'd to it. Before I go to
work upon it, _said I_, I must examine which way the Front of
this Edifice stands. That's not necessary, _said the King_, I
know that it declines from East to North 22 Degrees 30 Minutes,
and what is yet more, I know it by Experience. Pardon me, Sir,
_said I_, if I take the Freedom to ask you what Method you took
to be sure of the Fact. I caus'd a Board to be plan'd, _said he_,
perfectly smooth with several Circles drawn upon it by the
Compass; and in the Centre I set up perpendicularly a Stile of
Copper Wire, to the End of which hangs a Button as big as a small
Nut. This square Instrument I place against the Wall of the
Temple, and when the Sun is ascended some Degrees above the
Horizon, I stay till the Shadow of the Button of my Stile falls
upon the Circumference of one of the Circles of the Board, when I
mark that Place by a Point, and then with another Point I mark
the Place on the opposite Side of the Circumference, where the
Shadow falls in the Afternoon. I divide the Arch between these
two Points into two equal Parts by a straight Line which passes
thro' the Centre of the Stile, which Line is the Meridian of the
Place where I make the Operation. There are several Ways, _said
I_, whereby you may easily attain to the same End of which that
you mention is one of the best I know; but I will make you a
vertical Sun-Dial according to the above Declination of the Front
of the Temple. No, _said the King_, as the Point in Question is
only drawing of Lines, you must do me the Pleasure to teach me
the Construction of 'em. I consented willingly to his Demand, so
that we made a Sun-Dial of 8 Foot broad, and 6 in height, and
another horizontal Dial of Copper, which was plac'd on a Pedestal
of Agate of 8 Sides before the King's Palace, and both had the
Signs of the Zodiac upon them. These two Machines supply'd fresh
Matter of Admiration to those who saw them; and I make no doubt
but they were of more Service to them than the others after our
Departure, because not a Man in the Kingdom knew how to keep
them, much less to make them.

_La Foret_ had such a Sense of the Civilities he and I receiv'd
every Day from the whole Court, and was so desirous to shew he
was not ungrateful, that without saying one Word to me he set
about a Pocket-Watch, and had actually finish'd it before I
perceiv'd any thing of the matter. Tho' he work'd much better in
large than in small Things, yet a Watch in a Country where there
never was one before, was a Jewel of inestimable Value. As soon
as he finish'd it, he went to wait on the King, and after having
complimented him on the Obligations we had to him, he took the
Watch out of his Pocket, and intreated his Acceptance of it as a
Token of his sincere Gratitude. The King having view'd it Inside
and Outside, was perfectly astonish'd, admir'd the Beauty and
Usefulness of this little Machine, and protested to him that he
should never desire any thing of him in his Disposal, but it
should be at his Service.




CHAP. XI.

_More Adventures of the Author, and his Comrade, till their
Departure from Court._


As the King went often to see his Wives, there is no question but
he was fond to shew them his Watch, and that every one admir'd
the Genius of the Workman. For tho' they had seen the Clock a
thousand times, and seem'd even astonish'd at its Performance,
they thought it nothing in comparison to this pretty Instrument,
which, though small, went as regularly, and pointed out all the
Parts of the Day as exactly as the great one.

Lidola in particular, who was the King's second Wife, gave broad
Hints that she long'd to be Mistress of it; but the King, who did
not care to part with it, and indeed could not, without raising
the Jealousy of all his other Ladies, and making the Empress her
self uneasy, pretended not to understand her Meaning. _Lidola_
was so disobliged by it, that after Supper, when she was to have
entertain'd the King, who had given her to understand that he
would spend that Night with her (which he did very frequently,
because he was much more enamour'd with her than with any of the
other Ladies) she counterfeited an Indisposition, and sent to
desire the King not to come to her that Night. The King,
mistrusting nothing of the Matter, sent next Morning to inquire
after her Health, which he repeated for several Days together.
But at last perceiving no Alteration in her for the better, and
that she not only receiv'd his Messengers very cavalierly, but
that as he himself saw her _en passant_, she look'd upon him with
a Coldness enough to have chill'd the very Blood in his Veins, he
guess'd what she had taken Pet at, but wou'd not seem to know it;
and having a mind to see how far she would carry her
Indifference, he left off his Visits by degrees, and gave himself
up so intirely to his last Queen, that he was very seldom with
any but her.

_La Foret_, who knew no more than my self what had pass'd, was
surpris'd one Evening, as he was walking under the Galleries,
with a Voice that call'd him by his Name. Turning about to it
very hastily, and being suddenly struck with Astonishment at the
Beauty of the finest Lady that ever he had seen in his Life (for
she was not veil'd, tho' 'tis an establish'd Rule of the Country,
that marry'd Women are not seen in Mens Company without a Veil,
which almost hides their Faces) he stood with his Eyes fix'd upon
her, and had not Power to ask what was her Pleasure. Fair Genius,
said she, you seem to be surpris'd, but don't be frighten'd; I
only call'd to you to let you know how glad I am to see you
whenever you pass by my Apartment, and to give you this Melon.
There, take it, and farewel. Then she dropp'd the Fruit, and
immediately withdrew and shut her Casement.

_La Foret_ could never be tax'd either with Stupidity or
Ignorance, yet he knew not what to think of this Frolick. Tho' he
was not nimble enough to catch the Melon before it fell to the
Ground, he snatch'd it up without saying one Word, and brought it
to our Chamber where he told me in Confidence what had pass'd. I
immediately took the Melon, and going to stick my Knife into it,
I perceiv'd it had been open'd already very nicely towards the
Stalk; which made me cautious in cutting it, for fear of spoiling
anything that might happen to be within it, where, instead of the
little Kernels which are by Nature contain'd in that excellent
Fruit, we found a Scroll of the finest Vellum, with Writing on it
in the Language of the Country, to this Effect.


_I have seen you pass by my Window a thousand times, but scarce
ever heard you talk. The Judgment which I form of your Mind, by
your easy Deportment, and your uncommon Productions, excites my
Curiosity to have the Happiness of your Conversation when I am
disengag'd. I fancy that you can say nothing but what is very
good. Prepare therefore to give me that Satisfaction. I expect
you to-morrow without fail at my Door. Be sure to be there at the
first Stroke of your curious Machine, after Midnight, and you'll
oblige_

                                       LIDOLA.


I was alarm'd at the reading of this Billet, and told _La Foret_
what I thought of it, very seriously; but it all signify'd
nothing. He was lusty, well-proportion'd, as vigorous as a Man
could possibly be at 30 Years of Age, and no Enemy to the Sex.
The Friendship the King shew'd to us, induc'd him to think that
he would be far from suspecting him of a Design upon any of his
Wives, and therefore, without weighing the Consequences, he
resolv'd to lay hold of the Opportunity at all Events. What
confounded him most was his want of Eloquence, and the other
necessary Talents for expressing himself politely; for he came of
an obscure Family, and had seen but little of the World. As he
knew not how to behave, and had a better Opinion of me than of
himself, he would fain have engag'd me to take the first Step,
and to pave the way for him: But besides that, his Stature and
mine were very different, he being at least taller than me by the
Head, which would have been too gross a Cheat to pass, I had
other Reasons against embarking in an Affair of this Nature. But
all this did not discourage _La Foret_.

Next Day he dress'd as sprucely as he could, equipp'd himself as
a Galant ought to do when he goes to visit his Mistress, and
study'd every thing that might contribute to her Pleasure. Being
thus rigg'd, he took his Leave of me, and at the appointed time
went to the Place of Assignation. The Fair One, who probably
hearken'd for his coming, open'd the Door to him softly, and
after injoining him by a Signal to profound Silence, conducted
him into her Closet. She was in her _Deshabille_, which was very
fine, and notwithstanding the careless Air of it, seem'd to be
the Effect of Contrivance. Her Head and Shoulders were cover'd
with a Veil of fine Linen, in which there had been an infinite
Expence of Art; but whether it was by Chance, or by Design, under
pretence of handling the said Veil, and tossing it forwards and
backwards to hide what Modesty should have taught her to conceal,
she often gave a Glimpse of Beauties enough to have stir'd a
Heart not near so susceptible of Love as _La Foret_'s, who could
not stand those Charms. For his very Eyes were dazzled with the
Glare of so many Wonders, and, as if he had been perfectly
inchanted, he had not Strength to open his Lips, notwithstanding
the firm Resolution he had made to say abundance of fine things
to her.

Lidola perceiving her Lover so mute, fetch'd a deep Sigh, and
said to him with a most languishing Countenance, _I'm in love
with you, fair Stranger; I did not imagine I should have had the
Trouble of telling you so, because I thought you would easily
guess it: Your Silence does Violence to my Modesty; I am asham'd
that I have let fall the Expression; but make a prudent Use of
it, and remember to be discreet, if you would be happy with
Ladies_. _La Foret_ answer'd with very great Respect, 'Don't
reproach me, Madam, I beseech you; my very Silence has an
Eloquence in it which must fully apprize you of the Sentiments of
my Heart. Tho' your Presence, continued he, has depriv'd me of
the Faculty of Speech, it is only suspended to give me the more
Leisure to contemplate the Delicacy of your Charms. Words are not
always in season. There are Moments when the Eyes express
themselves infinitely better than the Tongue can, so that without
being a Conjurer, a Person, by observing their Motions, may know
the Sentiments of the Soul. I confess I was in the wrong to keep
Silence, but it was well for me that I did not speak, because the
fined Expressions that I could have thought of in a Language with
which I am so little acquainted, would not have fetch'd that
from your pretty Mouth in an Age, which Silence has drawn from it
in an Instant. What! you in love with me, Madam? O Heavens! how
shall I contain my Joy at so tender a Confession! Who would ever
have imagin'd that a Queen could debase her self so much as to
declare such a Kindness for the lowest of her Slaves. Persist, I
beg you; That shall be the utmost Boundary of the greatest of all
my Wishes, because undoubtedly I never ought to think of any
thing else.'

Just as she was going to answer him, a Waiting-maid bolted into
the Room, to the Terror of our Lover, who knew not the Meaning of
it at first, and so great was his Surprise, that he could not
hide it. But _Lidola_ dissembled hers, for fear of putting him
into Confusion. I had given Orders, she said to him, for some dry
Sweetmeats, and a Glass of Mead to be brought; you perceive they
are obey'd. I hope you'll meet with something or other in this
Bason that, you like. _La Foret_, who was too impatient for
amorous Endearments to mind Sweetmeats, was mad to find their
Conversation interrupted by an impertinent Witness. He had much
rather have spent the Time in Dalliance, than have wasted the
precious Moments in Eating. But for the sake of Complaisance, he
was under a Necessity of admiring the Extent of her Civility, and
he even acknowledg'd how much he was oblig'd to her for it. The
Fair One, who was not willing to omit any Proof of her Tenderness
for him, took one half of a Nectarin, and wantonly put it to his
Mouth. Once she pluck'd from his Lips what he had in part
chew'd, and eat it with an inconceivable Greediness; at another
time she made him bite a Piece which she held between her white
Teeth; in short, there was no wanton Air which she did not invent
to increase the Passion of the new Lover.

The Days were then about Sixteen Hours in length, the Sun not
being far from _Capricorn_, and that Place being situate in 51
Degrees, and 20 Minutes South Latitude, so that they were toying
with one another, when the Darkness or rather the Twilight
vanish'd, and the Torch of Heaven was rising to gild the
enamell'd Fields with his splendid Rays. The Damsel being the
first to observe it, told the Queen of it, at which _La Foret_
was offended, and even took the Liberty to reproach her for not
having appointed him sooner, because he said it was not worth his
while to come thither for so short a Stay. Tho' I'm a little out
of favour with the King at present, reply'd the charming
_Lidola_, I am not sure that he will neglect me long; the Fancy
may take him to come and see me in the Morning; and tho' he
should not, there are other People that have an Eye upon what we
do. I should pass my Time but ill, if any body should see you go
out of my Apartment: Let us act upon sure Grounds, and for this
time do you withdraw. If you have a Pocket-Watch like to that
which you gave the King, take care to bring it with you when you
come again, that we may know how much time we have to spend; for
we mayn't always have People near us to tell us how it passes.
When she had said these kind Words, she fell on his Neck, kiss'd
him very tenderly, and immediately withdrew. The Time flies away
insensibly at such agreeable Interviews; nevertheless _La Foret_
had not so far lost the Use of his Reason, but he knew very well
that it was high Time for him to be gone. Therefore he pull'd out
a _Kala_, which he gave to the Maid, and after recommending
himself to her Friendship, stole out softly, and return'd home.

The first thing he was bent on at his Return, was to impart to me
in Confidence what had pass'd with his Mistress. To hear him
talk, never Man travers'd so much Land in the Territories of
Love, in ten Years, as he had been doing in an Hour; in short, he
was in full Possession, and only wanted the Fruition. 'O Heavens!
(said I) how credulous are Lovers, and how easy is it for Love to
impose on them! _La Foret_, _La Foret_, you are playing a Game
that will infallibly ruine you. Gaming, Women, and Wine have a
good Aspect, I confess, but when made too familiar, are of no
Value; they produce short Pleasures, attended with long
Repentance; their greatest Sweets often change to Bitter; and
their Payment is only in Tinsel, with which they who suffer their
Eyes to be dazzled, are commonly deceiv'd. Remember what I now
tell you: The Affair you are engag'd in is such, that you'll
repent of it more than once.' I might have moraliz'd thus till
Doomsday, for all that I said was to no purpose. My Friend
thought of nothing but the Pleasure he should have, and turning
his Back upon the Consequences, was actually captivated by the
most flattering Ideas that his Mind was capable of forming. The
poor Man was blinded to such a Degree, that he did not see the
Precipice he was just falling into, and was sway'd by nothing but
his prevailing Passion. His Imagination was so disorder'd, that
he thought he had his Fair One every now and then in his Arms,
and he often talk'd to her as if he had been actually enjoying
her. In short, he pass'd his Hours in Bed very pleasantly, for
tho' he rarely slept, he had such sort of Dreams as create more
Pleasure than a profound Sleep, and have this Advantage, that
they tickle the Fancy, without impairing the Strength of the
Body.

_La Foret_ heard nothing of his Mistress in three Days, which
made him so uneasy that it had like to have turn'd his Brains. He
often retraced his whole Conduct, but could find nothing to
reproach himself with, unless that he had been too respectful. I
had not observ'd till then, that the Women of that Country had
any Inclination to Galantry. I really thought they were too silly
for it; but I began to see by this Specimen that there are few of
them in any Country but know a great deal of it in the Affair of
granting Love to the Men, and that if they don't take greater
Liberties than they do, it is only owing to the extreme Severity
of the Laws against such as transgress the Rules to which _Hymen_
seems to bind them. And they say moreover, that the Kings and
Governors are subject to the same Inconveniences, as private Men
in _Europe_, because those Gentlemen having more than one Wife,
each of them studies to gain her Husband's Favour, and when she
can't succeed, it gives her Occasion to embrace the first Offer
that presents: But return we now to our Love-Story.

Upon the Fourth Day in the Forenoon, as the King came to see us
at work, I thought at the first Sight of him that he smelt a Rat;
for looking willfully upon _La Foret_, he said to him, You seem
to be ruffled, Friend; your Countenance is chang'd from what it
us'd to be, and if I may be allow'd to form a Judgment by your
Eyes, your Heart is not in a very serene State. Are you fallen in
love with any Fair One of this Canton? For Love in a few Hours
commits great Ravages. You blush, continued the King. Don't be
afraid to own it: Tho' you are a Foreigner, and of a Religion
very different from mine, I assure you that I will do every thing
for you that is in my Power. If you make your Addresses to any
Free Person, I'll find the way to make her marry you; but let me
advise you not to delude any Woman, because, should you be taken
in the Fact, all my Credit would not be of weight enough to save
you. Galantry may perhaps prevail among us, but if it does, 'tis
conceal'd; and you are not ignorant that 'tis a Breach of one of
the Articles of our Law, which the Judge treats with the greatest
Severity. Adultery especially would not be pardon'd in my self.

_La Foret_, who had by this time recover'd himself, reply'd, 'Tis
perfectly right, Sir, to be severe upon that Head, and especially
with respect to the great Men: If I had the Power in my own
Hands, a King who prais'd that sort of Galantry should be less
exempt from Punishment than other Men, because while his
Subjects are oblig'd, for the Generality, to adhere to one Person
only, he has the Liberty of taking a Dozen, and by consequence
the Pleasure of having all the Variety at home that he could
expect to find abroad. However, continu'd he, this is a Happiness
which I don't envy your Majesty; for tho' I have neither Wife nor
Mistress, I am very well contented; and if I don't look at
present altogether so brisk as usual, 'tis owing no doubt to my
not having slept well for two or three Nights past, for otherwise
I am in perfect Health. Nevertheless, he added, I am infinitely
oblig'd to your Majesty for your Desire to make me happy, and to
find me out a Settlement. If ever I'm inclin'd to marry, I swear
to you, Sir, that I will refer my self intirely to your Disposal.
Let us call another Cause, _La Foret_, said I, 'tis time enough
to think of altering your Condition. The King reply'd very
graciously, That shall be when you please. You know the
Privileges of the Gown which you wear, so that you will not have
much to reproach me with.

The King thereupon retiring, we went to Dinner, and made various
Reflections upon the little Dialogue that had pass'd betwixt us.
Mean time _La Foret_ did not fail to take a Walk after Dinner in
the Galleries. _Lidola_, who generally took a Pleasure in seeing
him pass by her Windows, fix'd her Eye upon him till he was out
of Sight. Her Waiting-woman, who always kept a Look-out for some
Intelligence that might be to their Advantage, came at last to
her with News that she had just met the King taking the Air with
the Empress; from whence the Queen concluded, that he would
infallibly spend the Night with her, as had always been his
constant Practice when he took her out in the Day time; therefore
without Hesitation she injoin'd her Servant to go after _La
Foret_, and to signify to him, as she pass'd by him, that she
expected him at Eleven of the Clock.

The young Woman was not dilatory in the Execution of her
Commission. She met him just as he was upon the Return, brush'd
as close by him as she could with Decency, and said to him, _en
passant_, Come to us an Hour before Midnight. I dare not express
his Joy at the hearing of these agreeable Words, for fear of
saying too much to be believ'd, or not enough to give a just Idea
of his Transports. He made such Haste back, and was so absent
from himself all the while, that he was at home before he
perceiv'd it. I need not say he had no Thought, for he did not
care that I shou'd speak to him. The little Time he had to spare,
was spent at the Toilet, where he consulted his Mirrour a hundred
times, which being only of polish'd Steel, made him fearful that
he had not discover'd all his Blemishes. He wash'd himself almost
all over with perfum'd Water, cut and trim'd his Whiskers, comb'd
his black Hair over and over again, and being at length as
handsome as _Adonis_, he wish'd me Good-night, and went his way.
_Lidola_'s Servant, who stood Centinel, receiv'd and carry'd him
into the Anti-Chamber, where there was no Light, and bid him
steal into her Mistress's Apartment.

_Lidola_ was lain down on a Bed so fragrant, that it perfum'd the
whole House. Her Head-Dress was in the careless Air, her Neck
bare, as was also her left Breast, her Arms at Liberty, and her
whole Posture was like one between Sleeping and Waking. _La
Foret_ made his Approach to her so softly, that she did not
perceive it. At the unexpected Sight of so many Beauties he stood
like a Statue, with his Eyes so fix'd on the Person of this
charming _Venus_, that they had no Motion. A secret Desire, on
which he was incapable of making the least Reflection, push'd him
forward to view her more nearly. She was like a Loadstone that
attracted him imperceptibly and irresistibly. This adorable
Beauty happening to open her Eyes, seem'd to the last Degree
astonish'd to see her Lover by her Bed-side. She blush'd, and
having rais'd her self up, and put on a Veil that lay in a Chair,
just at hand, You have surpris'd me, said she, and perhaps seen
things you ought not to have seen. Nay, Madam, he reply'd, the
Fates will'd it, and not you, that I should have the Opportunity
of contemplating Beauties that had like to have thrown me into a
Trance. However, what I have seen will be so far from diminishing
the Respect I owe you, that it has infinitely heighten'd a
Passion which I thought could not have been stronger than it was
before. You deserve tho' to be chastis'd, reply'd the Fair One,
for not letting me know that you was present. But what made you
come so soon? It cannot be Night yet, and I did not appoint you
'till Eleven o' Clock. You mistake, said _La Foret_, you only
upbraid me for coming so late, tho' you don't consider how long
I have been here. You deceive your self, said the Queen; if you
consult your Watch, you'll find that you are in the Wrong to
contradict me. I have no Watch, reply'd _La Foret_, nor have I
need of one, for on these Occasions my Head is a Minute-Watch, so
that I would not lose one Moment. Have you not a Watch? said
_Lidola_; 'tis surprising that you should be without those Jewels
which you bestow upon others? If I had the Skill to make such
pretty Machines, it should never be said that I had not one for
my own Use, and another at the Service of my Mistress. This was a
mortifying Compliment to the _Frenchman_, who very well
understood the Tendency of the Rebuke, and was mad with himself
that he had not prevented it. The Queen perceiving him in some
Confusion, thought fit to put him out of his Pain. I only banter,
_La Foret_, said she, and you are studying for a serious Answer.
Sit down upon my Bed, continu'd she, the Moments are precious,
let us not squander them to no purpose. At the same time she went
to grasp his Hand, but Love render'd her so weak, that she gave a
Sigh, and fell back on her Pillow. So far things went on
swimmingly, and the two young Hearts did not doubt that their
Bliss was upon the Point of being compleated. But Fortune envying
their Felicity, chang'd all their Hopes on a sudden into mortal
Terrors.

The King had a real Love for _Lidola_, the Violence he had done
himself in not seeing her so long was such a Burden upon his
Mind, that he could bear it no longer; and a fresh Report which
she had given out of her Indisposition, adding to his former
Uneasiness, he was resolv'd to keep her Company that Night. The
Waiting-woman, who was always at the Window, hearing a confused
Noise at a distance, like that of a Company of Men, immediately
had a Mistrust, because 'twas but just Midnight, and the King
never went to Bed before that time: At length, seeing the Train
approach, she ran and gave the Alarm, crying out, _We are all
undone, Madam, here is the King just at the Gate_. As warm as our
two Lovers were before, their Blood immediately chill'd in their
Veins. _La Foret_ knew not what would be his Doom. It was no time
to demur, and he was immediately hurry'd into a Closet which
fronted that Chamber. He was no sooner enter'd but a Domestic who
stepp'd before, knock'd at the Gate. The Chamber-maid made him
stay just as long as she thought it might have taken her up to
rise, and as Visits of this sort were pretty frequent, she did
not seem to be at all surpriz'd. As the King was close at the
Domestic's Heels, he enter'd the very Moment that the Gate was
open'd. The Queen, who heard him coming, found it no very hard
Task to counterfeit an Indisposition, to which the Fear she was
in, both for her self and her Spark, did not a little contribute;
and the King verily believing that she was not well, had not the
least Suspicion, tho' he saw her more disorder'd than usual. He
shew'd a greater Fondness for her than ever, and said to her,
that notwithstanding the ill State of Health he found her in, he
intended to spend the Night with her. Sire, reply'd _Lidola_, you
do me a great deal of Honour, but I am not now in a Condition
either to give Pleasure, or to receive it; I fear that if I were
to stir ever so little, it would do me an Injury, and I find that
I want Rest. I would not incommode you, said the King, for the
World; if you can't admit of my Company, I'll go and rest upon
the Tent Bed in that Closet, being determin'd to stay here all
Night. This Answer quite unexpected by the Fair One, so alarm'd
her, that after abundance of Excuses for the Coldness wherewith
she had treated him, which she ascrib'd entirely to her Illness,
she began to be very sweet upon him, and begg'd him earnestly to
undress himself.

As soon as he was in Bed, and the Domestics gone, the
Chamber-maid took an Opportunity to go into the Closet to consult
with the Prisoner what shift to make for his Liberty, when, to
her great Surprize, she could not find him, tho' there was no
Door but what he went in at, and the Windows were so close, that
they did not seem to have been open'd. While she was rummaging
the Bed and other Furniture in that Apartment, the Lady, who was
perplex'd to think what was become of her Lover, call'd to her to
raise her Pillow, and bring her some Drink, and having by that
means an Opportunity to whisper, and to hear that he was gone,
tho' she knew not which way, it put her out of Pain, and she
slept the remainder of the Night very quietly. _La Foret_
imagining that the King would make a very short Stay, had shut
himself up in the Privy, but he found himself terribly mistaken
when he heard soon after that he design'd to pass the whole
Night with his Wife, or at least in the Closet where he was, in
case that she could not admit him to her Bed. Then it was, as he
has own'd to me since, more than once, that he was seiz'd with a
Panick which he had never felt the like of before. He could not
return thro' the Chamber where the King was, without the Hazard
of being seen; he thought all the Windows of the Apartment were
secur'd with Iron Bars: Besides, he was afraid the Noise would
betray him, if he open'd them, especially if he leap'd into the
Canal, which the Closet over-look'd. Having resolv'd all this in
his Mind, in the utmost Hurry, he thought of no better Expedient,
than to slip into the Water thro' the Hole of the Privy, and so
to save himself by Swimming.

By good Luck for him, the Room where I lay was low, and next the
Road, so that he came and rapp'd with his Fingers at one of my
Windows. I presently imagin'd that his Affairs had taken a wrong
Turn, got up in a Trice, and had no sooner open'd the Window, but
he bolted in like a hunted Hare, pull'd off his Clothes, and went
into Bed, where he gave me a full and true Account of his
nocturnal Adventures. You see now, said I, dear Boy, how Love and
Fortune trifle with you. They seldom agree, and if ever, 'tis in
order to deceive us the more terribly in the After-Game. Believe
me, you are in a very dangerous way, and if you don't abandon it,
as I have already advis'd you, it will assuredly prove your
Ruine. Let me hear no more of it, said he, she is worth all my
Trouble; and provided I can but once enjoy her, I fear not to
die. What vexes me most of all is, that I know not how to
gratify her. She ask'd me for a Watch; whereas I have not one to
give her, and it will take me up at least a Week to finish that
we have in hand. If she wants you to give her a Watch, said I,
'tis a plain Sign that her Love is self-interested, and tho' it
were not so, how do you propose she should make use of it? The
King who will know it presently, will also be satisfy'd where she
had it, upon which the Mystery will break out, and then farewel
the two Lovers. You are in the right, upon my Word, said my
Friend, I had not that Foresight; but in short, we must make an
end of it, and by that time, I warrant we shall find some
Expedient or other to bring us off; for Love is too ingenious to
lurch us when we are in so fair a way.

Mean time we heard five or six great Strokes upon the Bason of
our Clock which were given so fast one after another, that they
made us start; we could not imagine the Meaning of it; not
considering that we our selves had advis'd the King to make use
of this Method, in Imitation of the _Europeans_, to raise an
Alarm, and give the Inhabitants of the Canton Notice, when any
thing happen'd to the Disadvantage of the Quarter, that they
might all flock together to the Place, and endeavour to remedy
it. A Man running by just after, and calling out Fire, as loud as
ever he could, deliver'd us from that Fright, and threw us into
another. Not knowing where it was, we leap'd to the Bed's-feet
and put on each a dirty Gown, which we girt close round our
Bodies, with a Design to lend a Helping-hand to quench it, and
going out, we presently saw that Queen _Lidola_'s House was in
Flames. Ladders were brought from all Parts, and there was such
Plenty of Water at hand, that by the Force of it the Fire was
hindered from spreading to the neighbouring Apartments, so that
the Damage was not very considerable. As it began in the Closet
where _La Foret_ was conceal'd, we did not doubt but the
Waiting-woman, when she was looking for him, let some Spark fall
into the Tent-Bed, or some other Moveable or combustible Matter,
which had been the Cause of the Fire. Mean time the King retir'd
as soon as a Domestic brought him the News. We went immediately
to condole with him, but he only laugh'd, and told us, that
neither the Fright nor the Damage deserv'd our Compliment,
especially with regard to a Man of his natural Temper, whom
nothing could put out of Humour. The Queen was no sooner
recover'd of her Fright, on account of this sad Fire, but she
took Pen in Hand and drew up a second Letter, in Substance almost
as follows.


To _La Foret_.

_My Chamber-maid has already been abroad. I know where you are
retired, but I give a shrewd guess which way you made your
Escape. The Conjuncture was dangerous, and altogether as alarming
to me as to you, insomuch that the Fire which afterwards broke
out in my Closet, by the Imprudence of my People, was nothing to
it, in comparison. But let not this discourage you, we shall be
more happy another time. Be constant and tranquil. I will give
you notice when 'tis a proper Season, and take such Precautions
that at our next Interview, I hope for an Opportunity of giving
you a convincing Testimony, that I am truly your Friend._

                                   LIDOLA.


It was no difficult Matter for the Messenger of Love to Hide this
Billet into the Hands of the Lover, who seldom fail'd of walking
by her Mistress's Door every Morning, Noon, and Night, so that
she might meet and talk with him whenever she pleas'd, without
any Notice taken of her. Mean time, _La Foret_ seriously went to
work upon her Watch, and labour'd so hard at it, that it was
ready by the fifth Day. It was extremely pretty; the Graving of
the Box was beautiful, nor was the Case inferior to the
Workmanship within. The Evening was hardly shut in, but he went
out with his Machine in his Pocket, and finding the young Woman
of whom he was in quest, he put it into her Hand, and desir'd her
to present it for him to the Queen, to whose Favour he always
recommended himself. If ever Woman, discover'd her Joy, _Lidola_
did at the Sight of this pretty Watch. We were told that she
kiss'd it a thousand times, and bless'd herself for having
succeeded so well in her Intrigue.

One would have thought that this fine Pledge of _La Foret_'s Love
would have hasten'd the Happiness he expected for his Reward, but
in truth, he heard no more of it. The Waiting-maid who formerly
was so eager to find him out, was as watchful afterwards to avoid
him. This made him very uneasy; but as he had no room to suspect
the Lady, he imagin'd that the young Woman was disgusted to find
her Mistress so highly gratify'd, and herself unrewarded in
companion, of the Pains she had taken. In short, not long after,
when he scarce thought any thing of it, the young Woman to his
great Surprize accosted him at a Place where there was no
Witness, and after having dropp'd a Sigh, you are wretchedly
deceived, _said she_, I really pity you, and have the utmost
Abhorrence of my Mistress's unjust Proceeding. All that she has
done hitherto was only to coax you out of a Watch, and now she
has it, she has order'd me to tell you, that she finds it too
difficult and dangerous for her to receive you at her Apartments
any more, that she is troubled for it to the last Degree, that
her Grief is even inexpressible, that it will certainly break her
Heart, and a great deal more of such Cant which is all meer
Hypocrisy.

The King, _continued she_, was with us Yesterday, and hearing the
Beat of the Watch, immediately ask'd what it was. Being under a
Necessity of telling him, he seem'd surpriz'd at it, and would
needs know how Madam came by that Jewel. The ungrateful Creature,
as she herself confess'd to me, was just going to tell him, that
you had sent it to her with a Design to make use of it as a Bribe
to debauch her, and that you had actually made an Attempt to that
end; but for fear of involving herself in a Scrape, wherein
perhaps she would have run as great a Risque as you, or at least
have been in Danger of restoring the Watch, she told him that I
had found it, and that she had it from me. Upon this, I was
call'd, and question'd as to the Truth of it. I perceiv'd by her
tipping the Wink on me at every Word, that she was in a Plunge,
and that there was a Necessity for my confirming every thing she
had said. Very well, if it be so, _said the King_, I know whose
it is, and Justice demands the Restitution of it to the Right
Owner. I would have done so before, _said the Queen_, for as soon
as my Maid found it, I imagin'd it belong'd to those Foreigners
who made yours, and I sent it back to them that Instant, but when
my Servant told from whom she came, they protested that they
would never take it again, and that their Design was to make one
for the Empress, and for all the other Queens. Thus, _said the
Chambermaid_, have I told you what Turn the Matter has taken.
Possibly you expect some Reward for your Present, but I don't
think you will have any as long as you live. 'Tis enough, _said
La Foret_, I thank you my Dear; undoubtedly I shall remember your
Hint, and will take my Measures accordingly.

It being then past Supper-time, _La Foret_ made haste to his
Chamber, and went to Bed without saying a Word. You are in the
Dumps, Friend, _said I_, what ails you? Don't Affairs go to your
Mind? No verily, they don't, _said he_, for I heard that just
now, which I should never have thought of; and thereupon he gave
me the Relation of every Thing that the Maid had told him. Alas!
_said I_, did nor I tell you as much before? However, you are
come off better than I thought you would. But after all, consider
the Consequences of this Affair. You are hereby brought under a
Necessity of making Watches with all Speed for all the King's
Wives on Pain of incurring their Displeasure, and perhaps too the
Monarch's Hatred, who if you should fail in that Point, might
well mistrust that you gave that Watch with a Design to insinuate
yourself into the Affections of the most beautiful of all his
Wives, which Suspicion you know would be corroborated upon the
least Noise of your having been seen Abroad at an unseasonable
Hour, either in the Water, or going in at our Window, if any Body
has ever so little Hint of it. The D---l take all Women then,
_said he in a Passion_, I'll never trust another be she of what
Quality she will. Fair and softly, _said I_, your being in a Rage
won't help the Matter. I plainly see what is to be done. That we
may have at least some Respite, we must desire the King to let us
go and spend the Summer at our former Village, and then we will
consider what we have to do.

Next Day the King came as usual to see what we were about, and
banter'd us on the Affair of the Watch. _La Foret_ confirmed
every Tittle that the Chamber-maid had said about it, and then
added, that it being hot Weather, and not so proper for working
as the Winter Season, he desir'd that his Majesty would consent
that we might go and spend some Months in our old Village. With
all my Heart, _said the King_, and after having order'd us a
hundred Pieces, he wish'd us a happy Journey. We went soon after
to take our Leaves of the Court, and the Cook in particular being
our very good Friend, we thought it our Duty to crack a Bottle
with him. The Moment that we told him of our Resolution, the Man
seem'd Thunder struck, which we both mistook for the Effect of
his Friendship and his Concern to part with us for so long a
Time, but when he recover'd his Speech, he said to our very great
Surprize, are you really going away, Gentlemen, do you consider
well what you are doing? Don't you know what People say of you?
God forbid that I should suspect you of the least foul Action.
You never gave me any Occasion for it, nor any one else that I
know of; but every Body does not know you so well as I do. If you
will be rul'd by me, you ought to justify yourselves before you
change your Quarters, otherwise you'll run the Risque of being
accus'd as Incendiaries; for they who have spread the Report will
triumph in your Absence; and who knows but such as doubt of it at
this present will then give Credit to it? How! Incendiaries!
_said I_, are we charg'd with a Design of laying the Place in
Ashes before we go away? No, _reply'd he_, but they give out,
that _La Foret_ is the Man who set Fire to Queen _Lidola_'s
House. We are very much oblig'd to you, _said I_, for your good
Caution, and we'll go this Moment and inquire into the Cause of
so groundless a Scandal, of which I don't think it will be very
difficult to clear ourselves. As soon as we were gone out, I'll
lay a Wager, _said I to my Comrade_, that you were seen returning
to your Lodging at a late Hour the very Night the Fire happen'd,
and that some ill-designing Person has drawn this Conclusion from
it to your Disadvantage. Let us go to the King, _said I_, and
open the Matter to him, when we shall presently see what he will
say of it.

As soon as the Monarch saw us, What's the Matter, _said he_, my
dear Friends? have you not receiv'd the Money I order'd for you,
or do you want any more? What is it you stand in need of, I
conjure you to tell me freely. We want nothing, Sir, _said I_,
but the Continuance of your Favour; for we have just heard
something which very much afflicts us, and we must lie
inconsolably at your Feet 'till your Majesty has procur'd us
Satisfaction. We are slander'd with having form'd a Design to
reduce this Royal Canton to Ashes. If we are guilty, we deserve
to be punish'd, if not, the Calumny is so heinous, that we hope
from your Clemency, the Inventor of it will have exemplary
Chastisement. Tush, _said the King_, I heard this several Days
ago, but I gave so little Heed to it that I did not think it
worth while to mention it to you. However, to satisfy you, I'll
go straight and order Informations to be taken about it with all
Speed. And indeed they who had the Commission, discharg'd it with
such Diligence, that by tracing the Matter from one to another,
the Person that first invented the Lye was found out in an Hour's
time, who prov'd to be one of the King's Equerries, an honest
sober Man of exemplary Modesty.

The King at our Sollicitation was pleas'd to send for him in our
Presence, and having ask'd him what Motive he had to give out a
Rumor so prejudicial to our Reputation, he made this Defence. I
had been a little indispos'd for some Days, _said he_, when the
Court Physician whom I consulted, prescrib'd a Purge to me which
operated 36 Hours after I had taken it. Being obliged during
this to rise in the Night, I heard a great Noise in the Canal
facing my Chamber, at the Entrance of the neighbouring Canton. My
Curiosity to know what it was, made me look out at the Window,
and it being not very dark, I saw a Man in the Canal who got
Ashore over-against the Queen's Pavilion, shook his Clothes, and
ran towards the Temple-Bridge. Upon this I open'd my Door softly,
ran after him as hard as I could, and having watch'd him towards
the Senate-House, I saw him rap at a Window, and on its being
open'd, he got thro' it into the House. I knew it was the
Apartment of these Gentlemen by their Stature, and a certain Air
which I know is peculiar to them. A little after this, _Lidola_'s
Apartment was in a Flame. Now, Sir, said he, I ask whether
putting all these Circumstances together, my Conjectures were so
ill founded, and if wiser Men than I might not have been as much
mistaken? I own, _said the King_, there was a Probability, but
something more was requisite in order to ground an Accusation.
But before I determine any thing on the Point, what say you to
all this? said the King to _La Foret_. Nothing, Sir, _reply'd my
Comrade_, every Tittle that the Gentleman has told you, is true,
only the Inference he draws from it is false, so that I have
nothing to reproach him with but Want of Charity. My Companion,
_continued he_, is an Astronomer, of which, Sir, you are not
ignorant: He has been teaching me for some time past to find out
the principal Stars, and my Desire to perfect myself in that
Science, makes me often rise in the Night to see if the Sky is
clear, and then I am us'd to take a Tour in one of the four
Cantons, because the Buildings being lower there than in this, I
have a better View of the Stars. That very Night I went Abroad
for the very same Purpose, and having cast my Eyes on _Sirius_
and _Procion_, and observing their Situation and Distance as I
walk'd along, I had the Misfortune to fall into the Canal before
I was aware of it. Being stun'd as it were with such an
unexpected Fall, I made a little Pause to look about me, and fell
a swimming without knowing where I should land, 'till at last I
got Ashore where this honest Gentleman saw me, and from whence I
made all the Haste I could directly to my Chamber into which I
enter'd thro' the Window, not only for fear of awaking our
People, but of being seen in a Pickle which would no doubt have
rais'd their Laughter. You see, Sir, that we agree perfectly in
our Depositions, but that Mr. _Equerry_ is quite mistaken in the
Cause of my being sous'd in the Water; I hope however that after
this, he will be fully convinc'd of my Innocence. I am sorry that
this Misfortune occasion'd such an ill Opinion of me. My own
Destiny is properly speaking, the Cause of it; therefore I owe
you no Grudge for it. I am oblig'd to you, _reply'd the_ Equerry,
and beg Pardon for the Injury I have done you, for which I am
really sorry. I see plainly that I was too rash upon this
Occasion; but it will teach me to be more cautious another time.
Are you both satisfy'd, _said the King_. Yes, Sir, _reply'd
they_. Very well, _said the King again_, shake Hands, and let it
be never mention'd more. Thereupon we again took our Leaves, and
render'd as well pleas'd as a Couple of Kings. _La Foret_ with
his Presence of Mind, and I with the Civilities of our Prince,
and because we had so happily escap'd a Scouring.

We set out next Day without taking any thing but our Gowns, and
some Trifles which we thought absolutely necessary. We did not
want Money, we were known, and the People of the Country are very
hospitable, so that we were in no danger of faring ill. The King
having recollected that he did not ask us what Conveniency we
intended to make use of for our travelling, sent a Domestic after
us to conjure us to take the best that he had, and to tell us,
that if we did not, he should resent it. We had travell'd about
half a League when the Messenger overtook us; he would fain have
had us gone back with him, or to have told him how we intended to
be carry'd, whether in a Chariot or a Gondola which he would
accommodate us with on the Spot, adding, it was the King's
Pleasure. We thank'd the Messenger for his Civility, and pray'd
him to tell his Majesty, that we were confounded to find him so
very obliging, that we should gladly embrace his kind Offer, but
that we chose to walk from one Village to another after we had
staid long enough to make an Acquaintance with the Judge or the
Priest. This Answer did not satisfy our Man who left us with some
Uneasiness, for fear perhaps that the King should think he had
not duly discharg'd his Commission.

By the way now, let any one judge from this little Incident,
whether we had any Reason to complain of our Fortune, and whether
we were not compleatly happy, setting aside that unlucky Affair
of my Comrade. It was not only at Court that particular Respect
was paid us, but every where upon the Road the People throng'd to
do us Honour, so that one would have swore an express Order had
come from Court to receive us like the chief Men of the Kingdom.

We had been gone about 17 Days when we were surpriz'd to meet two
Domestics of our Judge and our Priest with a Canoe laden with
Spades, Mattocks, Pick-Axes, Hatchets, Bows, Habits, and
necessary Provisions to make a trading Voyage for Copper. They
told us, that their Masters wish'd we would be so good as to make
them another Clock bigger than the former with a Bell in
Proportion, which they intended to present to their Governor, in
order to gain his Consent that each of their Sons might have one
of his Daughters, who as they describ'd them, were perfect
Beauties. And as a pretty deal of Copper would be wanting for the
Purpose, they said their Masters were sending them to the Mines
with Goods to truck for that Metal; and indeed they had a very
good Stock of Provisions on Board, and a Permission to stay out
as long as they thought fit. My Comrade presently gave me to
understand, that this News chagrin'd him not a little. What,
_said he_, I came from a Place to avoid continual Labour, and
they are cutting out Work for me in another Place where I am come
for Rest; but I'll see the whole Nation at the Devil before I'll
file a Stroke more for any of them, tho' I should not be against
it if there was any thing to be got by it worth our carrying Home
whenever a Conveniency offers, but all our Reward is only a
Piece of Metal which will yield but 15 _d._ a Pound in _Europe_.
Let us be gone, _continued he_, as soon as possible, for I had
rather hazard 100 Lives if I had them to go back the Way we came,
into our own Country, than stay here any longer.

You don't consider, _La Foret_, _said I_, nor have you well
examin'd the Obstacles that we shall have to surmount. We had
great Advantages when we came, which we have not now. We were
then three in Number all provided with Fire-Arms, and press'd by
Necessity; but now the Case is quite otherwise. Be rul'd by me,
my Friend, let us stay where we are, we shall be still more and
more belov'd by amusing ourselves in Clock-making, part of our
Time, and one cannot be always idle. Wherever we are we can have
but Food and Raiment, and here we have as much again as we want.
Let us not imitate our Countrymen who are so fickle that they are
always shifting from one Place to another. Before we have
travell'd much farther we shall repent of our Folly. Finally, I
expatiated upon the Difficulties which hinder'd our Return, but
it was all in vain, and he told me in plain Terms, that he would
go alone if I was obstinately bent not to go with him. Very well
then, _said I,_ since you are inexorable, and as on the other
hand, I am resolv'd not to part with you; 'tis necessary we
should take the Opportunity of this Boat, and try So escape with
it thro' that frightful Cavern as they still call the Place
where, as I said before, their first King pretended that the
Earth brought him forth.

While we were forming this Design, our two Peasants were
impatient to see the End of our Dialogue. I told them that we had
been divided in our Opinions what Course it were best for us to
take, whether to return to the Village, or to go along with them
to the Copper-Mines where we had never been yet, and that we had
determin'd to keep them Company. They express'd great Joy at it,
and in order to add to it, we resolv'd to go to the next Canton,
and buy some Flagons of the best Liquors they had. We also took
some more Provision with us, but persuaded them at the same time
to turn towards the River, on pretence that as we had seen it but
in one Place, we had a Curiosity to survey the Shores of it from
one End to the other, and we assur'd them also, that we would
assist them alternately to row, and would furnish them with all
Necessaries if our Voyage was retarded some Days by the Current
of the Water, which however was not very rapid in that Place. The
poor Fellows consented to every thing we propos'd, the only
Difficulty being that as they were both of them Natives of a
Canton not many Miles of, they made Account to go thither and see
their Relations. I presently gave them to understand that far
from hindering their Design we would forward it. Go, _said I to
them_, this instant, and spend two or three Days with your
Friends while we march so slowly on that when you turn towards
the Current, you will soon overtake us. They were in Raptures at
my Complaisance, and I was as much rejoyc'd that I was not forc'd
to the Trouble of contriving to get rid of 'em in any other
Manner.




CHAP. XII.

_The Author leaves this fine Country; the Ways he contriv'd to
get out of it. He meets again on the Sea-Side with some of the
Ship's Company with whom he had formerly been cast away upon the
Coast_, &c.


As soon as those honest Fellows had left us, we took our Course
towards the River, but still kept in those Divisions of the
Cantons where there were no Houses. I think we had saunter'd
scarce two Days, when a little before Midnight we found ourselves
at the End of the Canals where were Sluices which we knew nothing
at all of before we came to them. This cursed Passage alarm'd us,
and we tugg'd hard near an Hour before we discover'd which way
the Sluice-Doors were to be open'd. At length we master'd the
Difficulty, but then we were as weary as Dogs. In the mean time,
there was a Necessity for our going over. It would have been a
dangerous Enterprise in the Day-time, because no Body was
suffer'd to enter this River without Leave from the Judges, not
only by Reason of the Fishery, but in Respect to the Laws which
hinder the Inhabitants from going beyond the Bounds of their
Country; whereas in the Night-time there was seemingly no Danger
of being so much as seen by any Person whatsoever. We had not
above 4 Miles and a half to pass. _La Foret_, as he was more
zealous to push on than I, so he was more tir'd. I bid him take
a little Rest, because one of us at a time was enough to steer
the Boat.

I kept exactly in the middle of the Current, and it being fine
still Weather, our Boat drove down with the Stream imperceptibly.
This together with the Fatigues we had undergone made me so
drousy that I could not keep my Eyes open, and we slept so
soundly that whether we were always so fortunate as to keep off
of the Shore, or whether we did not sometimes dash against it, is
more than I can tell, for we were not easily to be awak'd. Nor
did I exactly know how long we slept; probably it would have
lasted long enough to have refresh'd us, but as Misfortune would
have it, it was interrupted on a sudden. Our paltry little Boat
dash'd so vehemently against a Rock, that it push'd me out of my
Place, and I fell with such Violence against a Shoal, that my
Face look'd as if it had been scarify'd. My Comrade started out
of his Sleep not knowing what the Noise meant, nor where he was,
for he had quite forgot he was upon the Water, and cry'd all at
once, Oh God! what's the matter? where am I? Tho' I had done
myself a great deal of Mischief, I could not help laughing
heartily. Are you there, _said he_, pray where are we? Hell
itself can't be darker than it is here. Don't ask me, _said I_,
for I can't resolve you, only this I am certain of that our Boat
has just now beat against some Place, which gave me such a Fall
that my Head is broke, and if I guess right, we must be got into
that Cave which we are to pass thro'. I was so very sleepy, _said
he_, that I did not consider we were in a Bark. Good God, how
dark it is here! I think you were not mistaken when you guess'd
that we were under Ground. Handle an Oar, _said I_, and try if
you can feel what we are fasten'd to; we must certainly stick to
something for I don't perceive that we stir, and yet my Hand
tells me the Stream runs down apace, so that the Passage here
must be very narrow.

_La Foret_ was a bold Man, yet he was daunted at this dreadful
Gulph; he was afraid to stir, and would willingly have stay'd
where we were. When I saw there was no Good to be done with him,
I grop'd with my Hands and my Oar, and found that we were
inclos'd between two Points of the Rock. Come on, said I, there's
no Harm, we are where I told you, I feel the Roof of the Cave
with my Oar. Thereupon he bestirr'd himself, but notwithstanding
all that we could do, I believe we were three Hours in getting
out of that damn'd Place, after which we turn'd to the Right.

Wherever we came we met with Shoals, which no doubt were form'd
by Parts of the Mountain that broke off every now and then, and
obstructed the Passage. We run a-ground, or else beat against the
Shore, at every Turn, so that it had been well for us if the Boat
had not been so swift, but we could not stop her. In the mean
time the Passage grew still narrower the farther we went, so that
at last we could not go at all. Then my Blood came into my Face,
and verily believing that we were absolutely lost, I was going to
knock _La Foret_ in the Head, to be reveng'd for the Mischief he
had been the Cause of to me, without any Necessity. But I
remember'd very luckily that I had formerly plung'd him in the
like Scrapes, and that these were only the Consequences of our
former Misfortunes.

Now, said I, my Friend, we are hamper'd, and I know not how we
shall get off. If we had but steer'd to the Left, no doubt we
should have had room, but I don't see how we can go back, 'tis a
pretty way, and besides the Current here is too rapid. Upon this
he sounded the Water, and finding it but three or four Foot deep,
he stripp'd without saying a Word, and leap'd all at once into
the Water. O Heavens! I cry'd, what are you doing? I thought I
heard you fall over-board. Don't be afraid, said he, 'twas a
voluntary Fall, I am going to examine the Depth and Breadth of
this Pass. He had not been gone 20 Steps, but he guess'd he was
at the very Point where the two Branches unite. He came to tell
me the agreeable News, and added, that undoubtedly we were in the
narrowest Part. Observing that there were but two Peaks where the
Rock hinder'd our Passage, I took the Pickax and Mallet, and in
less than two Hours demolish'd one of those Peaks. This Exercise,
with what we had gone through before, made me extremely faint; we
took some Nourishment in order to strengthen us, and we relied
till we were in a Condition to begin our Work again. _La Foret_
too try'd to demolish the other Peak that hinder'd our Passage,
but whether the Stone there was harder, or that he did not act
with that Strength as I did, he observ'd that he made but a very
small Progress, so that I was fain to give him a Lift, and we
work'd at it alternately.

We had labour'd a long time, and had not a great deal to do, when
we heard a confused Noise approaching to us like Men talking; we
stood still for a few Minutes to hearken to it, and perceiv'd
that some Men were coming to us. Verily, said I to _La Foret_,
our Flight has not been so secret, but it has been observ'd;
perhaps the Day was far advanc'd before we enter'd this River, or
it may be some body spy'd us in the Canals: Be it as it will,
'tis very probable that the Court was acquainted of it at Noon,
and the King order'd Men to be sent out to apprehend us. You hear
how they advance, continued I, they are just at our Heels; what
shall we do now? Upon my Word, said _La Foret_, as for my part, I
am of opinion that we should fight to the last Gasp. We have
Tools here which will be of great Use to us for that Purpose; and
on the other hand, if we suffer our selves to be taken, I
apprehend that some unlucky Prank will be play'd us, and that we
shall be sent to the Mines. Not at all, said I, there is no
Danger; the King is too _debonnaire_ to treat us after that
manner; he has such a Value for our Workmanship, that he would
not deprive himself of it by banishing us; besides, we can say
with great Probability, that as we went upon the River with
Design to examine the Diversity of its Shores, it happen'd
unluckily in the Night-time that our Boat got loose before we
perceiv'd it, so that we were drove down by the Current to the
Place where they have found us. They will laugh perhaps at this
little Disaster, but they'll be glad that they came so seasonably
to our Assistance.

As my Comrade was going to make answer, we spy'd a Light. They
could not be above 30 Paces from us, and they were in the same
Arm of the River that we were, but in that Part of it which
form'd an Elbow, so that tho' they had Candles, they did not see
us. They were no sooner come thither, but their Boat, which
probably was larger than ours, was hamper'd all of a sudden, and
they seem'd to be uneasy at it. What shall we do now? said one of
them. Why, said another, we will make the best Shift we can to
get out of this Place, and we'll try to pass to the Left, which
we should have done before, if you would but have been rul'd by
me. We will do as you would have us, reply'd the former, but for
my own part, I believe we may as well do nothing at all; 'tis
possible that the Men we are in pursuit of have been gone this
way twelve or fifteen Hours ago, so that by this time they are a
great way off, or else have been cast away somewhere, as we had
like to have been several times. If you will take my Opinion, we
will return and say, which is true, that we met with such
Obstructions that we could go no farther. The King, indeed, would
be very glad to have those Men again, but he does not propose to
hurt a Hair of their Heads; and you know that we were injoin'd to
intreat them civilly to return, or to let them go in Peace in
case they would not come back with us. We may say likewise, if
you please, that we overtook them, but that not withstanding all
we could say, it was not in our Power to persuade them to return,
because they have not true Enjoyment in a Country, whose Maxims
are so different from theirs, and that they have a mind to see if
they can't find a way to their own Country, where they may have
the free Exercise of their Worship, whereas here they dare not so
much as defend it, as they have declar'd upon more Occasions than
one. Upon this, they all said, Come away, we will agree upon what
to say as we are going back.

After they were gone out of our Hearing, we did not budge for
some time, because we were afraid they might alter their Minds,
and that when they heard the strokes of our Mallet, they might be
tempted to come back again. This Inactivity cast us naturally
into a Doze, and at length into a profound Slumber. When we
awak'd, we began to put our selves into the greater Hurry,
because we were far from being hot, and were as fresh and brisk
as if we had rested in a good Bed. Consequently we beat down the
Angles that stopp'd us, and by main Strength forc'd open a
Passage. Afterwards we found things as my Comrade thought we
should, for immediately we had Room enough, but then the Place
was so full of strong Echoes, that what would have charm'd us at
another time, frighten'd us now from speaking, because at every
Sentence you would have thought there had been a thousand Devils
in the Air mocking you with their monstrous Voices.

Then we advanc'd very slowly, and in the mean time began to hear
another confused Noise, not unlike the Rumbling of Thunder at a
small distance, which made us even more afraid than we were
before. A Man that thinks himself in Danger need have no other
Affliction. Each of us rack'd his Brains to find out the Meaning
of it. We were not very wide of the Mark when we imagin'd there
must needs be a Place with a great Fall, and that the Noise we
heard must proceed from some Cataract. There we thought our Ruine
would be unavoidable. I did not dream then of what was told us of
the _Portuguese_ who formerly went that way, for if I had
consider'd of it, I should not have been in so much Pain. As we
had Cordage enough, I thought it high time to make use of it; we
immediately took ten or twelve Spades and Mattocks, ty'd them up
in a Bundle as tight as we could, and cast them into the Water as
an Anchor. The Remedy was effectual, the Ground being uneven, our
Machine stuck in a good Place, so that we advanc'd no further
than the Rope would let us out. At the end of about twenty-five
Fathom, my Comrade, who was commonly at the Head of the Boat to
sound with his Oar, and to feel on both Sides what hinder'd our
Passage, call'd out to me on a sudden to stand fast, because
there fell some Water from the Top with which he was already wet
to his Skin. Upon this I call'd him in, and after we had agreed
that the Water we heard, and which no doubt was the same he then
felt, could come from no other Place but the Top of the Mountain,
from whence it precipitated by some Crevice into our River, we
resolv'd to hale in our Anchor, but before we had got it half way
up, our Cable broke, a Loss which however was not very
considerable at that Juncture. I only endeavour'd to put my self
in such a Situation as to avoid the impetuous Fall of the Torrent
we so much dreaded. _La Foret_, by meer Force of Rowing, turn'd
my Rudder so as to carry us against the Rock, so that we had the
happiest Passage that could be without being in the least wet,
but not without danger of being swallow'd up by the dreadful
tossing and tumbling of the Waves, occasion'd by the Fall of so
great a Quantity of Water from such an Eminence, and 'tis
probable that if we had gone on the other Side, we should have
been swallow'd up.

The rest of the Way that we had to go was not near so dangerous,
and it pleas'd God we saw the End of it. When our Eyes began to
see the Light again, we thank'd the Lord most heartily, and our
Joy was such, that we have no Words in our Language strong enough
to express it. However, we could not land immediately the Shores
being too steep, so that we were oblig'd to fall down at least 3
Miles below the Mouth of the River, and then we went Ashore on
the left Side in a Place of such Verdure as Nature seem'd to have
made on purpose to solace us after having escap'd such manifest
Dangers.

The Provisions we had, came very seasonably to our Relief, so
that we made a very hearty Meal, and did not spare our Cider. By
the Height of the Sun it could not be then less than two o' Clock
in the Afternoon, therefore 'twas pretty plain we must have been
about 30 Hours in that dark Place. From hence we made the best of
our Way.

This River has prodigious Turnings and Windings, and is full of
Rocks 'twixt Wind and Water, Shoals and Islands which in some
Places form ten or a dozen difficult narrow Passages. There are
some Falls in it too which are extremely dangerous, nevertheless,
as we pass'd them without any Damage or any extraordinary
Accident that might naturally be expected in a Voyage of this
Nature, I will not stand to mention the Particulars, for fear the
Reader should think me tedious.

I will only add that about 35 Leagues from the Sea, this River is
divided into two Branches of which we chose the least, because we
had a mind to keep to the Left, and we thought the other led us
too far out of our Way. It was just at this Division that a
swinging Salmon leap'd 7 or 8 Foot above Water, and fell into our
Boat where we receiv'd it with great Joy in Hopes of making a
Feast of it, which we did for several Days. Notwithstanding all
the Speed we made, we were a Month in our Voyage.

Our Joy to think we were drawing towards our own dear Country,
tho' after all we were not sure that we should ever see it again,
made us indefatigable; we scarce gave ourselves time to rest,
insomuch that we could not have been more in a Hurry if a Ship
had actually staid to take us on Board for _Europe_. But alas!
when we arriv'd at the Mouth of the River, our Hopes were all
dash'd in an instant. We saw a dreadful Passage before our Eyes,
which seem'd to us impracticable. When we are Ashore there's room
for contriving Ways and Means to overcome such Obstacles as fall
in the Way, and let what will happen almost, a little Patience
and Pains-taking will bring us out of it, but the merciless
Ocean gives one a Disgust against venturing from the Shore.

We had been five Years seeking our Fortune since we left these
Coasts. We had indeed encounter'd various Dangers, and undergone
extraordinary Fatigues, but then on the other hand we had our
Share of Diversion, and even now, I would not for any thing but
have seen so fine a Kingdom; on the contrary, I repent a thousand
times that I left it. My Comrade, who was the Cause of it, knew
not what to say now; the poor Devil was quite confounded, but
something however must be resolv'd on.

It was as yet fine Weather, and by good Luck we had a Stock of
useful Materials, only we had not many Nails. I was of Opinion,
that the first thing we ought to do, was to provide ourselves the
best Lodging we could, and that for this Purpose our Hatchets and
Mattocks would be of great Service. About 50 Paces from the
River, and consequently from our Boat there was a vast Lime-tree,
under which we built a fine large triangular Hut, whither we
brought our Baggage. Our Bows were also of great Use to us for
hunting, otherwise we should have been in Danger of being
famish'd; but the Birds were not so tame as those we had formerly
met with, so that it requir'd a great deal of Art to catch them.

The thing that gave us some Trouble was to make a Fire for the
first Time, because we had lost our Steel, and the Fire that we
had sav'd went out the Day before we came hither. The Place
where we were was so full of Sand and Shells, that we had several
Days Ramble into the Country before we could meet with Flints
that were for our Purpose; these were all that we wanted; for we
had Rags which we caus'd to be well dry'd in the Sun for Tinder,
and we did not want old Iron. As we had plenty of Wood, we did
not let the first Fire we made go out, nor was there a
Probability of its being extinguish'd a long time, for there were
whole Trees which were burning continually.

We stay'd about 8 Months in this Canton, where we liv'd by
hunting. One while, in order to pass away the Time, which we
thought extremely tedious, we took our Boat, and made a short
Voyage upon the River, or out at Sea, according as the Weather
and Tide permitted us, and sometimes we climb'd up to the highest
Eminences in Hopes of spying some Vessel to carry us out of our
melancholy Solitude.

Being weary at length of staying always in the same Place, we
resolv'd to make a Sail some Leagues to the Well in Hopes not
only of finding out the Place where our Ship was cast away, for
we could not be very far from it, but also of making some new
Discovery. We took in Provisions for a few Days, and rising very
early one Morning, we made towards the Strand in order to keep
near the Sea. We walk'd so stoutly that if I am not mistaken, we
had travell'd above 15 Leagues by the Close of next Day. The
Shore was every where uniform, and there was no Variety of
Objects to delight the Eye. We ascended to the Downs, which in
that Place were very high, and the Prospect was the same as far
as our Eyes could reach it. A little fresh Gale of Wind that blew
from the North East, oblig'd us to take Shelter all Night under a
Hill, where the Sand retain'd a great deal of the Heat which it
had contracted from the Sun in the Day. As soon as Morning
appear'd, we enter'd the Flat Country where there was greater
Variety, but then the Ways were much worse. If we had been
dispos'd to have loaded ourselves with Game, it was in our Power
to have kill'd what we would, because we had each a good Bow, and
there was abundance of Animals of all Sorts.

At length, on the fifth Day, as I take it, after our Departure,
and about two or three o' Clock in the Afternoon we arriv'd at
our River. As we had rambled a little from the Sea-side, we
perceiv'd immediately by several Tokens with which we were very
well acquainted, that we were no more than a League and a half
distant from it, at which we were overjoy'd because we were
afraid that we had gone too far. Nevertheless, this little way
seem'd very tedious to us; we knew it was a round-about Way which
we might have avoided, tho' indeed we chose it, and we were glad
when we perceiv'd our Barrack at a Distance, because there we
expected to take our Rest.

But we were soon after struck with a Damp that chill'd the very
Blood in our Veins, when we saw our Boat gone. We thought at
first that we had not fasten'd it well, or that the violent
Motion of the Water had broke the Rope by which it was moor'd.
The Curiosity of knowing what was become of it, made us mend our
Pace. We curs'd the very Day that we went upon this fatal
Voyage, which depriv'd us of the Advantages that we receiv'd from
this little Machine, and we began to blame one another for having
first propos'd it, when _La Foret_ on my Left-Hand, turning his
Head about by chance towards our Hut, which was but a little Way
behind us, gave a sudden Start, and cry'd out, Oh Lord; what's
that? what terrible Monster is that in our Hut! I immediately
turn'd about, and never was more surpriz'd in my Life than to see
a great Creature there lain down, so that we could only discover
its Back, and by the Hair of it we concluded it must be a Bear.

To speak the Truth, the Sight of so fierce an Animal as that
seem'd to be, surpriz'd us. The Bows that we had were not Weapons
fit to attack it, yet we were twenty times in the mind to advance
towards it as softly as possible, and let fly an Arrow at it from
each of our Bows, and then to bend them again instantly in order
to be ready to shoot it again, in case it had Strength enough
left to make towards us; but for fear of missing it and being
torn to Pieces, we chose to go on without making any Noise,
imagining that when it was awake it would go off towards the Wood
rather than towards the Shore.

We travell'd as if we had not made use of our Legs for a Week, so
little did we feel the Fatigues we had undergone. Fear carry'd us
on as swift as the Wind, without giving a Look either to the
Right Hand or the Left, and as we always kept by the Side of the
River, we were within two or three Paces of our Boat before we
spy'd it, and when we thought no more of it. This unexpected
Sight reviv'd us in a Moment, but when we went to it, and found
it fasten'd in another manner from what it us'd to be, we could
not help being surpriz'd again. The Boat was in a nasty pickle,
and the Oars and Stretchers were not in the order we left them.
Besides, we observ'd a Wicker-Basket about 18 Foot long in the
form of a Bow just under the Water, with Cords ty'd to the two
Ends, which was made use of for fishing, as was evident from
several little dead Fishes about the Machine, which those who had
made use of it, had neglected to throw into the Water.

These Instances of humane Industry, made us conclude that the
Country was not uninhabited, but the Point was to know what
People they were; we could not imagine them to be sociable and
civiliz'd, and there was all the Appearance of their being
Cannibals. Mean time, we were as hungry as Horses, we had sav'd
none of the Provisions we took with us, and the two or three
Fowls that we brought were raw, so that if we would eat them we
must dress them, and we had Fire still burning near our Hut, as
we could easily see by the Smoak, but we could not get to it for
fear of the Bear. The Day was almost spent, so that there was a
Necessity of coming to a Determination, if we intended to lie
there. We resolv'd therefore to carry our Boat with all Speed to
that part of the River which was over-against our Hut, and then
to give a terrible Hollow and Hoot, in order to frighten the
Beast away.

We did as we intended, but instead of rousing the Bear, we were
very much startled to see a couple of Men run dress'd in Skins
down to their Knees. Tho' the River, which was very deep,
separated us, yet we were afraid and kept upon our Guard; they
approach'd us, and seeing us both dress'd, one of 'em call'd out,
and ask'd who we were. O Heavens, _said I_, that's _Normand_, I
know him by his Voice. We are your Friends, _said I_, and perhaps
more than you imagine. Come over then in God's Name, _said they_,
and be not terrify'd at our Dress. We are poor unfortunate
Wretches abandon'd by God and Man, but we are civiliz'd
Christians. That was enough to oblige us to go over to them. The
Tears fall from my Eyes whenever I think on't; tho' they were
very much alter'd, yet we knew them; we embrac'd one another with
inexpressible Marks of Tenderness, and cry'd for Joy like
Children. We went together to our Hut, where they gave us some
little Fishes broil'd, but our Hearts were so full that we could
not eat a Bit. Any Body that had seen us would have taken us for
Statues; for we had no Motion, except in our Eyes, and all that
we did was to stare at one another in such a manner as shew'd our
Astonishment.

At length when we began to know one another, they oblig'd us to
take some Nourishment, and after having heartily reproach'd us
for our having left them, without giving them notice, and
declar'd that they were both firmly of Opinion that we had been
torn to pieces by wild Beasts, they ask'd us, where we had been
so long, and what was become of _Du Puis_, upon which we were
fain to oblige them with a general Account of our Voyage. They
wish'd a thousand times they had been in our Place, and according
to them, we were very wrong in coming away from so fine a
Country. Talk no more of it, _said I_, you don't yet know the
tenth Part of what I shall tell you hereafter. If it had not been
for _La Foret_, you would not have seen us here, for I should
never have had a Thought of coming away as long as I liv'd.
To-morrow you shall tell us how you came to our Hut, and how you
have subsisted so long in this Place without any manner of
Commerce; but now I must retire to Rest, for in truth I can hold
out no longer: And indeed I slept like a Dormouse, for our
Savages were up 4 Hours before _La Foret_ and I were awake.

We had scarce bid one another Good-morrow, but we renew'd the
Conversation upon the Subject of our last. _Normand_ was desirous
to know more than I had told him, and we long'd to hear of their
Adventures. It was at that time very hot, for we were not only in
the middle of Autumn, or if you please in the Month of _May_, but
the Sky was clear for many Days together, and the Weather mild
and agreeable, so that we went and sat down under the Shade of
our Hut. About four Days ago, said _Normand_, having a mind to
bathe my self in the River, I ask'd my Comrades, if any of 'em
would go with me; but the only Man that consented was
_Alexander._ Tho' we each took a Bow with us, we did not intend
to spend any time in hunting; nevertheless a very beautiful large
Fowl sprung up before us in the Way which we had a mind to shoot
at, and we went out of our Road to follow it. You will say 'twas
a Bird of good Omen to conduct us to this Place, for as soon as
it was almost within Bow-shot, it again flew straight before us
in a direct Line without turning either to the Right Hand or the
Left, and we pursued it till we came full-but, as one may say,
upon your Barrack, and discover'd the little Boat; and then the
Fowl disappear'd, and we thought no more of it. A Hut and a Boat
were such Rarities in a Country like this, that we were
astonish'd to see them. We thought at first, that some Ship had
met with the Misfortune of being cast away here-abouts, and that
some few of the Company had escap'd Ashore, so that we made no
Scruple to come to the Door of this Hut, and seeing no Body
appear notwithstanding we talk'd loud, we both enter'd, and found
a great many Things which confirm'd us in our Opinion.
Nevertheless, my Comrade was for our returning, and coming again
next Day with more in Company, but I forc'd him to stay out of a
Principle of Curiosity which I had to know the Owner of so well
contriv'd a Lodging. To pass the time, we contriv'd a great
Basket in form of a Semicircle, which by the Help of your Boat we
made use of with Success to bring the Fish Ashore at those Places
where the Coast was steep, and where the River had broke in upon
the Land. The third Day you came, and found us, God be prais'd,
at a Time when we little thought of one another.




CHAP. XIII.

_Containing what happened to the Residue of the Ship's Company
during the Author's Absence; and the rest of their Adventures
'till their Departure from this Country._


You know, _continued he_, that when you went away, we were
building a Bark to carry us off. At first, every Man wrought hard
at it, but as fast as the Work advanc'd, the Zeal of our People
slacken'd. The greatest part of the Company were afraid she was
too small, besides that they began insensibly to be reconcil'd to
these Southern Coasts, where scarce a Day pass'd but they made
some new Discovery of Use for the Support of Life. It was five
Months before the little Vessel was rigg'd. How rigg'd? _said I_,
and pray whence had you wherewithal? The Captain, _reply'd he_,
had been very sparing of the greatest part of his Provisions; he
had still a Quantity of Bacon, Butter, Oil, Salt, Biscuit, and
Candles left, besides what we were able to pick up here for the
Sustenance of the Body. When, all was ready, he summon'd the
Crew, and order'd all that had a mind to go with him to be in a
Readiness. I don't desire, _said he_, to force any Man; but for
my own part, I'll venture a Passage in the Bark, and tho' the
Voyage is dangerous, 'tis to be hop'd, that he who has preserv'd
us hitherto will take care of us for time to come. Several came
to a Determination on the Spot, the others knew not what to
resolve on: At length, we agreed to the Number of sixteen of us,
to remain together in this Country after having had a Promise
from the others upon Oath to use their Interest and Intreaties
with the King of _Portugal_ to take Pity of us, and to order the
first Ship that went off to the _Indies_, to come and fetch us
away. There was great Grief, and many Tears shed at parting. They
weigh'd Anchor one Morning at Break of Day, with a moderate Wind
at South South West, which together with the Tide carry'd them
quite out of Sight in less than two Hours. They set out so well
that we envy'd their Happiness, and wish'd to be with 'em,
because we could not doubt that if the same good Weather
continued, they would be soon at the _Cape of Good Hope_. The
Wind held thus in the same Quarter above two Days, but on the
third about Noon it chang'd, and on the 5th and 6th we had very
bad Weather, so that we were in some Pain to think how the honest
Lads far'd.

Having left the Shore, we went to settle in a Valley about four
small Leagues from this Place. The Country which is really very
agreeable, is water'd with a Rivulet full of Fish, and abounds
with Roots as big as red Beet, which are very good when well
boil'd. On the South South West Side there's a Wood of a
considerable Extent, where we have Apples, Pears, Nuts, and other
very pleasant Fruits in abundance; and the other Side furnishes
us with as many Pease and Beans as we want. Our Captain left us
all the Instruments he could spare: We had Fire-Arms, Shot,
Powder, Ropes, Hatchets, Spades, Hammers, Saws, Nails,
Packthread, Needles, Blades, Pots, Kettles, Caldrons, and other
Utensils. With all this Baggage we went to that Place, and built
two very commodious Huts, which have the true Air of Peasants
Cottages, and we cover'd them so well with Rushes, that we defy
the Wind or Rain to hurt them.

We liv'd there about a Year without scarce ever straggling from
one another, for we saw nothing on the Right Side or Westward,
but barren Hills which no Body had yet thought worth their while
to ascend. Three of our Comrades resolv'd one Day to hunt there,
and at the same time to see if they could make no new Discovery.
It took them up about three Hours to pass the Mountain; from
thence they enter'd into a very thick Wood, where they travell'd
two Leagues without seeing any Way to get out of it. Whilst they
were musing whether to return or go forwards, one of them said
that he heard a Noise which he could not tell what to make of,
but it very much resembled the Voice of a Man. This was a little
surprising to the others, but they advanc'd that Way, and
clapping their Ears to the Ground, they found that what he had
said was true. Two of them were for going nearer to see what it
was, but the other stifly oppos'd it, and affirm'd that what they
heard was the Voice of Savages, who would give them no Quarter if
they fell into their Hands. He had no sooner spoke, but they saw,
a hundred Paces from them on the other Side of some Bushes, a
great Villain cover'd with the Skin of a Beast who no doubt
spy'd them, and ran probably to tell his Gang that there was a
Prey at hand. This at least was what our Companions thought of
it, and not judging it proper to stay for their coming, they
turn'd back and scamper'd away. They had learnt by Experience the
Necessity of observing the Sun or Stars in a Forest which one is
not well acquainted with, and they did this to such a Nicety that
they got out almost at the very same Place where they enter'd.
When they came upon the Hills, they stood still to take a little
Breath; for then they were out of that Danger which threaten'd
them in the Wood where, tho' perhaps it was only a Panic Fear,
they imagin'd several times that they heard the Noise of Pursuers
just at their Heels.

We were very sure when they came back that they had been in a
Fright, for they look'd as if they had been hag-ridden, and were
all over in a Muck-Sweat as if they had been dipp'd in Water, but
we little thought what was the Matter. We were prodigiously
alarm'd at so unexpected a Narrative, and really knew not what to
do, whether to keep our old Quarters, or to abandon Bag and
Baggage, and encamp on the other Side of the River. For my part,
I was for fortifying our present Post. I had been in three or
four Campaignes heretofore, and had learnt the Art of guarding
against an Enemy, so that my Companions agreed to do as I thought
fit. In the Evening we only posted Centinels to prevent a
Surprize.

Next Morning at Day-Break, I mark'd out a Square about our two
Huts, each Side whereof I was 35 Geometrical Paces in length,
after which we broke Ground, and began with a Breast-Work 4 Foot
high to shelter us from any Attacks that might be made that Way.
Then we rais'd and widen'd our Works in such a manner that the
Rampart was 20 Foot in the Base, and 6 in Height, besides a
Parapet above that of 5 Foot. The Ditch form'd by the Earth we
cast up for this Purpose was very broad and deep. In the Front
opposite to the Mountain, I left a Slope of 6 Foot only, which I
cover'd also with a small Half-Moon and secur'd with a Traverse.
All this was finish'd in 7 Weeks. Mean time, we heard no Talk of
any Enemy, and sometimes could not help rallying those who had
put us into such a Ferment.

At first every Body was afraid to stir out for Provisions, and
now they did it without any Scruple, but it did not hold so long.
Two of our Men going out one Day at Sun-rise for Plunder; had not
the good Luck to come back again; perhaps they were so imprudent
as to expose themselves more than others had done, at least they
had talk'd of doing so more than once. The Loss of them made us
very uneasy, and we thereupon encompass'd our Fortress with
Palisadoes.

While we were at this Work, we perceiv'd a Company of Men coming
down the Mountain very fast, which put us into the greater
Consternation, because three of our Comrades were then gone a
hunting, so that we were but eleven in Number. I order'd my Men
to charge their Muskets, and not to discover themselves 'till the
Enemy was come to the Ditch, where they were to be saluted with
at least five Discharges. When the Drolls were at hand, we saw
very plain that they were Savages. They seem'd to be about
threescore and ten, all lusty well-made Fellows cover'd with
Skins down to their Legs, and laden with Bows and Arrows. A great
many of 'em had Clubs 5 or 6 Foot long. 'Tis probable that the
Knaves had spy'd us before they came in a Body, for they did not
seem in the least surpriz'd at the Work we had made. Not one of
our Men discover'd himself. I had planted a great Branch full of
Leaves before me, thro' which I could observe the Enemy without
being seen. 'Tis probable that they thought to have surpriz'd us,
because they came without making the least Noise to the Brink of
the Ditch, and there they stopp'd, not knowing what Course to
take to come at the Place; but I did not think proper to give
them time to examine Things too closely, so that I order'd five
of my Men to fire upon 'em, and to charge again with all
Expedition that they might be entertain'd with a continual Fire.
They perform'd their Part so well that three of the Savages fell
upon the Spot.

This terrify'd them, because they knew not what to think of their
Comrades sudden Fall. Indeed they saw the Fire and Smoak of our
Arms, but I very much question whether they discover'd the Men
that gave Fire. They must conclude it to be Lightning, or some
Devil that struck them, at least we imagin'd so by the horrid
Cries they all made looking towards Heaven. I said to my
Comrades, Let us make an Advantage of the Terror of those
Miscreants; let the other five give Fire. This Discharge with the
Fire I made fetch'd down two more which increas'd their
Astonishment. Then we shew'd ourselves all at once crying out
like Madmen, at which time the five first gave Fire again, and
kill'd two more upon the Spot. We should have dispatch'd 'em all
after this manner, but they were not such Fools as to stay any
longer. Seven of the strongest took each a dead Man upon his
Shoulders, and fled with as much Precipitation as if they had
been pursued by an Army.

The three Men of our Company that were absent, were not so far on
the other Side but they heard us fire very plainly. They imagin'd
there must be something more than ordinary in the matter, because
they knew we would not have wasted our Gunpowder without a great
Necessity. They lay hid for some time in a Thicket, with as much
Game as they could carry, and in the Evening they advanc'd, and
glad they were when they first saw the Centinel walking on the
Breast-Work, where he was posted on Purpose to give them the
Signal that there was no Danger.

Our apprehension that the Rascals would return stronger, and more
resolute, made us finish our Palisadoes with all Speed; and for
want of a Breastwork we fortify'd the Rampart with Fraises.
Besides, it was resolv'd that some of our Men should go by Turns
to the Downs to fetch two small Pieces of Cannon which our
Captain left behind him. It cost a great deal of Time and Pains
to draw them to our Fort. Then we provided a Quantity of little
Flints, of which our Brook was full, in order to put into the
Cartridges. In the mean time, we did not hear the least Word of
the Enemy for 8 Months together, so, that we scarce thought any
more of the Scoundrels 'till one _Sunday_ at Noon, when the
Centinel alarm'd us, just as we were at Dinner. Upon this I ran
out to see what was the matter, and God knows I was not a little
astonish'd to see the Mountain cover'd with a Swarm of our
Enemies advancing like hungry Wolves to devour us. To speak the
real Truth, the stoutest Hearts among us trembled for Fear, for
we did not doubt but the Rascals came resolv'd either to conquer
or die, and that they had taken all the necessary Precautions for
executing their Design. They advanc'd very quietly; I was of the
same Opinion as at the first time, that it was advisable for us
to conceal ourselves, and not to fire 'till they came upon the
Glacis, but _Le Grand_ thought on the contrary, that the best Way
would be to intimidate them before they came too near, and to
make use of our Cannon, since we had them at hand. Accordingly,
as soon as we saw them advanc'd within 3 or 400 Paces of our
Fort, one Piece was discharg'd: Whether it did any Execution or
no, we could not see, but they stopp'd short, whereupon we
discharg'd the other Piece which carry'd off several of their
Men, as we were told by some of our Comrades who being to the
Windward, protested they saw it very plain. However, this did not
terrify them, on the contrary they renew'd their March, and came
on apace. They were at least 400 resolute Men, a Number far
superior to ours. As soon as they were within Reach, we fir'd
upon them briskly, but they were not dismay'd, and
notwithstanding the Number of Men they lost, they came up even to
our Palisadoes, where some stoop'd, and others leaping on their
Backs threw themselves over with great Agility and terrible Fury:
In the mean time our Cannon, which were charg'd with Stones, did
Wonders, and yet for all this, if they had but attack'd us in
several Places at a time, instead of attacking us in one only, we
should have been infallibly ruin'd. Our _Chevaux de Frise_ were
also of great Service to us, because for want of proper
Instruments to pluck them up, they broke but two of them. This
however made a Gap which gave an Opportunity to one of the
boldest of them to climb even to our Breast-work, and others were
preparing to follow; but three of our Men falling desperately
upon them, put them to the Sword, and made them tumble from Top
to Bottom. In fine, three or four of the best Men they had, being
Eye-Witnesses of this smart Rencounter gave way, upon which they
all fled, and after a Fight of three Hours, quitted the Field
with, much more Rapidity than they came to it.

We were overjoy'd at this Deliverance, which we had Reason to
think a happy one. Next Day when we went out to see what
Slaughter we had made, we found 72 dead, and 13 Wretches gasping
for Life, whom we instantly dispatch'd with the But-Ends of our
Musquets, and after having made a great Pit, we cast them all
into it, for fear the Stench of their Carcases might infect the
Air. The only wounded Man we had was one that was polled upon the
Breast-work, who was shot in the Thigh with an Arrow, but was
soon after cur'd.

After this Skirmish we doubled our Diligence or our Preservation;
we were still in Dread of our conquer'd Enemy, because we
apprehended that in time they would be wiser; but we never saw
them afterwards, nor heard any thing of 'em any more than of our
two Comrades, whom to be sure the Villains murder'd and devour'd.

Now you mention eating, _said I_, methinks 'tis time to talk of
laying the Cloth. If you'll be rul'd by me, we will dine first,
and then see what we have to say to one another more. Since that
time, said _Normand_, nothing happen'd worth your Notice. Are you
all living still? I ask'd him. No verily, _said he_, four died
two Years ago, and there's another very ill, but perhaps the
Sight of you will contribute to his Recovery; at least I am
persuaded, that both he and others will be transported to see
you. I beg let us go to them, we have time enough before us, else
the poor Fellows will not know what's become of us. Tho' we were
not yet recover'd of the Fatigues of the preceding Days, yet
after having taken a Bit without Loss of Time, we travell'd away.

The Sun had been set a long while when we came to our Journey's
End, but the Sky was clear; and the Moon almost at Full. I could
not help laughing when we came about 100 Paces from the Fort, to
hear one cry, _Who goes there?_ and to hear _Normand_ say, _A
Friend_. Yet this was not all; you were but two when you went,
said the Centinel, but I see more. Officers! Guard! At these
Words, _Le Grand_ came out with a Gun in his Hand to take a View
of us. I was very well pleas'd with this good Guard, especially
at that time when I was come from a Country where they knew not
what a Guard meant. _Normand_ stepp'd before us, and discover'd
who we were, at which they came upon us all at once, and had like
to have smother'd us with Embraces. Here we were oblig'd to give
another Narrative of our Adventures, and to hear ourselves
bitterly reproach'd for not having improv'd our Fortunes.

_Le Grand_ said, why Friends, do you seek for Treasures and
Empires? What need have we of any thing but plain Food and
Raiment? You were in a Place where you enjoy'd these two
Advantages at once, where all Persons are upon a Level, except
here and there a few to whom the others pay a small voluntary
Deference on Account of their Virtues, and the Care they take to
administer Justice. You were also familiar with the King, who
nourish'd you with the Fat of a plentiful fruitful Country, a
Land of Blessing and Peace, from whence Soldiers are banish'd as
much as Hangmen, and where humane Blood is sacred and safe from
the Rage and Tyranny of great Men? I pray, what would you have
more? Go where you please, you will never find so much again
elsewhere. But 'tis the Foible of most Men, they seldom are
contented with what they enjoy, and in whatsoever State and Place
they are, they always think that to be happy they must change it.

All this moralizing, reply'd _La Foret_, is to no Purpose, we are
come away, and we will not go back again were we to want Bread
elsewhere. He is in the right, _said I_, when Errors are
committed, 'tis needless to think any more of 'em, unless it be
to be a Warning to us at another Time. If ever such good Luck
should happen to us again, perhaps we shall know better how to
improve it.

Next Day we went to fetch the remainder of the Baggage which we
had left near the River, and came hither with it, designing to
live and die here with the rest of our Company.

I was mightily pleas'd to see the good Order which _Le Grand_
kept in this Fort with Respect to Manners. The least immodest
Word was forbid on Pain of public Correction. He read Prayers
every Morning and Evening at which they all attended, for tho'
they were for most part Catholics, yet they liv'd together as if
they had been all of one Religion. They all profess'd to love God
and their Neighbour, as much as themselves; every one took his
Turn to go and fetch in Provisions, to dress the Victuals, to
mount the Guard, and so of the rest, while others walk'd Abroad
for the Air, or employed themselves in what they pleas'd. It was
an easy Matter for us to accommodate ourselves to the Maxims of
this petty Republick. The sick Person I found there was cur'd, so
that our Company consisted of 12 Persons.

We liv'd 27 Months together without any considerable Accident
among us, but then one of our Comrades died, whose Name was
_Gascagnet_, a Native of the _Cevennes_. He had been sadly
afflicted with an _Asthma_ for several Years, which had made him
as lean as a Rake. When he was dead, I begg'd Leave to open him,
which was readily granted. For this Operation I made use of some
sorry Rasors and Scissors which my Comrades had sav'd. I found
his Lungs contracted, and dry as a Spunge. The Trachian Artery
or Pipe of the Lungs was hard, inflexible, and wide enough to put
an Egg into it. The Liver was green, one of its Parts was gritty,
and the other which seem'd perfectly ulcerated, stuck to his
Kidneys. I found 4 Stones as big as Prune-Stones in the Bladder
of the Gall, which was as yellow as Wax. As to the Heart, it
seem'd in as good Order to outward Appearance as one could wish,
but when I open'd it, I found a Hole in the _Septum Medium_ of
the Size of a Silver Penny, edg'd with a Membrane which without
doubt was form'd there to hinder its closing up.

I confess that this surpriz'd me, but after a little
Consideration I guess'd that the Deceased having always labour'd
under a Difficulty of Breathing, and his Lungs by consequence
wanting to be sufficiently cool'd, Nature was willing to provide
a Remedy, as it does, tho' by other Means, for Infants in their
Mother's Womb, and which indeed do not breathe at all, inasmuch
as the Blood is circulated in them in a very different Manner
from what it is when they are born. For, whereas in this Case,
the Blood which is contain'd in the Veins, and push'd from the
Extremities of the Body towards the Heart, which it enters thro'
the _Vena Cava_, discharges itself into the right Cavity from
whence it passes into the Arterious Vein, afterwards into the
_Arteria Venosa_, and from thence into the left Cavity of the
Heart, from whence it is push'd to the Extremities of the Animal
by the _Aorta_, which communicates by its Branches with those of
the _Vena Cava_; in the other case on the contrary, the Blood
which issues from the Right Cavity passes immediately from the
Trunk of the Arterious Vein into the _Aorta_, at the same time
that it also flows immediately from the _Vena Cava_ into the
Trunk of the Veinous Artery, which from thence enters and dilates
it self in the Left Cavity of the Heart.

I observ'd nothing extraordinary in the Intestines. The Ureters
and Kidneys were full of Gravel, so that no wonder the poor Man
was always complaining, and that he died in the flower of his Age
when he was but 34 Years old. We bury'd him in the Counterscarp.

'Twas scarce six Weeks after, that we had a horrid Earthquake,
which was follow'd with as furious a Tempest as I ever saw in my
Life. The Mountain to the West of our Fort, rent in twain from
Top to Bottom, and at the same time there gush'd out a Torrent of
muddy Water with extraordinary Impetuosity. By good Luck it did
not come down directly upon us, otherwise our Works would have
run a very great Risque. This Inundation lasted 'till next Day.
All our Valley was under Water, and we were three Days without
being able to get Abroad. When the bad Weather was over, and our
Meadows dry, we ascended the Mountain to see part of the Damage
done by it. We found that the Cleft made in the Mountain was at
least 120 Foot wide below, and above 50 towards the Top. There
was a Fountain near the Top of it, which after this was never
more seen, and I was the first who observ'd that it was gone.
This surpriz'd us all, but what astonish'd us more, was that half
of the Forest which was below on the other Side, was swallow'd
up, and that instead of Trees which were there before, there
appear'd a very great Lake. These prodigious Events gave us
Occasion to admire the Works of Providence.

_Le Grand_ was sorry for the Loss of this Fountain, because we
often went that Way to divert ourselves, and were very fond of
its Water, which was wonderfully fine and clear. He could not
comprehend what Relation this Fountain had with the cleaving of
the Rock, and the others were even more astonish'd at it than he.
Don't you see, _said I_, that there could not have been such a
Gap in this great Body, unless the Particles of which 'tis
compos'd had met together, and that consequently the Channels
thro' which the Water pass'd that form'd the Fountain were
stopp'd up, just in the same manner as the Pores of a Spunge
close in Proportion as 'tis squeez'd. I am not sure whether you
don't banter, _said one of 'em_, one would think so by your
Looks, tho' what you say seems probable enough. No doubt I
banter, _said I_, for there's a Natural and Physical Reason for
what you admire, which they are not ignorant of who have the
least Notion of Philosophy. We know nothing of Philosophy, said
_Le Grand_, but if you think we are capable of understanding you,
it will be a Pleasure to us to philosophize with us concerning
our Fountain. I will, _said I_, with all my Heart, because we
have nothing else to do now, provided you won't think me a
Pedant.

The Globe we inhabit, _said I_, is compos'd of an infinite Number
of various Particles, the chief of which are Terrestrial and
Aqueous. This compound Body turns in 24 Hours round its proper
Center. What, said _Le Grand_, does the Earth turn round? Yes,
yes, reply'd _La Foret_, I heard him explain this Phoenomenon
before so clearly, that there's no room to doubt of it. Let him
explain it ever so clearly, said _Le Grand_, I will never believe
any thing contrary to my Senses and the Holy Scriptures, in which
there are a great many plain Passages that positively contradict
what you advance. That your Senses often deceive you is very easy
to prove, continued I, and as to the Scriptures, 'tis certain
that the Design of the Holy Ghost was never to make us
Mathematicians and Philosophers, or else he would have taken care
to explain those Passages of _Genesis_ concerning the Creation,
which puzzle a great many People, and which a Priest of the
Country where _La Foret_ and I have been, observ'd that he had
heard talk of. Nor would he have fail'd to have told us the true
Proportion of the Circumference of a Circle to its Diameter, when
he treats of the Sea of Copper which _Solomon_ caus'd to be
plac'd in his stately Temple, and which is pretended according to
the Vulgar Opinion to be from 30 to 10, or from 21 to 7, whereas
it is as from 22 to 7, or at least there does not want much of
it, as is demonstrable from the Mathematics. God, in order to
render himself intelligible, condescends to talk with us in our
own Jargon, and accommodates himself to our Phrase; for when he
speaks after his own Manner, 'tis impossible for us to understand
him, and what he says is mysterious beyond our Penetration. Now
all this is easy to be comprehended, and is liable to no
Objection.

Granting therefore that the Earth turns, the Parts of it which
are in greatest Agitation must be those which are farthest from
its Centre, as is easy to prove from several curious Experiments.
This being so, the Water which besides the Motion of the whole
Body wherewith it is carry'd, has a particular one that renders
it liquid, must by consequence lead the Van. Then comes the Air
which is another Liquid compos'd of Parts much more subtle, and
more agitated than those of the Water, which also makes it go
before it, and form a sort of Down round the terrestrial Globe,
which composes our Atmosphere, and extends about 2 Leagues
distance round the Surface of the Earth; and 'tis in this
Atmosphere, by the Way, in which are form'd Rain, Snow,
Lightning, Thunder, and all the Meteors in general.

Hold, said _Le Grand_, according to your Philosophy the Bodies
that have the least Motion must be the nearest to the Center of
our Globe: Now the Aqueous Parts move faster than the
Terrestrial, therefore the Water must consequently cover the
whole Surface of the Earth, and we should have a perpetual Flood,
which is not the Case.

The Objection is good, _said I_, and 'tis certainly true, that if
God by his Almighty Power should level the Mountains, and lay all
the Hills in general even with the Valleys, there would be no
Appearance of dry Land. 'Tis an Argument which perhaps might very
well be made use of also to favour the Notion of the universal
Deluge, were it not that the Scripture speaks of Mountains
before and after. But you ought to consider that Nature cannot
always have its free Course, by reason of Obstacles which hinder
it. The Water of a River ought according to the Laws which are
prescrib'd it, to follow the Course of its Channel, yet it often
happens that an impetuous Wind stops it, and drives it back even
to its Source. The Mountains and Rocks form'd by Providence are
Barriers which the Ocean cannot go over, just as Liquor which is
in a Vessel cannot surpass the Brims, but bring the Brims lower,
as I said just now of Mountains, and you will see it quickly run
over.

I return therefore to my Subject, and say that there being no
Vacuum in the World; No Vacuum in the World! said _Le Grand_,
interrupting me. Alas! I submit, _said I_. No, _reply'd he_, I am
in the wrong to interrupt you so often: Go on, I beg; you did
well to check me, for I am sensible I should have talk'd idly;
from this time I won't speak a Word more. The Moment, _continued
I_, that any Particles of Air or Fire more subtile and agitated
than others rise, an equivalent Portion of others must
necessarily descend at the same time to supply their Place. Now
you must know that most Mountains are hollow towards the Bottom
as you see this is now 'tis open, and for as much as the Earth is
porous, and full of Crevices and Channels, it happens that the
Sea forces into those Passages, and fills those hollow Mountains
to the same height as the Ocean.

I understand you, said _Le Grand_, you need say no more, you mean
that the Sea being as high as the highest Mountains, which all
the World acknowledges, and is easy to perceive when one is upon
the Coast, the Air which presses the Water upon the Ocean, forces
it to pass thro' the low Conduits of the Earth, and to rise to
the Top of the Rocks, from whence it runs out by Streams, which
form the Fountains or Springs, just as the Liquor which is pour'd
into a Vessel where there's a Pipe or an Arm, rises in that Arm
to the same Height as it is in the Vessel, and there runs out of
it if there be the least Hole. This is reasoning exactly like a
Philosopher, _said I_, your Conclusion is very good, 'tis pity
that your Principles are bad. For 'tis not true, that the Sea is
so high as the Shore, if it were, we should soon be drown'd; so
that 'tis a vulgar Error, the Reason of which is very well known
to those who have only learnt the first Elements of Opticks. But
the Case is thus.

When the Water comes to the Foot of those hollow Mountains, 'tis
heated by the Sun-Beams, and rises in Vapours to the Roofs, which
when collected like the Water of a boiling Pot against the Lid,
form Drops, and those Drops, Streams which run out at the first
Out-let they meet with, and form what we call Springs, as several
Springs form a Brook, and several Brooks a River, which carries
back to the Sea the Water that came from it, and by consequence
only circulates it like the Blood in the Veins of a living
Animal.

There! said _La Foret_, what d'ye say to that? yet this is
nothing. The Explanation as clear as it is, depends on the
Knowlege of other Things which I have heard him relate
elsewhere, and which you must needs be acquainted with in order
to understand the Matter throughly. Be that as it will, reply'd
_Le Grand_, I think all this is very good, and I wish that our
Doctor would entertain us in the same Manner on the Formation of
Meteors, which must needs be a most diverting Subject. I had
rather, _said I_, give you some Notion of the Mathematics, of
which I have learnt something. 'Tis a Science which perhaps may
be of Service to you if ever we go from hence, at least it will
help to pass away the Time. They all consented to my Proposal
with Joy, only _Le Grand_, who was fond of the Sciences, shook
his Head. You have put in a Clause for Natural Philosophy, _said
he_, which is not displeasing to me at all; I dearly love to
treat of the Works of Nature, nevertheless we must not require
too much at the Hands of our Matters: Be so good only before we
conclude this agreeable Conversation, to tell us what your
Opinion is with regard to the Deluge; for in the Manner you
talk'd just now, I fancy you are of the Vulgar Opinion: Tell us
freely whether you think it was Universal or Partial.

As Salvation is not at all concern'd in the Question, _said I_,
which way soever it be determin'd, I came without any Scruple
into the Opinion of one of the Regents of my College, who
publickly declared, that it was impossible for all the Water in
the World to cover the whole Earth to such a Height as the
Scripture seems to mention. But is not God Omnipotent, said _Le
Grand_, and besides, is it not said that the Flood-Gates of
Heaven were open'd? Undoubtedly, _said I_, but the Divines don't
pretend to make this a Miracle; if they did, I should not have
one Word to say. I don't deny but he who created the Universe can
create new Bodies of Water when he will, but I affirm that if he
made new Waters for that Purpose, he afterwards annihilated them.
And as for the Flood-Gates of Heaven, 'tis a poetical and
metaphorical Expression us'd by the Author to dignify his
Subject.

How comes it to pass, _said another_, that as there is a Region
of Fire, there might not as well be a Region of Water, which
Providence might make use of upon Occasion, as an inexhaustible
Magazine, either to moisten the Earth in a Time of Drought, or to
lay certain Countries under Water? That, reply'd _Le Grand_, is a
meer Trifle. The first is a Fiction of the ancient Philosophers:
The second a _Chimaera_ of Children, which nevertheless I have
heard urg'd by Persons of Sense. For in short, where should a
watery Region be plac'd? If above the Firmament, it would have no
Correspondence with the Earth; if under, 'tis impossible we
should see the Fix'd Stars, because the least Mist deprives us of
the Light of the Sun. But without going so much out of the way
for a Remedy, let it only be consider'd, that when it has rain'd
8 or 10 Days together in any one Place, there is a Flood; now,
suppose it only to rain every where with the same Violence for
forty Days together, and then the Thing does not seem to me to be
attended with so much Difficulty.

You don't consider, _said I to him_, when there is a great deal
of Rain in one Place, there's too great a Drought in another, and
that what the Sun exhales in one Part the Clouds carry to
another. If it were to rain every where with so much Violence,
the whole Ocean as it were must first of all be exhal'd in
Vapours, in which Case all that fell would but barely suffice to
fill the low Places from whence the Water was drawn to form the
Clouds, so that it would require a great many more to cover the
whole Globe to the Height of 15 Cubits above the _Alpes_ and the
_Peak of Teneriff_; Mountains that are perhaps two Leagues high;
which you plainly see is impossible.

Mean time, another Difficulty occurs with respect to the Size of
the Ark. My Master, who taught me Mathematics, had the Curiosity
to take the Dimensions of this great Vessel, and to calculate the
Contents of it; then he examin'd _Pliny_, and consulted all the
Books of Voyages in order to make out an exact List of all the
various Animals that we have any Knowlege of at this Time.
Finally, he computed how much Provision would be necessary for a
Year's Subsistence of all those Creatures, and 8 Persons; but
when he had collected all this together, he found the Bulk to be
so great, that the Vessel could not be big enough by far to
contain it, not to mention the Animals which we never heard of,
and which are undoubtedly very numerous.

But, said _Le Grand_, have we a right Notion of the Measures
mention'd by _Moses_? Yes, said I, the Cubit we read of in the
Scripture was a Foot and half long, and that you may not think
we talk at random, you must know that the Ancients perceiving
that Men are not alike tall and stout, and that consequently
their Limbs must be in Proportion very different from one
another, agreed, instead of making use of their Elbows for their
common Measures in Traffic, to take four Barley-Corns laid flat
one by another for the Measure of a Finger's Breadth, four of
which made a Hand's Breadth, or three Inches, and twelve Inches
or sixteen Fingers Breadths a Foot: One and half of these Feet
made a Cubit, and five Feet the Geometrical Pace, whereas the
ordinary Pace is but two Foot and half. The Rod was twelve Foot.
The Furlong consisted of a hundred and twenty five Foot, and the
_Italian_ Mile of eight Furlongs, from whence you perceive that
the first Measures that were invented by Mankind, came afterwards
to the _Greeks_, _Romans_, and several other Nations. This being
so, 'tis natural to conclude that the Deluge related by _Moses_
was not universal with regard to the Earth, but only with regard
to Man, The World was then in its Infancy, and its Inhabitants
had not had Time enough to multiply and spread. God said that
Part of it which was inhabited under Water, it was not necessary
for him to drown all the other Parts, accordingly it was enough
for _Noah_ to preserve only the Species of Cattle which were in
those Countries, in which case the Ark was sufficient to hold
more, and consequently all the other Difficulties vanish. For as
to the Expression of _the whole World_, 'tis very common for the
Sacred Writers to make use of it to signify a Part of it;
witness the Passage where 'tis said with respect to _Joseph_ and
_Mary_, that all the World should be enroll'd, which every Body
knows cannot be understood of more than those Countries which
were under the Government of the _Roman_ Emperor.

Upon this all my Companions retir'd with Resolution to dive as
far as possible into the Mathematics, and to improve by my
Lectures. Accordingly we began next Day with _Euclid_'s Elements.
Tho' that Author had not gone thro' my Hands in several Years, I
had taken so much Care to revolve the principal Contents of his
six first Books often in my Mind that I seldom hesitated in the
Demonstrations I made from him. From thence we proceeded to
Geometry in which indeed I was not so expert, besides that in
order to go through a regular Course of it, we wanted Books and
Instruments, which there was no Appearance of recovering where we
were; and in fine we concluded with Fortification. I should have
been glad also to have taught them a little of Algebra, but _Le
Grand_ was the only Person that seem'd inclinable to apply to it,
which indeed was but now and then, and he was quite discourag'd
from proceeding, as soon as we came to the Cubic Equations.

We spent several Years in these fine Sciences, insomuch that
there were no smooth sandy Places but what were full of
Geometrical Figures, especially in the Downs and upon the Shore,
to which we often went for the Air. We were there one Day when
the Rolling-in of the Tide gave us an Occasion to discourse of
the Flux and Reflux of the Ocean, during which we were extremely
surpriz'd to see to the West as far as our Eye-sight could reach,
a Body which we had not discover'd before. We were at first
divided in our Opinions what it should be; some thought that as
the Water was low, it was the Point of some Rock, others would
have it to be a little Cloud. _Normand_ affirm'd he had seen the
same Thing before, and the rest asserted 'twas a Ship. To be
certain of the matter I fix'd two Arrows in the Ground, which
form'd a right Line with this Body, and placing myself behind
them, I observ'd immediately that it mov'd, and that consequently
it could not be a Rock. We then were very attentive to observe
whether the Figure of it did not change as Clouds do commonly,
which spread, increase, or vanish by degrees; but not perceiving
any Alteration for half an Hour, only that it was a little bigger
if any thing, we concluded that it must absolutely be a Ship,
which was sent by Providence to deliver us from our tedious
Solitude.

The Wind blew a little fresh, and as it was not yet Noon, we had
Hopes of its coming up with us before Night, since it coasted
along the Shore. _La Foret_, who was more afraid than any of us
that so rare and unexpected a Conveniency should escape us, was
of Opinion that four of us should go aboard our Long-Boat, which
we had carefully laid up near twelve Years ago in the Hut that we
built at our Arrival, and had not made use of since, and venture
out with nothing but our Oars in order to meet the Ship, for fear
she should put off from the Coast before they who navigated her
knew we were here, and that consequently we should never have
such another Opportunity if we neglected this. His Opinion was
approv'd of, the Boat was tackled out, and _La Foret_ with three
others went aboard her. Tho' they had but two Oars, they tugg'd
so hard that in a very little time we lost Sight of 'em. Mean
time the great Ship drew near, and we began to distinguish the
Sails when we observ'd the Sun approach the Horizon. We had at
least a League and half to travel to the first Lodge that we had
made between our Fort and the Sea, and the Moon rose late. These
Considerations made us think of retiring to it, which we did, and
found there some Remains of Provision that we had brought thither
in the Morning, which were a very seasonable Relief to us.

Tho' we were fatigued, it was impossible for us to close our
Eyes, and there was not one Man of us but was mortally uneasy. In
the Morning before Day we return'd the directest Way we could
find towards the Shore. At our Arrival we were overjoy'd to see
the great Ship lying at Anchor a little lower about a League at
Sea, and two Long-Boats at the same time coming Ashore, so that
we advanc'd to meet them at Landing. The Captain of the Vessel
not knowing who they were that came aboard him detain'd two of
'em, and made use of their Comrades as Guides to eight Men whom
he sent off in the Ship-Boat to know who we were. Immediately we
were order'd to go and fetch our Baggage, and to return with it
as soon as possible, because the Ground there not being very fit
for Anchorage, if the least foul Weather had happen'd it would
have been dangerous. Six of the Ship's Crew went along with us.
When we came to our Fort, we took what we thought the best of
every thing, and left the rest for the Savages, if ever they
thought fit to return. Notwithstanding all our Haste 'twas Night
before we came to the Ship. _La Foret_ had already inform'd the
Captain of the Nature of the Country which we were going to
leave, or rather had taken care to give him as disadvantageous a
Character of it as he could; so that having no great mind to see
it, he immediately set sail, and gave us Cause to thank God for
delivering us from that miserable Place, where 18 Years ago we
had the Misfortune to be cast Ashore.




CHAP. XIV.

_The Author's Passage from the Southern Countries to_ Goa, _where
he was imprison'd by the Inquisition. The Story of a_ Chinese
_whom he met with there, and the Manner how they got their
Liberty._


The Captain of the Ship was a true _Spaniard_, who in every
Action discover'd the Pride and Genius of his Country, so that
tho' I should have been glad to have known by what happy Accident
this Ship was conducted to the Coasts of a Country where no Body
trades, it was impossible for me to learn it, for there was not
one of the Ship's Company that knew any thing of the Matter, and
I was afraid to ask the Churl for fear of being huff'd as others
had been. The Surgeon who spoke a little _Latin_, only said to me
one Day that they came from the _American_ Islands, whither they
had convoy'd some Merchant Ships, and carry'd Orders concerning
the Release of four or five Ships which the Chevalier _Tyssot_
Governor of _Surinam_ had caus'd to be stopp'd by way of
Reprisal, and that immediately after the Delivery of those Orders
they sail'd towards the Southern Countries where they went Ashore
twice. At the first time, continued he, nothing presented worthy
of the Captain's Attention. At our second Landing which might be
about seventy or eighty Leagues from the Place where you were,
ten Men were sent Ashore, but only two return'd who were those
that were left to take care of the Long-Boat, for the others had
been attack'd by the Natives of the Country who pursued them as
far as the Downs, where they took and cut them to pieces in Sight
of their Comrades, who had much ado to escape because the Water
was low, and their Boat was on dry Ground. We had a Desire to
have landed there also where we found you, but I fancy the
Account you gave of those Parts, put our Captain quite out of
Conceit with it, which whether true or not, I thought I heard say
that we were going in a straight Line to _Goa_.

Accordingly I observ'd, tho' I knew not why, that we had entirely
abandon'd the Country where we had been, and that we were
steering towards the North-East. But we could not finish our
Voyage without stopping, for the Captain was oblig'd to put in at
the Isle of _Bourbon_, five or six Degrees East of _Madagascar_,
where we stay'd ten Days to recruit ourselves, and to take in
fresh Water.

During the short Stay we made here, the Sailors continually
diverted themselves as long as their Money would hold out. The
Day before we came away, some of those that were Ashore got
drunk, particularly one, a Native of _Seville_ about thirty five
Years of Age, a very clever Fellow with large Whiskers which he
curl'd every now and then, and took more care of than of all the
rest of his Body. As drunk as he was, he came to the Long-Boat,
and no sooner was aboard, but he fell fast asleep. His Companions
that came after him, jogg'd him some on one Side, and some on
another, and made a hundred Grimaces to excite him to laugh with
them. A young _Portuguese_ who was very near as drunk as he,
being also desirous to try a Frolic, softly pull'd out his
Scissors, and slily cut off the _Spaniard_'s Left Whisker. They
all abhorr'd this Action, blam'd his Imprudence, and told him no
Good would come of it. And the next Morning the _Spaniard_ being
told by some Babler who it was that had play'd him that scurvy
Trick, he came to the Capstane where the other was helping to
weigh the Anchor, and without speaking one Word to him run his
Knife up to the very Hilt in his Breast. The _Portuguese_ however
had Strength to give the _Spaniard_ such a cursed Blow upon his
Head with a Lever he held in his Hand, that he fell down
stone-dead, and the _Portuguese_ himself after a little
staggering fell with his Nose against the Bridge of the
Forecastle, where he lost almost all his Blood in the Space of a
Quarter of an Hour, and gave up the Ghost in my Arms. Thus we
lost two brave Men at once, to the great Trouble of the Captain,
who thereupon made an Oath that he would punish the first of his
Men that he saw in Liquor in such a Manner as to make him
remember it. This however was no hinderance to our sailing, so
that we arriv'd happily at _Goa_ the 13th Day of _April_, 1663.

This famous City is situated in an Island of the same Name, which
is at least fifteen Miles in compass at the Mouth of the River
_Mondoui_. It has a good Harbour, a very famous Arsenal, and an
incomparable Hospital. As I had no Engagement on board the Ship,
the Captain had the Goodness to let me settle on that Island, and
follow my Profession there without demanding any thing for my
Passage. Most of my Comrades also went Ashore, some one Way, some
another.

I was directed to an Inn where the Landlord was extremely civil.
I had not been an Hour at his House, but he was so complaisant as
to offer me Lodging there gratis, 'till I could find a House to
my Fancy. I made a hearty Supper, and went to Bed betimes. It was
hot Weather, so that I laid myself down without any Thought near
the Bed-Post, with my Left Arm hanging out of the Bed almost to
the Ground. When I had been there at least four Hours, and was in
my first Sleep, something soft and lukewarm which mov'd up and
down upon my Hand, made me draw it up, but I was too drousy to
think what it might be. Falling into a Doze, soon after, the same
thing happen'd again and again, 'till being at last thoroughly
awak'd, I was surpriz'd to see something walk thro' the Room
which seem'd as big as a Calf. My Blood came into my Face, for I
could not imagine what it was, and tho' I verily believ'd that
all the Tales of Witches and Apparitions were old Women's
Stories, and had fasten'd the Door of my Chamber, in which I knew
not that there was another Bed besides mine, yet I then doubted
of the Truth of my Hypothesis. In the mean time, this frightful
Object after having taken some Turns about the Room, thought fit
to return directly to me. Upon this I drew back, crept to one
side as fast as it advanc'd to the other, and when I was almost
out of Bed as I thought, my Honour which was very great before,
increas'd prodigiously when I found something stir behind me. To
be plain, I was in a mortal Agony to see myself beset on all
Sides. The Palpitation of my Heart was inconceivable, could
hardly fetch Breath, and was all over in a Sweat. In short, the
very Moment that the one made as if he would throw himself upon
me, I heard a Voice from the other saying, What's the matter, are
not you well? At these Words I gave a dreadful Groan, which
plainly shew'd the Fright that I was in. Don't be afraid,
_reply'd he_, and who are you? _said I_, trembling all the while.
I am _John_, said he, a Sailor on board the Ship that you came
in. The D---l take you, _said I_, you have put a Trick upon me
that surely will cost me my Life. I am half dead already, and if
I han't Relief, 'tis impossible for me to recover. How the D---l
came you hither? _continued I_, and who is there in the Chamber
besides you? No Body, _said he_, and if you perceive any thing,
it can only be the Captain's Dog, which follow'd me hither last
Night. A Dog, _said I_, what, is it as big as an Ass? 'Tis the
great black Shock-Dog that you have seen a hundred times, _said
he_, but Fear is apt to magnify Objects, and to be sure he
appear'd to you bigger than he is. 'Twas that cursed Cur then,
_said I_, that came and lick'd my Hand three or four times before
I was quite awake. But once more I pray, how came you into my
Room? The Captain, _reply'd he_, went to sup with a Friend where
he detain'd me 'till ten o' Clock, and then bid me come and lie
here this Night. When I came, the Inn-keeper said he had no room
for me, but that if I had come an Hour or two sooner, I might
perhaps have taken half a Bed with a Stranger who was just
arriv'd in the _St. Jago_, and upon his explaining himself a
little farther, I was sure it must be you; so that after having
told him that we both came in the same Ship, he permitted me upon
my Word and Honour that you would not take it ill, to come and
bear you Company. All this, my Friend, would have been perfectly
right, _reply'd I_, if you had but spoke to me when you came into
the Room. I would have done so, _said he_, but you slept so
sound, that I thought it would be a Sin to disturb you. These
Circumstances reviv'd me very much, and I found my Spirits
recover by degrees, but they had been too much disorder'd for me
not to guard against the Consequence; therefore as soon as 'twas
Day, I made my _Portuguese_ get out of Bed, and charg'd him to
send for a Surgeon who breath'd a Vein, and took away five or six
Ounces of Blood, so that God be thank'd my Panic had no
Consequence, tho' certainly I never was in such a Terror before.
My Landlord, who scarce knew me again was affected at this
Incident, but we laugh'd at it afterwards, and he diverted every
one that came to his House with the Story.

I lodg'd ten Days after over-against the Dominicans Convent here,
which is a very fine one. Tho' I stay'd here but a very little
time, I had the Happiness to perform several Cures, which
procured me the Acquaintance of many People of Worth. One of the
Dominicans having broke his Leg by a Fall down Stairs, sent for
me, and tho' the Bone was shatter'd, yet I made such a Cure of
it, that at two Months end he walk'd as well as ever. This was of
very great Service to me; for the honest Friar thought he could
never do enough to shew his Love and Gratitude, and not only
himself, but all of his Order were fond of my Company at all my
leisure Hours, and I us'd to entertain them with a Narrative of
my Travels. Besides, they recommended me where-ever they went, so
that my Practice increased every Day, which brought me in a great
deal of Money, and I thought my self in a fair Way of acquiring a
considerable Estate. But Thanks to my unlucky Star, a fresh
Affair happened which gave me a great deal of Trouble, and had
like to have cost me my Life.

The Inhabitants of _Goa_ are made up of all Religions, Pagans,
Jews, Mahometans, but the Catholic is the prevailing Religion,
and the only one that is publickly exercis'd, The Clergy are
very rigid, and the Laity extremely superstitious, but you must
not think this proceeds from a Principle of Devotion, the former
being stupidly ignorant, and the latter excessively debauch'd,
the Women especially having the Character of inconceivable
Lasciviousness. Being a little at Ease, and having an Opportunity
to frequent several Companies, I often took the Liberty to banter
those Eaters of Crucifixes and Swallowers of Images, who think
they may with Impunity cut a Purse with one Hand as it were,
provided they tell their Beads with the other. A Man of my
Profession enrag'd to see how much Business I had, at the same
time that he could hardly get Bread; having heard me talk after
this manner several times, was such a Villain as to go and accuse
me of Heresy before the Inquisition, which is the most terrible
and the most unjust Tribunal in the World. For as I was going one
Day to the Governor's, who had sent for me to bleed one of his
Domestics, I was scarce fifty Paces from his House, but an
Officer came and said I must go with him, and at the same Instant
four of his Tipslaves surrounded me, and seizing me by the Collar
carry'd me on the 26th of _June_ 1669 to Prison, where they
loaded me with Fetters like the vilest of Criminals.

There were above twenty of us in a cursed Dungeon without Light.
There was a deep Hole, in the middle of it for the Prisoners
Necessities, but scarce any Body durst go near it for fear of
falling in, which was the Reason that every one dung'd where he
could, and that consequently there was an intolerable Stench.

The first Day that I was detain'd, I did nothing but sigh and
groan for the Loss of my Liberty, and with the Apprehension of
what I was soon to suffer from the Tyranny of the most implacable
Judges in the World. But being afterwards made sensible that all
this would answer no End, I thought that the best way to dispel
part of my Chagrin would be to start Conversation upon
indifferent Matters with the first Man that came in my Way. For
this end I address'd myself to most of my Fellow-Prisoners, some
of whom did not understand me, because I did not speak their
Language, and the others were so dejected, that they did not care
to answer me a Word; only one Man who was more patient and
sociable than the rest, said to me in _Portuguese_;

"You have but a melancholy Reception here, but you must not be
surpriz'd at it, for 'tis impossible without a happy Temper and a
great Courage not to be dispirited in so disagreeable a Place as
this, especially when a Man has been here some time. For my part,
I thank God, I am of an Age to bear a great deal, and am so
resign'd to the Decrees of Providence, that I laugh at all that
Man can do to me." Those are fine Qualities indeed, _said I_,
very few People are capable of so much Resolution. Of what
Religion are you, _said I_? I am, said he, _a Universalist_, or
of the Religion of honest Men. I love God with all my Heart, I
fear him, I worship him, and I endeavour to do to all Men without
Exception what I wish they would do to me. All that's very good,
_said I_, but you are undoubtedly of some Communion. People
seldom attain to your Age, but they declare for a certain Party
or Sect. Not I, _said he_, I make no difference between one
Society or Denomination and another; there is not one but has its
Beauties and its Blemishes, and I am persuaded there is none in
which a Man may not either be sav'd or damn'd. Verily, _said I_,
what you say confirms me in the Opinion I have had a long Time,
that there is not a greater Variety in Faces than there is in
Sentiments. This is true, _reply'd he_, not only with regard to
every Man in particular, but with Regard to every Day of one's
Life; what we thought of Yesterday in one Light, we look upon
to-day in another, and the Mind as well as the Body is subject to
a thousand Alterations.

I am a _Chinese_, continued he, and my Father was a Man in good
Circumstances, who took great Care of my Education, so that it
was not his Fault if I have not a good Stock of Learning. One _Du
Bourg_ a Missionary Jesuit having heard mention of him as of a
generous Man and of a numerous Family, found Ways and Means to
introduce himself among us. He was a Man not only civil, but
seemingly of an exemplary Piety, so that we all took an
unspeakable Pleasure in hearing him discourse. He gave each of us
a Catechism, which he desir'd us to read attentively, and
explain'd in a very easy familiar Way. After this there were
Conferences at our House two or three times a Week, in which it
must be own'd, that the Jesuit neglected nothing for our
Instruction. As there was little or no Perplexity in the Subjects
which he treated of at first, such as the Fall of Man, his
Redemption by the Son of God, and everlasting Happiness, we took
great Pleasure in his Lectures; but at last after two or three
Months were over, this Ecclesiastic who went on gradually, and
did not care to frighten us all at once when he began to explain
the Prophecies, and to display the Mysteries of the Trinity and
the Incarnation, my Father's Mind began to be uneasy. He could
not comprehend how Men of Sense that boast of the glorious Lights
of Revelation should not see that their Worship is envelop'd in
the thickest Darkness of Paganism. Is it not far flung, said he,
that People should take Pleasure in being wilfully blind to such
a Degree, as to have an Abhorrence of those who shew them
plainly, that their chief Maxims and the most essential Articles
of their Religion are miserable Puerilities, and Impertinencies
which they themselves say were a Stumbling-block to the Jews, and
Foolishness to the _Greeks_! Especially, _said he_, I tremble
when any Man goes to persuade me, that a Being, sovereignly
perfect and immaterial engender'd another corporeal God equal to
him from all Eternity, and that there is also another God, an
independent Spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son, each
of the Three making a distinct Person, and being perfect God, and
yet all those Three making but one only perfect God. Certainly
this is making a strange _Chimaera_ of the most simple, and most
undivided Being.

The Jesuit wish'd he had not embark'd so far. He endeavour'd to
remove that Obstruction by the common Method of Theologues; but
not succeeding, he made use of this Comparison. Suppose, Sir,
_said he_, a Tree that bears Fruit incessantly; in such a Tree I
find three Things that have a very great Resemblance to the Holy
Trinity. I observe the Analogy between the Trunk and the Father,
between the Son and the Branches, and between the Holy Spirit and
the Fruit. The Trunk is as the Father, because both the Branches
and Fruit are produc'd from it; the Branches are as the Son, in
that they are produc'd from the Trunk as so many Arms or
Conveyance for distributing to Mankind, all that proceeds from
the Trunk. And the Fruit is as the Holy Spirit, considering that
it comes to us both from the Trunk and the Branches, as so many
Assurances or Testimonies of their Goodness. I own, that when
Eternity is the Point in Question, the Resemblance ceases,
because 'tis not possible to find a Proportion betwixt Finite and
Infinite, be the former ever so ancient and extensive. Mean time,
'tis as true on the other hand, that when we examine the Kernels,
or the Seeds of the Fruit of this Tree with a good Microscope, we
observe not only a Tree already form'd with its Branches, but the
Fruit also, tho' a little confus'd; a true Emblem this of the
Deity consider'd during and before the Creation of the World, at
which Time it appear'd but as one entire Tree without Distinction
of Branches and of Fruit. But to come from hence to the Thing I
aim at, 'tis evident that whatever Difference you make between
the Trunk, Branches, and Fruits of a Tree, there is essentially
none at all; they are indeed different Parts, yet all those Parts
together constitute but one Whole. It signifies nothing to say
that the Trunk is not the Branches, and that the Branches are
not the Fruit. I affirm that this Distinction is not real, that
is to say, that those Things cannot subsist independently one of
the other as when they are united. In order to make a compleat
Tree such as we have imagin'd, there must necessarily be a
Conjunction of a Trunk, Branches, and Fruit, yet each has its
particular Use; the first, as I said before, creates or produces,
the second bears, displays, and gives, and the third by its
Presence and Operations confirms in the Belief we entertain with
Regard to the second and the first. 'Tis one and the same
Substance variously represented, one Agent which operates after
divers Manners, but in the main is only one, and cannot be
consider'd as several without a manifest Contradiction. God is
but One in Essence: In the Oeconomy of Salvation he is consider'd
as the Author and Father of Mankind: In the Affair of Redemption
he is look'd upon as an obedient submissive and humble Son who
satisfies the Justice of his Father; and when the Business is the
Application and Distribution of his Grace, he is consider'd as
the Holy Ghost.

After this Manner and no other, _said my Father, interrupting
him_, I conceive of the Meaning of the Word Trinity, but there is
something else couch'd under it, or you would not have made so
many Periphrases; I don't like any of these Ways of acting;
formerly I thought you an honest Man, but now I find you a Cheat,
and taking him by the Arm he thrust him out of his House for good
and all; then turning about to us, _he said_, Don't you observe
the Absurdities in this Sophister's Arguments? According to his
Way of talking, this Jesus whom he preaches up to us so much, and
whom he makes equal with God, had not so much Credit as to pay by
his ignominious Death the Debt which the first Man contracted by
eating the forbidden Fruit, because _Adam_, who, according to
him, was created to live eternally, thereby deserv'd Death
Temporal and Eternal, and because Christ only preserv'd _Adam_'s
Posterity from the latter of those Deaths of which we have not
any Certainty, and of which many Nations are ignorant; whereas he
was not able to redeem us from the Death, which we know by
Experience, and which, _said he_, was impos'd upon us as a
Punishment. And what is yet more remarkable upon this Head is,
that the Terms of this Redemption are burdensome, and much more
difficult to put in practice, than those to which the Jews were
subject under the old Dispensation. The _Israelites_, as the
Christians themselves say, were only bound to do good Works; the
Law requir'd nothing of 'em but Sprinklings and such other
Ceremonies; but under the New Covenant Faith is added to good
Works, and a Faith strong enough to believe all the Mysteries of
Religion without doubting, notwithstanding they are repugnant to
Reason and good Sense. As for my own Part, Children, _said he_, I
renounce such wild Opinions, and will positively hear no more of
them.

I was then twenty two Years of Age, and consequently at Years of
Discretion: I could not for my Life see the Wildness of those
Opinions which my Father cry'd out so much against. My Director
(to do him justice) had only taught, that _Adam_ was threatned
with Temporal Death, if he transgress'd; and that the Design of
_Christ_'s Sufferings was not to take this Penalty off from
Mankind, but to make them more than Amends by procuring for them
Eternal Life in another World. To teach this, I thought, was not
to represent _Christ_ as wanting any Credit with God; unless it
had been necessary to the Happiness of when that the Temporal
Death should have been superseded, the contrary of which seem'd
more probable. I saw too that under the old Dispensation Faith
was required of the Jews, as it is now under the Gospel requir'd
of _Christians_. They were bound to believe not only that there
is a God, but that it _Moses_'s Law was of Divine Origin, that he
wrought Miracles, and that a _Messias_ was to come. These were
some of their Articles of Faith; and tho' the Number of a
Christian's Articles is enlarg'd, yet none of those which my
Director had taught me, seem'd to my Reason to contain such
Propositions as a Divine Power did not reach to. However my
Father's Temper was such that he could not bear his Children to
make him Replies, so that I was forc'd to obey, or run the Risque
of being chastis'd.

After this, I did not see the Monk above three or four times in
six Months, which was such an insupportable Mortification to me,
that one Day having acquainted me of a Voyage he intended to make
to _Goa_, I inform'd myself which Way he was to go, and without
saying a Word to any Soul, I set out two Days before him, and
went fifteen Leagues from Home to stay for him. The good Man was
transported to see me, but when I told him what was the Motive of
my meeting him, he had like to have discarded me for fear of the
Consequences, so that I was oblig'd to give him my Oath that I
would, where ever we came, declare what indeed was no more than
the Truth, that he had no hand in this Excursion of mine, and
that I would always endeavour at the Hazard of my Life to clear
him from any such Accusation.

When we came hither, I intreated him to find me out some Person
with whom I might live in the nature of a Domestic. It was not
long before Father _Du Bourg_ procur'd what I wanted, for he
plac'd me with one _Pelciano_ a _Portuguese_ Physician whom he
knew intimately. This honest Man who had a great deal of Regard
for me, took so much Pains to teach me his Language, that
notwithstanding my ordinary Avocations, I was able to speak it in
a very short Time. He likewise took a singular Pleasure in
instructing me in his Religion, but tho' he was not so
prevaricating as the Jesuit, I was shock'd at a great many
Things, which I thought either ridiculous, or manifestly
contradictory. I was also at some Trouble to reconcile your
Chronology, which limits the Creation of the World to the Term of
about 6000 Years, with ours and that of the _Indians_, who extend
it with a great deal of Probability to a Distance almost
infinite. Besides, I was extremely perplex'd which of the Sects
to make choice of, when I heard that the Christians as well as
others, are divided into a Number of Societies which differ so
much in their Opinions as to cause an irreconcileable Hatred
between them, so far as to damn one another; and that even in
every one of these Societies there's I know not how many
different Sorts of Opinions. My Master to whom I propos'd my
Scruples, and who made use of all his Rhetoric to solve them,
expected I should prefer the _Romish_ Religion to all others,
probably because 'twas that which he profess'd himself. But
being shock'd at the ridiculous Superstitions which I found those
of that Communion were guilty of, I earnestly begg'd him to tell
me seriously what he thought it adviseable for me to do.

Well my Lad, _said he_, remain as you are, or else turn to that
Side where you think to find most Advantage. I will not make use
of the Authority of _Polybius_, a very famous Historian about 200
Years before _Christ_, who pretended, as he says in his sixth
Chapter, "That the Gods, as well as Punishments and Rewards after
this Life, are only the chimerical Productions of the Ancients,
which would be very insignificant if a Republic was to be form'd
to consist only of good Men; but because there is no State where
the People are not irregular and wicked, 'tis absolutely
necessary for keeping them in Awe, to make use of the Panic
Terrors of another World, to admit, believe and intirely to
conform to them, on Pain of passing for Madmen and Fools." As
this great Man was a Pagan, 'tis not fair to quote him among us
upon a Fact of such Consequence. So that it shall suffice to tell
you, that 'tis a Maxim with Great Men as well as the Learned to
accommodate themselves to Times and Seasons. 'Tis indifferent in
what Church, or with what People we worship God, provided we
serve him with Respect and Veneration. He is the only common
Father of all Mankind, and is willing to grant them all
Salvation. 'Tis neither the Denomination of _Catholic_,
_Calvinist_, _Lutheran_ nor _Anabaptist_, by which People are
sav'd, but by Faith and good Works, The Man that leads a good
Life is acceptable; to God, wherever he dwells, and Providence
which trieth the Heart and the Reins, can easily distinguish a
Believer from 100000 wicked and ungodly Persons. Most of the
Articles which set Men at Variance in Religion are not so
essential as is pretended by the Clergy; 'tis often a Matter of
Indifference whether they are accepted or rejected; and provided
there are any of Consequence, 'tis always certain that no Body
knows our Hearts, and 'tis an easy Thing to associate with Fools,
and even to imitate their external Grimaces without embracing
their ridiculous Opinions. Worship is not attach'd to any
particular Place, nor is Adoration paid any longer on the
Mountain or in _Jerusalem_. God no longer requires the Blood of
Heifers for his Satisfaction, nor the Distorsions of the Body. My
Son, _says he_, give me thy Heart. This, _I said,_ appears to me
very rational, I most humbly thank you for your Advice; and
according to these Principles I shall be content with keeping up
the Title of a Christian, without attaching myself absolutely to
any one Sect. Ever since that Time, continued the _Chinese_,
while I travell'd with Mons. _Pelciano_, I attended at all the
Divine Services without any Scruple, and without giving Offence
to any Person whatsoever.

But, I _reply'd_, how came you to be committed here? Indeed I
know nothing of the Cause, _said he_, unless it be for having
perhaps spoke a little too freely of the Mystery of the
Incarnation; for I remember, I talk'd of that Matter publickly
three or four Days before my Imprisonment. Mean time 'tis an
Article that I shall never be silent about; for tho' I call my
self a Christian, and am really so, I am far from designing it to
the Prejudice of the Author of all things. Jesus Christ himself,
if he were here, wou'd clear me. How great a Man soever this
Divine Prophet was, 'tis sufficient to believe him the Son of
God, by way of Eminence, and 'tis affronting him, to think him
capable of attributing that Title to himself by Nature. It may
also be affirm'd that he is truly our Mediator, because he has
pointed out the way of Salvation to us, and the Means of keeping
in that way. His Morals were undeniably pure, his Life holy, and
his Doctrines divine, and he confirm'd the Truth of them by his
Death; but that he is God Almighty, and Everlasting, the same
Essence as the Father, and yet personally distinct from him, and
engender'd from all Eternity, conceiv'd immediately of the Holy
Ghost, or of God himself, and born of an immaculate Virgin, is
what he has not pretended to, tho' others, with the greatest
Injustice in the World, put those Words into his Mouth. 'Tis very
true, as I have heard my Master say an hundred times, that the
Scripture introduces God saying to him, _Thou art my Son_, but
then it adds immediately after, _This Day have I begotten thee_.
And as to the Word Virgin, 'tis certain, that in the original
Language it also signifies a young Woman. Besides there are many
Expositors who say, that the appropriating those Passages to
Jesus Christ is doing Violence to the Text.

Finally, I must tell you, that the very Miracles, which are
ascrib'd to this Great Person, are not to be understood
literally, but in an improper and figurative Sense, as all the
Parables of the Gospel are understood in. Thus, for Example, the
Story of the Temptation, which appears to be ridiculous and
impossible, if taken literally, means nothing but that the Kings
and Princes of the Earth, who are as high as the Mountains above
other Mortals, the Clergy, those Directors of Consciences, who
preach in the Temples and sacrifice at the Altars, are equally
liable to Trials and Temptations with the poor illiterate people
in the Deserts, but that there is nothing which ought to divert
them from their Duty, and to hinder them from paying their Homage
to the Monarch of Heaven and Earth. The Persons possess'd with
Devils mean repenting Sinners, and the Swine, into which the
Devils that possess'd them were sent, signify Wretches abandon'd
to all manner of Uncleanness, and plung'd over head and ears in
Wickedness. The Faith of a Believer appears from the Example of
_Peter_, when he walk'd up on the Waters, and his Unbelief from
his sinking; his Virtue from his resolving to follow his Master
in the most evident Dangers; and his Infirmity from his denying
him the very Instant that a silly Woman accus'd him of being one
of his Company when he fell into the Hands of his Enemies. In a
word, all the extraordinary Events, as the Cure of Cripples,
Blindness, Palsies, and such other Ailments, as well as the
Resurrection of the Dead, mention'd in the History of the Life of
Christ, are to be understood in a spiritual Sense; for then there
is no Difficulty in explaining the Scripture, and they to whom it
appears ridiculous or mysterious, will find it intelligble and
easy; and so is the Old Testament, when we consider it only as a
Compound of Emblems, Allegories, Metaphors, Hyperboles, Types and
Comparisons invented for the Comfort and Instruction of the
Children of God.

What you have now told me, _said I_, would furnish us Matter for
a long Conversation, but I believe it would be to no Purpose. All
that I can tell you is that the Jesuit _Du Bourg_ is a very
Politick Gentleman, your Master a _Portuguese Jew_, and for your
own Part, I look upon you as a Volunteer, or a Free Person, and
not as a lifted Soldier. As long as a Man is not engag'd to any
particular Captain, he may go and serve where he pleases without
any Body's calling him to Account; but from the Moment that he is
inlisted, he cannot leave his Company without the Permission of
his Leader, and if he deserts he is a Criminal, and is punish'd
according to the Laws. You say you are a Christian, tho' you are
very far short of it 'till you have abjur'd Paganism, and
embrac'd the Sect that you like Best among the Christians. You
are not properly speaking subject to any Censure, and I persuade
myself that if they who detain you here knew you, you would not
stay here long. When all's said and done you are not under their
Jurisdiction, and in this City there's entire Freedom for People
of all Nations. Represent this to your Judge the next Time that
you appear before him, not forgetting to say that you are a
_Chinese_; and if you don't make mention of Christianity, I
question not but you will do very well, and that you will get off
for a Correction which you have very well deserv'd.

If ever I get out of their Clutches, _reply'd he_, I assure you
I'll never get in again. I have, Thanks to God, wherewithal to
live at Home, and can do very well after the manner I propose to
myself, and even tho' our Domestic Affairs should not find me
Employment, as long as my Father is living, I can spend my Time
in making Telescopes and Microscopes.

How Microscopes, _said I_, where did you learn the Use of those
Things? At Mons. _Peliciano_'s, reply'd he, who is as well
skill'd in them as any Man in all the _Indies_. Father _Du Bourg_
meddles with them too, and even pretends to excel in them, but
after all what he does that Way is worth nothing. The Microscopes
which I make magnify Objects inconceivably. They make a Grain of
Sand appear as big as an Ostrich's Egg, a Fly as large as an
Elephant, and they help you plainly to distinguish Bodies which
are imperceptible to the naked Eye. What I have admir'd a hundred
Times is that by the help of this little Instrument, we find that
our Bodies are cover'd with Scales one upon another like the Back
of a Carp. And my Master lays it down for a Maxim that the Air we
breathe is Water rarify'd, which only differs from that of Fish
in Proportion as the Greater is to the Less; and I believe
likewise that our Thick Air is compos'd of Particles much more
gross in Proportion to the Subtle Matter, than those of Water can
be. This Thought is founded upon Experiments which I have seen
him make several Times, and which perhaps you will not be sorry
to know.

He took two Bottles, one full of Water in which he put some small
Fish; the other of Thick Air in which he put Birds, Mice, Rats,
Squirrels, and other such Animals, after which he pump'd the Air
out of the one, and the Water out of the other. Then making an
Observation with certain Glasses of a Figure in a manner
Hyperbolical, it appear'd there was not so much difference
between the Particles of the Water which went out of the one, and
the Particles of Air that remain'd, as there was between the
Particles of Air and the Parcels of pure Matter in the other; to
which may be added that Fish live longer in the one than those
little Animals in the other. But Glasses of this Sort are of
difficult Construction, at least I have not been able hitherto to
make them to due Perfection. To this I have heard it objected
that if you take three different Vessels seal'd hermetically and
fill'd, the first with Water, the second with Air, and the third
with subtile Matter, and put a live Sparrow in each; it was
always observ'd that the Flesh of this Animal was corrupted in a
few Days in the first Vessel, whereas in the others it did not
suffer the least Alteration in several Years, From hence it seems
to follow that the Particles of Water must be more gross and more
efficacious than those of Air, because otherwise this would
proceed by degrees; that is to say, that if the Water corrupts
Flesh in eight Days, the Air must do it in sixteen, and the
subtile Matter in twenty four, supposing an Equality in their
Differences, whereas 'tis found that Water alone is capable of
this Operation. But 'tis probable that, the Greatness of the
Parts has not so much Share in this Dissolution as the Figure
and Agitation in the Agent on the one hand, and the Disposal of
those same Parts in the Patient on the other, because there are
Bodies, such as Oak-timber, which keep much longer in Water than
the Air; whereas, on the contrary, Fire destroys Ash-wood in a
Day, when Water cou'd not do it in an Age.

'Tis a curious Subject, _reply'd I_, but do you know what your
Doctor thinks about the Production of Animals? He thinks, said
he, that Generation is the only way by which they are produc'd,
whatever Argument may be invented to favour a contrary Opinion.
For as to the Instance of Fruits with Worms in them, whereof
there's no Appearance without which way they got within, this is
attended with no Difficulty. To explain this matter it must be
observ'd, that Flies and such Insects commonly creep into the
Chinks of Trees and Plants, not only to shelter themselves from
the Injuries of the Air, but to get Nourishment from the Sap; so
that if the Eggs of such Vermin happen to be in the Place where
Fruit is to be form'd, that which is nearest being encompass'd
with the first Drop of the Moisture that issues out of it for its
Formation, lies inclos'd in it, and lives in it till the Fruit is
ripe, or as long as there remains any thing for it to subsist on;
and when such Provision is spent, it penetrates thro' the
Obstacle that stops it, and makes its Way out. To confirm this
Opinion by undeniable Proof, only look upon the Gall-nut, and if
you examine its Production carefully, you will find something in
it that is surprizing.

The Gall-nut is an Excrement, or, if you please, _said he_, a
sort of little Apples that grow in the Leaves of Oaks, after this
manner: There are certain black Flies, which in the Season lay
their delicate Eggs on the lower side of the Leaves of those
great Trees, for fear they should be scorch'd by the Heat of the
Sun: As soon as these little Animals are hatch'd, they break
thro' the Covering which gives them Shade, and pierce thro' the
Veins of it, in order to be nourish'd by the Juice that comes out
of it in a great Quantity. If it then happens that one of these
Insects be environ'd with a Drop that has any due Consistency, it
stays there while such Drop congeals, grows and becomes a Fruit
at last, of the Bigness of a Pigeon's Egg, more or less, and it
does not go out of it till 'tis become a Fly, or till the Fruit
which it was in a manner produc'd, be too dry to give it
Nourishment. He confirm'd this Hypothesis by other Arguments
which I don't remember.

Three Weeks after my Imprisonment I was carry'd to the Holy
Office: The Judge having ask'd me the Place of my Birth, my Age
and my Religion (to which I answer'd very readily) conjur'd me to
declare with my own Mouth the Reason of my being detain'd,
because there was no better Method for my speedy Deliverance out
of Trouble, expecting, no doubt, that I should act with regard to
that Tribunal, as I wou'd before God, that is to say, make
Confession of my Faults, in order to obtain Mercy. I protested to
him, that I had not done or said any thing which I cou'd reproach
my self with, or which any body cou'd lawfully lay to my Charge;
that God was Witness of my Innocence, and that it must: be some
ill-minded Person, who perhaps envy'd my Success in my Business,
that had done me the Mischief to accuse me of some Crime that I
had never committed. In fine, I gave him to understand, that I
had great Dependance upon his Goodness, and that if he did but
inquire into my Life he wou'd soon be convinc'd of the Truth of
what I told him.

The same thing happened to me a fortnight after, and so on till I
had been examin'd seven times; after which the Inquisitor told
me, that since I did not care to make a true Confession of the
Crimes I had committed, as a means of recovering my Liberty, they
should proceed to declare against me. At the same time the
Secretary read the Depositions, which set forth that I had spoke
contemptibly of the Images of Saints, Crucifixes, Purgatory, and
the Infallibility of the Holy Office. What say you to that? _said
the Judge_, I own, _said I_, that when I beheld the Irregularity
of most of the Inhabitants of this City, I could not help
declaring in several Places, that I was surpriz'd to see, that
People, who scrupled to pass before a Crucifix often made of vile
Stuff, without paying a profound Reverence to it, or were afraid
to neglect one Day without falling down twenty times before
Images of Paper, made no Scruple to wallow in the Ordure of the
most infamous Vices that can be committed in a Society of
reasonable Creatures. 'Tis also true, that I spoke of Purgatory,
as a Place which I thought very unnecessary, because 'tis
sufficient for a Christian to believe that his Saviour's Blood
cleanseth him from all his Sins. And as to Infallibility, _said
I_, I don't think it can be lawfully ascrib'd to any but God, all
Men being Sinners, according to several plain Passages of the
holy Scripture. I own, _said I_, that I talk'd after this manner,
but God knows that 'twas only with a View to glorify his Name,
and from the Abhorrence I had to see so much Licentiousness in a
Place where Piety and Devotion are pretended to reign in a very
eminent Degree, and not with any Design to offend Religion or the
holy Office. You took too great a Liberty, Friend, reply'd the
Inquisitor; if you had however confess'd all this at first, it
wou'd not have been the worse for you, tho' your Guilt wou'd have
been the same. Mean time the Secretary, who wrote down my
Confession in the Nature of a formal Deposition, order'd me to
sign it, whereupon a Process was commenc'd against me; I was
condemn'd to the Gallies for Life, and all my Goods confiscated.

We were about an hundred and fifty poor Wretches, who, on the 8th
of _January_, 1670, were turn'd out of this terrible Place, some
to be banish'd, of whom our _Chinese_ was one, some to be
whipp'd, and three, who had been accus'd of Magic, were burnt
alive, particularly a poor old Man of four-score and three, whom
two different Orders of Monks had depriv'd of a very considerable
Inheritance, by forcing his Brother, who was a rich Man, to make
a Will, by which they got Possession of all that he left behind
him at his Death, on pretence of delivering his Soul forthwith
out of Purgatory. This unjust Proceeding so exasperated the old
Man, that he cou'd not help fretting at it, and raving against
those Persons whom he took to be the Authors of this Injustice,
whereupon they loaded him with Crimes that deserv'd Burning, and
did not cease to prosecute him till they saw him consum'd to
Ashes.




CHAP. XV.

_Of the Author's Departure for_ Lisbon: _How he was taken and
carry'd into Slavery, and what happened to him while he was a
Slave._


I was carry'd aboard a Ship, the Captain of which had Orders to
deliver me over to the Inquisitor at _Lisbon_; so that we set out
that same Month for _Portugal_. I was told by the way, that the
Galleys, to which I was condemn'd, were only Houses of
Correction, where the Prisoners were put to hard Labour, because
the _Portuguese_ have no Galleys at Sea. This comforted me a
little in my Misfortune. I thought it a great Happiness to be
deliver'd from the Oar, and the Cruelties exercis'd by the
Tyrants of the Committees upon the Slaves chain'd on board their
Vessels. We had a tolerable Voyage, and the finest Weather all
the way that we could reasonably expect. The most remarkable
thing that happen'd to us was, that on the 23d of _March_ a
Water-spout had like to have carry'd off our Main-topmast. The
Crew thought themselves lost, and in a Moment the most impious
Expressions were chang'd into those of Devotion, which continu'd
till the Hurricane left us. At length, after having pass'd the
_Canaries_ a long time, and being arriv'd, as I thought, at N.
Lat. 34. two Pirates came up with us one Morning at Day-break,
which fell to cannonading us stoutly. Tho' we had made a good
Voyage, yet there were several sick People on board of us; we
fought however near two Hours, during which I've had twelve Men
kill'd, and seventeen wounded. I beg Pardon of God, but I must
own I was glad that we were fallen into the Hands of Pirates,
because I thereby hoped to recover my Liberty;, but it did not
turn out as I expected. The Captain redeem'd his Ship for a Sum
of Money, and the Pirates only took thirty of the stoutest and
cleverest Men, besides my self, whom they carry'd to _Serselli_,
a little Town upon the _Mediterranean_, twenty Leagues from
Algier, and four from the River _Miromus_. There we landed on the
18th of _July_, and were sold to the highest Bidder.

My Master was a Ship-carpenter, a Man of Substance, who had at
least thirty Boys in his Service. At first, I was only employ'd
in the coarse Work; to fetch and carry, and to serve the Workmen
with what they wanted, was my proper Occupation. Afterwards I
helped to careen the Ships, to refit them, and to calk them.
There was a vast difference betwixt my Condition of Life now,
and that I was in at _Goa_ before I was detained there; yet when
I remember'd what I had suffer'd in the Inquisition, and what was
preparing for me at _Lisbon_, I thought my self extremely happy.
In short, I had a Master that was perfectly honest, who seeing
that I did my best, did not let me want for Necessaries. The
Lodging was good, the Provisions better, and he never gave me an
angry Word. This made mean hundred times call to mind the Idea
that us'd to be given of the _Barbarians_ and _Turks_ among us
Children. They were represented to us as Devils; but I must lay
it to their Commendation, that I found as much Charity, Humanity,
and Honesty among them as among the _Europeans_; nay, more, if I
may presume to say so, insomuch that I should not have been sorry
if it had been my Hap to have ended my Days among them; but
Providence was pleas'd to dispose of me otherwise; and the
Methods it made use of to bring me out of that Country are pretty
remarkable.

As there is nothing perfect in this World, _Schilt_, the Head
Footman, who was a Renegado and a Native of _Vienna_, hated me as
much as my Patron lov'd me. There was no ill Office which the
Traitor did not do me when he had an Opportunity to false
Appearances; so that my Master, who plainly saw where the Fault
lay, but could not possibly do without him, was forc'd against
the Grain to part with me: I was sold to a wealthy Nobleman, who
liv'd in the Country about three Leagues off from the Place where
I was.

This Nobleman had a Son of twenty seven or twenty eight Years of
Age, who was a Fool, and sometimes quite mad. He had lucid
Intervals of Reason, but at other times he rent his Clothes,
broke his Chain sometimes, and would have been likely to have
torn those in pieces who came in his reach, or to have kill'd
himself if he had not been prevented. An Amour was the Cause of
this Frenzy. He had courted a Girl, who wou'd not have him, upon
which he mop'd at first, and at last his Head turn'd. There was a
Necessity for some body to be near the poor Wretch Day and Night,
and they were willing to have a Man of a proper Age, Wisdom, and
Strength to watch over his Actions. I had sufficiently of the
first, and was not entirely destitute of the others: And I can
say, that I manag'd it so as was very pleasing to my Superiors.
He had not been six Weeks under my Care, but I did what I wou'd
with him, except when he fell into a Passion, and then he car'd
for no body, and all that could be done with him, was to keep him
fast bound, and to let nothing come in his way that he could do
any Damage to.

This House, or rather this stately Palace, was a Place of Resort
for all the Gentlemen thereabouts, and Foreigners were there
eternally. One Day a Bashaw arriv'd there, who was receiv'd with
very particular Tokens of Esteem and Respect. They lodg'd him in
a very magnificent Room, which look'd into the inner Court; but
towards Midnight the Gentleman was awak'd by a prodigious Rattle
in his Chamber, which, for all he was a Bashaw, frighted him, so
that he lifted up his Head, look'd first one way, then another,
and at last spy'd at one End of the Hall a Creature lying upon a
piece of _Turky_-wrought Tapistry, which he could not tell what
to make of. He was upon the point of rising out of his Bed, and
going near to examine it, or of calling out to some body else to
come to it, but while he was hesitating which to do, the Object
on which he had fix'd his Eyes rose up on a sudden, advanc'd
towards his Tent, dragging a huge Chain after him, and in very
tatter'd Clothes, with a Beard that cover'd half of his Face, and
bare-headed, so that he look'd more like a Devil than a Man. At
this Spectacle he was struck all of a Heap: But this was not all;
for the Spectre not only walk'd twenty times round the Room, but
came to the Bashaw's Bed-side, and lay down by him for half an
hour, without doing or saying any thing, and then getting up
again, marched out, pulling the Door after him very hard. When
the Morning came my Patron was surpriz'd that he had not seen his
Guest; for Breakfast had been ready a long time, and they had
promis'd one another to walk out in the Morning to get them a
Stomach. At last, about eleven o'Clock he sent a Domestic, and
bid him steal in softly, to see if he was asleep. The Man opening
the Door, and creeping into the Room, advanc'd gradually to the
Bed-side, and saw the poor Bashaw staring with his Eyes wide
open, but pale as Death, with all the other Symptoms of a man
that had scarce any Life left within him. The Servant return'd as
softly as he enter'd, made but one Leap to his Master, and told
him what he had seen. Upon this the whole House was in an Alarm;
they all ran to see him; they spoke to him, ask'd him what was
the Matter, but he spoke not a Word, so that every body believ'd
he was at the point of Death. Mean time some body having thought
fit to put a Drop of Spirit of Wine into the Palms of his Hands,
and to rub the same on his Temples, and under his Nostrils, they
began to observe that he came to himself. A little after they
forc'd him to take a little Brandy into his Mouth, which did him
a great deal of Good; he recover'd his Spirits by degrees, and
giving a deep Groan, O Heavens! _said he_, what a terrible Night
have I had! I am not much oblig'd to you, Sir, _said he_,
speaking to my Master, for putting me in a Place where Witches
have their nocturnal Meeting. What means all this, reply'd my
Master? Have you had any troublesome Dreams? we drank a little
hard last Night, which perhaps you are not us'd to, so that this
may have disturb'd your Brain, and started disagreeable Objects
to your Fancy: But come, get up, it will signify nothing, only be
of Courage, a good Dinner will set all to Rights. You must not,
reply'd he, lay the Blame either on the Wine or on my Brain;
'twas no Imagination nor Dream, I assure you I was in my right
Senses when the Devil appear'd to me. He stay'd about two Hours
in my Room, and actually lay sometime upon my Bed. But, Sir, said
my Master, who began to smell a Rat, what Shape did the Devil
assume? He appear'd in the Shape of a Man, reply'd the Bashaw,
and notwithstanding the little Light that glimmer'd in at the
Windows, I observ'd, that he was all over ragged, that he had a
sorrowful Countenance, thin Jaws, _&c_. Don't say a Word more,
said my Patron, interrupting him, I am troubled at this Accident.
I am sorry to say it, but I must tell you, that the Man you saw
is my Son; and having given Orders that he shou'd be brought, the
Bashaw was in amaze the very Moment he saw him. I can't deny,
said he, but that's the very Man I saw last Night, who put my
Brains so much upon the Rack. He talk'd in such a manner as made
the Fool almost burst with Laughter, and gave him an Opportunity
to tell him with his own Mouth the Prank that he had play'd. This
anger'd the Bashaw, so that he ask'd if no body was appointed to
look after him, and some body answering in the Affirmative, he
desir'd to see him. Immediately I was sent for, and when I came
before him, Is it you, _said he_, you Dog, that is set over this
young Gentleman to take care of him? Yes, Sir, _said I_. And
what's the Reason then that you let him loose last Night?
_reply'd he_. He was not ty'd, _said I_. He had been well for
some Days past, so that I have not kept so strict a Watch upon
him as usual, but have ventur'd to take my Rest by him. During
this he made an Excursion, and came to alarm you, as I am told,
at which I am really concern'd to the last degree, and I ask your
Pardon, promising you it shall be so no more. No more, you cursed
Dog, _reply'd he_, I believe it won't, at least with respect to
me, for I shall never recover it. I have a great Respect for
those that you belong to; but 'tis well for you that I am not
able to rise; for perhaps I should have been very outragious,
and you might have run the risque to have had your Head broke.
Get out of my Sight, you Wretch, and pray to God, that I may not
happen to meet you. Then addressing his Speech to my Master, If
you would oblige me, Sir, said he, you will dismiss this
Scoundrel upon the Spot, that I mayn't hear his Name mention'd
any more. I had not been many Months in this Castle, during which
the other Domestics did not owe me any Grudges, and my Master had
a very great Respect for me, because of the Care I took of his
Son, who really gave me a great deal of Trouble. Yet for all this
the good Man was oblig'd in Complaisance to turn me away.

I was carry'd into the City to be sold to the first Bidder; there
I learnt that the head Footman I mention'd ere now was dead, so
that I sent to ask my old Master, or Patron, whether he wou'd
please to admit me into his Service. He was overjoy'd to have me
again, and I as glad to live again with a Person who had all the
Regard imaginable for me while I dwelt with him. About three
Weeks after, Monsieur the _Bashaw_, accompany'd with a fine
Retinue came to see our Yard. I knew him when he was a hundred
Paces off. His Threats had made such an Impression on my Mind,
that I ran away with all the speed I cou'd. He did not know it
was I, because the next Day, after the Vision, when he was
recover'd of the Fright and his Passion entirely over, he ask'd
what was become of me; and when he was told that I was gone, he
seem'd to be sorry at it, order'd me to be sent for immediately,
because he desir'd to speak with me, with an Assurance upon his
Word and Honour that he wou'd not hurt a Hair of my Head.
Notwithstanding this, I trembled when I went to him, which he
observ'd and burst out into Laughter, which he did no doubt to
hearten me. He ask'd me several indifferent Questions, to which I
answer'd with all the Submission possible. At length he ask'd me,
whether, in case my present Master was willing to part with me, I
shou'd not be very glad to return and live with the Gentleman
whose Service I had so lately quitted upon his Account? Having
made him sensible that I cou'd not act as I pleas'd in that
Affair, I cou'd make him no Answer but that I was perfectly well
where I was. Keep then in that Mind, said he, 'tis to be sure as
agreeable to be in the Company of People of Sense, as to be
eternally taking care of a Lunatic; and having given me Money to
drink his Health, he sent me about my Business.

This little Adventure was not the only one that happen'd to me
during my Slavery, but the others were of such small Moment that
I pass them over in Silence. As to the Disputes to which I was
often subject, so far as to be oblig'd sometimes to proceed to
Blows, the Detail of them wou'd take up too much of the Readers
Time and Patience. The _Turks_ are generally ignorant, and I
cou'd hear nothing from 'em but cold Railleries against our
crucify'd Jesus, which I bore with Patience; because on the one
hand, they don't believe in Christ; and on the other, they were
upon their own Ground, and I had no Protection to hope for from
any Body. But I had much ado to contain my self when I was
attack'd by Christian Renegadoes.

Among others there was a _Gascon_ Disputant, who was really the
boldest Atheist or Deist that I ever saw. He was perfectly
good-natur'd; but when he was in a rallying Mood, he turn'd every
thing into Ridicule, and confounded our greatest Mysteries with
the Whimsies of the _Jewish_ Talmud and the Legends of the
_Romish_ Church. My Father, said he, was assassinated one Day as
he was going in Pilgrimage to our Lady of _Loretto_: A fine
Reward this for so good a Catholick as he was! My Mother who
professed the _Romish_ Religion was dragoon'd and murder'd for
her obstinate Disobedience to the Orders of the Court. And I my
self in my Voyage from _France_ to _Holland_, was taken by
Pirates, so that in avoiding Persecution I fell into Slavery.

As I found him a young Man not only of great Wit and Learning,
but also of a vast deal of Good-nature, (for all that knew him
there mightily extoll'd his beneficent and friendly Temper) I
very much pity'd him, and endeavour'd several times to reclaim
him from his dangerous Sentiments with respect to Religion. We
had frequent Conversations upon that Head, and I had great Hopes
that in time I might be able to set him in the right Road of
Truth; but an unhappy Accident shorten'd his Days before Heaven
permitted me to perfect this charitable Work. It wou'd be too
tedious to mention all the Disputes we had together, so that I
shall but just glance over some of the chief Points.

When I reproach'd him with changing his Religion and professing
the Mahometan, which by the way he did not believe a tittle of,
he made me Answer that after a due Examination of the several
Religious that had come to his Knowledge, he found nothing in any
one of 'em that cou'd satisfy a rational Man, and that therefore
he saw nothing which ought to hinder a wise Man from conforming
at least externally to the prevailing Religion of the Country
where he dwells, just as People accustom themselves to the Habits
and Manners of a Country for fear of being thought ridiculous by
appearing singular. And because I am like to gain more Confidence
and Esteem among the People of this Country by conforming to
their way of Worship, I shou'd be a great Simpleton, said he, if
I depriv'd my self of that Advantage by a silly Attachment to
another, which is a hundred times more impertinent and absurd. I
answer'd him, that I was extremely surpriz'd to hear a Man talk
at that rate who had been educated in the Christian Religion, and
by his Profession ought to know it the better for having
throughly study'd it. 'Tis for that very reason, reply'd he, my
Friend, that I speak thus of it, because I have well examin'd it
and have discover'd its Folly and Ridicule. But tho' you are so
old, 'tis probable you have not yet shaken off the Yoke of the
Prejudices of Education, and that you implicitly adhere to what
you learnt from your Nurse or your Chaplain without farther
Inquiry. I told him, that I had travell'd and seen more of the
World than he thought, and that I had heard the Arguments of
People of various Sentiments in the Article of Religion, but that
I had never met with any System which was so worthy of God, so
agreeable to Man, and which had so many Marks of Truth as the
Christian Religion. That my Profession had not permitted me in my
Youth to study religious Controversies so throughly as he had,
but that nevertheless, I wou'd undertake to defend against all
his Attacks the principal Truths of Christian Religion; as the
Existence of a God; the Creation of the World; the Immortality of
the Soul; the Fall of Man; the Redemption of Mankind by Jesus
Christ; the Truth and Divinity of the sacred Scriptures, on which
all the rest is founded; and the Necessity--

Hold, said he, there's enough, and if you can defend those
Articles, I'll agree to any that you shall please to add. We will
begin at the last, if you please, and so go back to the first.
You know very well, said he, that Christians are not all of one
Opinion with regard to the Inspiration of the Holy Scriptures.
Some think the whole inspir'd even to the least Word; others
reject this Opinion, and only maintain in the general, that with
regard to the Matter, the Holy-Spirit so far guided the Writers
of those sacred Books, that they cou'd not commit any Error in
the Facts which they relate, nor in the Doctrine which they
teach. Pray tell me which of these two Opinions you pretend to
embrace?

I am not for the first, said I, and I think a Man must be quite
void of Sense to maintain it, if he has read the holy Books with
ever so little Attention. But as to the latter, it is supported
by convincing Arguments. Not to insist upon the great Antiquity
of the first Books of the Holy Scripture, which you will own to
me, however, to be the oldest Monuments in the World, and which
were written before the Art of Writing was known to other
Nations; the marvellous Things which are contain'd in those
Scriptures, the Miracles which God wrought to confirm the
Revelation, and the Predictions of the holy Prophets of which we
have seen a great part accomplish'd, and wait for the fulfilling
of the rest, are Things which surpass all that Man can do, and
which none but God can be the Author of.

You are in the right, said he, not to insist upon the Antiquity
of your sacred Books, because it wou'd not be of any Advantage to
you. For a Romance, or an Imposture, may be as ancient and more
ancient than a true History, this is nothing to the purpose.
Nevertheless, I am very far from admitting those Books to be so
old as you pretend, and I defy you or any body, to prove that any
of those Books was in being before the time of _Esdras_, that is
to say, above a thousand Years after _Moses_, who according to
you wrote the first Books. And if we attentively read the Books
ascrib'd to _Moses_, we shall find a great many Passages which
shew that they were written long after his Time. He quoted
several which I pass over in Silence to avoid being tedious. Then
as to your Argument, said he, which is founded upon the
miraculous Things contain'd in the Scriptures, I draw a
Conclusion from it quite contrary to yours. For the more a Book
contains of what is marvellous and extraordinary, the more 'tis
liable to Suspicion. This is the Supposition you your self wou'd
form of any other Book, and if you don't think so of this, 'tis
only the Effect: of your Prepossession which is very palpable,
because it inclines you to admit such Evidence to prove the Truth
of a Book as wou'd, if you were not prejudic'd in your Judgment,
serve for the effectual Destruction of its Credit. As to the
Miracles you talk of, they are only written in that Book of which
you wou'd have them brought as Proofs, and therefore, as I have
already said, they must tend rather to explode it. Every
indifferent unprejudic'd Person receives a Relation or History of
past Transactions only according to the Degrees of Probability
with which it is attended, and judges it to be false or romantick
by the marvellous or extraordinary Facts which it contains; for
Nature was always the same at all times, and Truth was ever plain
and natural. As to the Proprieties you mention'd, all the
Accomplishments which are related in the same Book with the
Predictions, prove nothing but that they are part of the same
Romance, and were forg'd at the same time; and as for those which
are pretended to have happen'd since, the Events have so little
Connection with the Predictions of which they are construed to be
the Accomplishment, that nothing but the Force of Prejudice can
discover their Conformity. He quoted a great number of Instances
to me to support what he had said, but I choose not to mention
them here.

Moreover, said he, if you were well acquainted with the History
of the Canon of those sacred Writings, not only of the Old
Testament which you derive from the _Jews_, an ignorant
superstitious People as ever liv'd, who were not agreed neither
as to the Truth and Authority of every part of it, but also of
the New Testament as it is now admitted among the generality of
Christians, you wou'd find so much Ignorance, Superstition,
Uncertainty and Perplexity in it, that you your self wou'd be
asham'd of it. Thereupon he enter'd into the History of the
Canon, and of the Manner how, and Time when it was form'd; and he
talk'd to me of the Factions and Disputes among the Members of
the Council of _Laodicea_, and some others, with regard to the
several Gospels, Acts, Epistles, _&c_. which the several Churches
or Societies of Christians had receiv'd for true, exclusive of
others; of the Difficulties and Perplexities on that Head, and
how some rejected what others receiv'd, together with the Reasons
urg'd on both sides, insomuch that I was astonish'd to find what
a Treasure of curious Things he had stor'd up in his Memory.

I reply'd, That _Moses_ was in possession of the Credit of having
written the _Pentateuch_, and that to destroy this there must be
Proofs brought, not meer Assertions. I put him in mind that
_Ezra_ (whom he seem'd to think the Author of it) was not able,
if we may judge by that undoubted Piece of His, to have compos'd
what passes under _Moses_'s Name: and that, if he were able, yet
it was next to impossible for Him to have made the whole _Jewish_
Nation believe (as they appear constantly to have done) that what
he wrote, had been in being all along before the Captivity. I
said that the miraculous Facts recorded in them did not, in my
Judgment, take off from their Probability because they are all
ascribed to a Divine Power, and are mention'd as serving some
great End and Purpose: and that as to the Prophesies, some of
those in _Isaiah_ and _Daniel_ are so visibly connected with the
Accomplishment in _Jesus_, that a Man must be blind (I thought)
not to discover their Conformity. I was going on to defend the
Authority of the Books of the New Testament, and began to
observe, That, notwithstanding any Disputes in the Council of
_Laodicea_, or any other Council, yet from the Beginning some of
our Gospels and Epistles had been receiv'd as of Divine
Authority; and that Christianity, as to the main of it, would
stand firm, if all the Pieces which had ever been doubted of by
any Number of Christians, were thrown quite out of the Inquiry.

Upon this he turn'd the Discourse, and said, What Notion can you
have of God, who according to you is the Sovereign Lord of the
whole Universe, and can dispose of all its Parts as he pleaseth;
if you believe that in order to explain his Will to Mankind, he
was under a Necessity of imploying obscure, ignorant, or
enthusiastical Persons to write Books, or prophesy, or preach in
a remote Corner of the Earth, and to a Herd of ignorant People,
without making it known to the learned and polite Nations? Do you
think that was the right Method to make all Mankind sensible of
so necessary a Thing as the Will of God? Has not he who created
and dispos'd of every thing according to his good Pleasure, and
without any Possibility of being hinder'd in it, has he not put
all Things in the Condition he at first design'd them? And is
not that his Will which we call the Order, Course, or Voice of
Nature? To support any other particular Will in that infinitely
perfect Being, is to suppose Alteration and Imperfection which is
contrary to his Nature. And to imagine that he communicates to
some Persons, and conceals from many others the Rules to which he
wou'd have all Men conform, is to suppose him guilty of an unjust
Partiality unworthy of his divine Nature. Therefore it may surely
be concluded, that whatever is call'd divine Revelation in one
Country or another, is really nothing but an Imposture founded
upon the Weakness of Mankind in general, and invented by such as
seek to impose upon them from certain Views and Designs.

I made him answer, that if Man had continued in that State of
Perfection wherein the Creator at first plac'd him, he wou'd not
perhaps have needed a Revelation to serve as a Rule to his
Actions, but since he lost that Happiness by his Fault, he is so
corrupted and so prone to Wickedness, that he not only requires
Revelation, but the special Grace of his Creator for--

Hold there, said he, I find you are going to tell me of the Fall
of Man and all its Consequences, such as the Corruption of his
Nature, Original Sin, the Redemption of Mankind, _&c_. This, if
you please, shall be the Subject of our Conversation for the
remainder of this Evening. Your Divines, said he, are much in the
right to call those Mysteries the stumbling Block of humane
Reason, for surely they are incomprehensible by Reason and good
Sense. But before I enter into the particular Examination of
these Articles, give me Leave to entertain you with a Fable which
I had from an _Arabian_ Philosopher, who had been a great
Traveller, and said he made it to give his Friends an Idea of the
Mythology of a certain Nation that he had seen.


The Fable of the BEES.

There was formerly, said he, a great and potent King, Sovereign
of one of the Islands in the Ocean, whose Power was such that no
other King equall'd it, and all his Subjects were so submissive
to him that they did whatever he requir'd, and his Will was so
far the Rule of all their Actions that they cou'd not do
otherwise. His Goodness was as great as his Power, and his Wisdom
as great as both. In a word, he possess'd all Perfections in the
highest Degree. This King found the said Island Desert, but he
planted it, fill'd it with Inhabitants and Animals of all sorts,
and caus'd it to be cultivated, so that it produc'd all
Necessaries not only for the Sustenance, but for the Conveniency
and Pleasure of all the Inhabitants.

The King's Palace was the greatest and most magnificent that can
be imagin'd, and situate in the middle of the finest Gardens that
were ever seen. This Monarch who perfectly understood every
thing, form'd a Plan to himself of the finest Production of which
Nature was capable, and then gave Orders it shou'd be executed,
which was done upon the Spot; for such was the Extent of his
Power, that all Things both animate and inanimate conform'd
exactly to his Will and immediately submitted to his Law. There
were also Parks, Meadows, and Woods all admirably fine, and full
of all sorts of Animals, Birds, and Insects that cou'd be desir'd
either for Use or Pleasure. I shou'd have a great many strange
things to tell you, were I to enter into the Detail of every
thing relating to all those Animals, _&c._ For this Reason I
shall only tell you what I heard most remarkable concerning one
single Species of Insects, _viz._ The Bees.

In this Island there was a multitude of Bees, and as the King's
care was extended to every thing, he so order'd it that there
were abundance of Flowers every where to nourish them. But in a
Nook of one of the King's Flower-Gardens there was a particular
sort of Flower, which he forbad the Bees to touch: Not that those
Flowers were hurtful to the Bees, or that the Monarch valu'd them
more than any of the other Flowers, but, as I was told, because
he had a mind to try their Obedience. It happen'd not long after,
that some of the Bees forgetting the Order, or not much regarding
it, went and suck'd those Flowers. The King immediately perceiv'd
it, and was so incens'd at it that; he resolv'd to drive all the
Bees out of the Island, and even swore, so great was his Wrath,
that he wou'd not spare one Bee. But some time after, when the
Heat of his Indignation was abated, he regretted that he had
pass'd so severe a Sentence and some remains of Pity for those
poor Bees engag'd the Monarch, who was Goodness and Mercy it
self, to find out some Expedient to bring them off.

The King had an only Son whom he lov'd infinitely more than all
things in the World, and it was his Pleasure that this Son shou'd
be the Mediator to make Peace between him and the Bees. But to
the end that this Peace might be made in a manner consistent with
the King's Dignity, and without wounding his Honour and his
Justice, which were concern'd to maintain the Oath that he had
sworn, there was a Necessity for this welbeloved Son to bear all
the Pains due to the Bees, and that for this purpose he shou'd
become a Bee himself. When this Metamorphosis was made, the Son
went in the form of a Bee to one of the worst Hives in the whole
Island, where he found it Labour in vain to advise the other Bees
to be more circumspect and more observant of the King's Orders,
for they laugh'd him to Scorn, abus'd him, and at last stung him
to Death. And what was worse than all, at the same time he must
bear the whole Weight of his Father's Wrath and Indignation, who
was resolv'd to revenge the Fault of the Bees upon him. As soon
as this Son was dead, he returned to his Father, and fell to
interceding for the poor Bees, whose Debt he had paid, and for
whose Crime he had suffer'd; which Mediation he still continues
with so much Success, that the King has taken Companion of
several of those Bees and forgiven them their Faults, provided
they adhere strictly to his Son as many intire Bee-hives have
already done. It does not appear that these Bees so favour'd make
more Honey, or are more at Ease than the others, but the Reason
of it is (as they are taught by certain Hornets who have
introduc'd themselves in great numbers into all those Hives)
that they will be more sensible of the Benefit that results to
them from it after they are dead.

'Tis these Hornets that teach the Bees, which are inclin'd to
hearken to them, all this Story, together with a multitude of
Circumstances that are not so much as touch'd here. And in the
several Hives, both the Story and Circumstances are so vary'd
that some receive it one way, and others another, and some
believe nothing at all of the matter. These latter are threaten'd
by the Hornets with very severe Punishment after Death, whereas
the Bees which follow their Advice will be sure then to receive
great Rewards. When they are told, that 'tis plain that all Bees
when they die, fall to the Ground and rot away either in Dust or
Dirt, they gravely answer that 'tis only their Bodies that
perish, but that their buzzing Part which is somewhat different
from their Bodies, is to enjoy the Rewards or suffer the
Punishments with which they have threaten'd 'em. For they make
them believe that when a Bee which has follow'd the Advice of the
Hornets, and given them the greatest part of his Honey, comes to
die, his Buzz goes directly to the King's Palace and contributes
to fill his great Hall of Audience with Musick, with which they
say that Monarch is very much delighted. Whereas the buzzing Part
of a Bee that acts after another manner, goes after its Death to
a great Cave under Ground, where 'tis benumm'd with the Cold, and
makes a very disagreeable Noise by reason of the infinite Torture
it there suffers. There's a prodigious number of other such
Chimeras, with which these Hornets are continually filling the
Heads of the poor Bees; for as they are excus'd from working and
live upon the Labour of the Bees, all they have to do is to
invent something to terrify the Bees and keep them in a State of
Dependance, in which they have succeeded so well, that we see
abundance of these poor Insects so full of Apprehension of what
may happen to their bulging Part after Death, that they cannot
with Pleasure eat the Honey they have made, nor do any things as
they shou'd for the support of their Lives. And when there happen
to be any Bees which in Contempt of such Chimeras apply to their
Work and turn a deaf Ear to the Hornets, they incense the other
Bees against them, and generally kill them, or at least turn them
out of their Hives as dangerous and seditious Creatures. It often
happens that when the Hornets are at Variance with one another,
all the Bees of a Hive take part with one Side or other, and
being animated by the Hornets they fall upon one another with so
much Fury, that we generally find half of the Bees of a Hive
kill'd, because they had not the same Conception of the Chimeras
of the Hornets as the others had. Sometimes too those Hornets
engage whole Bee-hives to make War against other Bee-hives, so
that frequently we see several thousands kill'd on both Sides,
only for supporting the Chimeras of the Hornets of their own Sect
against those of others. The Bees also expose themselves
generally very cheerfully to this Slaughter, upon the Assurance
given them by the Hornets of one Party as well as another, that
they thereby do very great Service to the King who will take it
well at their Hands, and admit their buzzing Part into his great
Hall preferably to those of many others. For they pretend to know
the Orders and Will of the King much better than the other Bees,
because certain Hornets, say they, who liv'd several Ages before
them, heard 'em from the King's own Lips, and transmitted 'em
down to them, partly impress'd upon Wax, and partly by the
Reports of their Predecessors. 'Tis upon this Foundation that the
Hornets usurp so much Authority over the Bees throughout the
whole Island (for there are Hornets which have insinuated
themselves into almost all the Hives) and extend their Tyranny so
far as to render those poor Insects perfectly miserable. They
forbid them on certain Days to suck the Flowers, which they are
permitted to do on others, and likewise prohibit their making Wax
and Honey on certain other Days, because, say they, 'tis the
King's Will and Pleasure.

After he had finish'd his impertinent Fable, I told him, that I
saw the End of it very plainly, but that it only prov'd how Men
of Wit could turn any thing into Ridicule: I shew'd him that the
Comparison fail'd in almost every Circumstance; particularly I
observ'd, That tho' the eating of the Fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge was forbidden to _Adam_ upon a severe Penalty, yet when
he had eaten of it, God is represented in Scripture as so far
from being in Wrath, and from Swearing not to spare any of the
Human Race; (as the Fable wou'd insinuate), that the Sentence
pronounced was softned with the Promise of a Saviour, under the
Title of the _Seed of the Woman_: I told him, that the buzzing
Part of the Bee does by no means answer to the Soul of Man: that
if Christians maintained, that the speaking Part of Man had gone
to Heaven or Hell after his Decease, there would have been some
Justness in the Fable: but that the Fact (as he well knew) was
quite otherwise. I shew'd him, that the Distinction of Soul and
Body was not peculiar to the Christian Religion, but common to
all other Religions, and was believ'd in Countries where no
Revelation had reach'd. I was going on in this Strain, but it was
then too late, and it was high time to part and go to bed: and I
had no other Opportunity of talking with him again on these
important Subjects; for some time after, this poor Man and
another carrying along a great Beam upon their Shoulders, he fell
down, by which his Head was so bruis'd that he dy'd before he had
time for Repentance, which I look'd upon as a just Punishment
from Heaven, because he had made such an ill Use of his Wit and
Learning.

I had been fourteen or fifteen Years at _Sercelli_, when it
happen'd, one Day as I was at work in refitting a Ship, I
discover'd a Hole towards the Middle, two Foot from the Keel: I
was oblig'd in order to make my Work good and lasting, to go down
into the Ship's Hold, where, as I was removing the great Flints
and Gravel, which serve to ballast the Ship, I discover'd a
Bundle bigger than my two Fists. The out-side Wrapper was a
Callico Handkerchief, in which there was a Boot Hose of Silk, and
in that Boot Hose, a blue Sock, in which there was a Purse with
three hundred eighty five good Guineas. My first Care was to
conceal my Treasure in a sure Place, where no Body wou'd go and
look for it, and notwithstanding my Heart was full of Joy, I
took great care not to make the least Discovery that I was a
Penny richer than before.

About six Months after this, the _English_ Consul at _Algier_,
having Business at our Town, and caming with two other young
Gentlemen to see if we had any Ships upon the Stocks, one of my
Comrades happen'd just at that time to call out to me to lend him
a helping Hand to remove a Mast he was then at work upon, when
Mr. _Elliot_, who heard me call'd by the Name of _Massey_, came
up to me and ask'd me _What Countryman I was_? I told him.
There's a good Friend of mine, said he, a Silkman at _London_,
who is your Countryman, and his Name is _John Massey_. I know
very well, said I, that I left a Brother of that Name behind me,
six Years younger than me, but it being now fifty Years ago, and
having not heard from my Family ever since, nor they probably
from me, 'tis impossible I can be certain whether that's the Man.
What you now say, reply'd the Consul, makes me believe you are
Brothers, for my Friend can't be less than sixty Years of Age,
and he has often talk'd to me of a Brother that he very much
lamented, who he suppos'd had been a long time dead. Thereupon I
was forc'd to tell him in a few Words, by what Misfortune I
became a Slave in _Africa_, and he made an Offer to write to my
Brother, to desire him to find out some Expedient to procure my
Deliverance in my old Age. I then declar'd to him in Confidence
that I had Money. If so, said he, I'll find Ways and Means to set
you at Liberty, but you must not make any shew of your
Substance; Leave every thing; to my Management, and don't you
meddle or make. Farewel. I kiss'd his Hand, and recommended
myself to his Favour.

About a Month after, my Master, to my very great Surprize, call'd
me to him, and taking me by the Hand, said, I am overjoy'd,
Friend, that you are going to return to your own Country. Mr.
_Elliot_ has bargain'd with me for your Ransom. Go to _Algier_
and meet him. I wish you a good Voyage. At these Words I embrac'd
him, and thank'd him for his Civilities, and the Regard he had
always shewn to me from the very first Day of my Arrival. We both
shed Tears at parting as if we had been Brothers. From thence I
went to take Leave of my Comrades, and then set out for _Algier_,
where the Consul receiv'd me with extraordinary Courtesy. I told
him down thirty five Guineas, which, he said; he was to pay for
my Liberty, but had it not been for his Credit and my Age, such a
trifling Sum wou'd not have, set me free.




CHAP. XVI.

_Continuation of the Adventures of_ Peter Hudde _who is mention'd
in the second Chapter; and the Author's Arrival at_ London.


I stay'd above a Month at _Algier_ before I embark'd for
_London_, during which it happen'd that a _Turkish_ Pirate
brought a _French_ Galley into _Algier_. Mr. _Elliot_ immediately
obtain'd a List of her Crew in order to see whether there was not
the Name of some Person that he knew, or of some Countryman of
his in the Number of her Slaves. He caus'd it to be read in my
Presence, and seem'd astonish'd to find the Name of a Man there
whom he was very intimate with at _London_. I was as much
surpriz'd at the Name of _Peter Hudde_, which he observ'd, and
ask'd me the Reason. To satisfy his Curiosity, I gave him an
Account of him, after which we went together to the Place where
the Galley-Slaves were confin'd. As soon as we arriv'd there, we
both inquir'd for our Men. His Friend had been wounded in Battle,
and expir'd not above a Quarter of an Hour before we came: The
other came in an Instant. Is your Name _Peter Hudde_? said I,
Yes, said he; Did I never see you at _Lisbon_, continued I; That
might be, said he, but it must have been a great while ago then.
That's true, said I, for it was, if I am not mistaken, so long
ago as 1643 or 1644. There was one _Van Dyke_ at that Time, a
Factor, did you know him? You turn pale, but you are in no
Danger here; tho' indeed it must be confess'd that you play'd him
a scurvy Trick. I cannot deny it, said the Galley-Slave, I was
the Man that robb'd him of the Sum of 300 Ducats; for which
enormous Sin and others that I have committed, I beg God to
forgive me. I have smarted sufficiently for it in this World, but
I hope he will be merciful to me in the next. That's speaking
like a Christian, _said I_, and 'tis a Happiness for you that
Providence does you the Favour to put you upon Repentance of your
Crimes. But pray tell me, why and when you were condemn'd to the
Gallies. The Remembrance of it, Sir, _said he_, makes me tremble,
and I wish you would excuse me from so unpleasant a Narrative
which can only tend to renew my Sorrow. We commended him for the
good Disposition of his Mind, and then I insisted upon my Demand,
in which I was seconded by the Consul. Well then, Gentlemen,
_said he_, I will satisfy you, as well to give you Proofs of my
Obedience, as to acknowledge the just Punishment of my Crimes.

After I had robb'd Mr. _Van Dyke_, I embark'd for _Nantes,_ where
by the Name of _Vander Stel_, and pretending to be Nephew to a
famous Wine-Merchant at _Rotterdam_, I soon contracted an
Acquaintance with all the _Dutch_ Merchants there. The Caresses
which I received from those honest People are inexpressible; for
there was scarce a Day but I was invited to magnificent
Entertainments at one or other of their Houses. During this an
Intendant arriv'd from _Languedoc_ who was well known to several
of those Gentlemen whose Houses I frequented. This gave me an
Opportunity to scrape an Acquaintance with him. He was glad to
see me, and as he delighted in Gaming he was rejoyc'd to find me
in the same Disposition. Sometimes we play'd a Game at Chess, and
we spent many Afternoons at Picquet, but never so as to win much
of either. At length as I went one Day to see him, I had the
Happiness to find him alone in his Room uneasy for want of some
Company to pass the Time with. He call'd for the Cards, and we
play'd at Ombre. He was a Dab at that Game, but I was too cunning
for him. Whatever was his Design, 'tis certain that he encourag'd
me to drink more than usual, at which I was not a little pleas'd
because I imagin'd that when he had drank his Skin full of Wine,
it would prevent him from discovering my foul Play. In short, I
won 50 Pistoles of him in less than four Hours Time, at which he
seem'd astonish'd, and desir'd I would give him Revenge at
Lansquenet; which was the very Thing I wanted. However, I
pretended not to understand that Game very well, and told him,
that unless Fortune favour'd me as she had done before, it was
impossible but I should lose my Money and my Breeches too. Now my
Adversary began to lose Patience. We play'd high, and tho' I let
him win now and then in order to keep him in Temper, yet about
Midnight when we left off, I had won above 3000 Crowns of him,
which he told me down two Days after in ready Cash. This Luck
made me wonderful rich. I sew'd 500 Ducats in a Piece of Shammy
Leather of which I made a Belt and wore if under my Shirt, and
then I set out for _Avignon_, the Intendant going out of the
Town at the same Time another Way. Upon the Road I hir'd a
Footman, and resum'd my old Name of _Heudde_.

My expensive Way of living at this new Stage made every body
believe that I was a Person of the first Rank, I made no Scruple
to introduce myself into the best of Companies, and they took a
Pride in mine. After I had been there about Fortnight or three
Weeks, I happened to meet a Wench in the Street of about twenty
Years of Age the finest Beauty I had ever seen in all my Life. I
let her pass me, and when she was fifty Paces behind me I turn'd
back and follow'd her at a Distance 'till she went into a House.
Upon this I order'd my Footman to inquire privately if she dwelt
there, and what her Parents were. He brought me an Account of
every particular, and told me that her Father was a Jew Merchant
who dealt largely in jewels. I went next Day to his House on
Pretence that I wanted a small Diamond of 25 or 30 Pistoles, and
in order to settle a closer Correspondence with him, I told him
my Name and Country. To this I added that I knew several _Jews_
at Amsterdam, and mention'd some to him whom he knew. In fine, I
left no Stone unturn'd to induce him to give me Admittance to his
House, without speaking a Word to him either of Wife or Daughter.
This first Visit succeeded so well that I attempted to make a
second. I actually bought a Ring by which the Usurer could not
get less than one third, but that was no great Matter. The Hopes
of more considerable Gain tempted: him to invite me often to his
House. I did not fail to improve his Civility, and made
Preparation to treat him now and then at my Quarters.

Every thing went swimmingly, but I did not see that it advanc'd
my Design, so that I concluded I must take another Course. As I
was musing what to do, it luckily happen'd that at our very first
Interview he was accompany'd with another _Jew_. I drew them by
degrees to talk of the Difference of Religions, which engag'd us
in a Dispute. I pretended that 'till then I did not know the
Force of their Arguments, and the Weakness of ours, with regard
to the _Messiah_. The Hopes of making a Proselyte, induc'd them
to desire that we might meet as often as possible in order to
have an Opportunity to treat the matter thoroughly. Thereupon I
deny'd that I might be present at their public Worship. They
open'd the Doors of their Synagogue to me with Joy, I caus'd
myself to be instructed in their Religion, and at last being
convinc'd of my Errors by the Truth of their Principles, they
circumcis'd me, and I became a _Jew_. As soon as this was done, I
was solemnly initiated into all their Mysteries, I ran thro' all
their Ceremonies, and the Fair Sex who thought me a Saint,
caress'd and honour'd me as well as the Men. As for my part there
was no Complaisance which I did not put in Practice to them,
especially I carry'd it with such a Respect to the fair Jewels as
was not disagreeable to her. Besides, I often made her small
Presents which she receiv'd with Pleasure, and which her Mother
did not dislike, but the Father who was covetous, tho' he had a
vast Fortune to give with this only Daughter, frown'd at this
little Intercourse of Civilities.

Mean time, I cut a grand Figure but yet without running into
Extravagance: He was surpriz'd at my way of Living, mad to know
what Bottom I had to support it, and made Inquiry every where but
could not hear the least Tidings. When I saw that, I sent my
Footman to a Friend of mine a Jew Goldsmith to buy a couple of
Crucibles, and not to speak a Word of it to any Body. The
Jeweller it seems frequented that House, so that three Days
after, my Footman was perfectly surpriz'd, when going to my
Friend the Goldsmith's House, to know if he was at Leisure to
receive me, the Jeweller took him apart into a Room, treated him
with a Glass of his best Wine, and talking about Crucibles, ask'd
him slily what I meant to do with mine. My Boy, whom I had
tutor'd beforehand, pretended at first to be ignorant of the
matter in order to make him think there was some Mystery in it:
At last after a great many Questions on one hand, and swearing on
the other that his Master would break his Neck if he reveal'd it
to any Body, he told it him as a Secret that was to remain so for
ever betwixt them two, that I made use of it to increase Gold,
and that I was one of the best Chymists in _Europe_. This which
he thought an ingenuous Confession, and not improbable, had its
desir'd Effect. _Mascado_, which was the Jeweller's Name, was
overjoy'd he had discover'd this, but he did not know which way
to prevail on me to trust him with the Secret. First of all he
sifted me concerning the nature of my Effects, whether they
consisted in Money, Houses or Land, which way I was supply'd
with Cash from my own Country, and then offer'd to remit me some
for a small Charge. He ask'd if I intended to travel always,
whether it would not be more for my Advantage to settle in some
Place or other, and the like. I answer'd all this in a loose
manner, which could not be very satisfactory to him. And when he
saw that he could get nothing out of the Master, he address'd
himself a second time to the Domestic, and by the Virtue of
Promises and a small Present, he made him promise that the first
time I went about the Grand Work he would not fail to give him
Notice.

Ten Days after this, I put my Crucibles on the Fire, and tho' I
was stripp'd as it were to my Shirt, I was in such a Heat with
blowing and stirring that no Vermilion was redder than my Face.
Mean time my Servant ran to _Mascado_'s House to inform him what
was doing, on pretence that I had sent him out to buy some Drams
of _Aqua Regalis_, so that the one was scarce return'd but the
other came to ask if I was at Home. The Maid who then happen'd to
be at the Gate, came and knock'd at my Door telling my Man that
some Body wanted to speak with me, and that she had told him I
was in my Chamber. I pretended to be angry with her for it, and
sent out the Footman to tell him that I was not to be spoke with.
The _Jew_ made a Pish at that, and entering bluntly into my Room,
I beg your Pardon, Sir, _said he_, you have been so retir'd since
your Conversion that I thought you was engag'd in some Act of
Devotion, and for fear that too much of it might throw you into
a Fit of Melancholy and give you the Vapours, which it seems you
were lately afflicted with, I took the Liberty of bolting in
without being introduc'd, on purpose to chat with you for an
Hour, and to invite you to spend the Evening at my House. But
what are you doing here? _continued he_. Are you turn'd Chymist?
What have you there in those Crucibles? Upon my Faith, I believe
you are in quell of the Philosopher's Stone. Let us call another
Cause, _said I_, seeming to be very much confounded: We must be
doing something or other while we live in this World; and other
Things I said, of which 'tis needless to give you our Dialogue.
But after many Circumlocutions, and upon Condition he would not
speak of it, the Conclusion was that I had the Art of multiplying
Gold. To be plain with you, _said he_, I was surpriz'd to see how
expensively you liv'd without any visible Way to maintain it, or
speaking to any Body to help you to Money. But is your Art
certain, and does it never fail? The next Time that I go to work,
_said I_, you shall see an Experiment of it.

Some Days after this I appointed a Time, and bade him bring me
ten Ducats. He cast those ten Pieces of Gold into one of my
Crucibles, and I threw my Powder of Multiplication into the
other. Then I mix'd the whole, and stirr'd it well with a hollow
Rod of Iron into which I had put Gold-Dust to the Value of fifty
Livres, having stopp'd it up with a little Wax, which immediately
melted, so that the Gold-Dust ran out, and augmented the Mass of
Metal which he himself had thrown in. The Time fix'd for the
Operation being expir'd, I put into his Hands the little Ingot
that resulted from the Mixture which he carry'd immediately to
his Friend the Goldsmith, who told him that it was the best Gold
that ever came out of a Furnace. He was charm'd with the Secret,
and would have persuaded me to work at it every Day. I told him
that I had already Money enough by me for my present Occasions,
that it was time enough for me to work when I wanted more, and
that as long as I had no House nor Family, I should not be
solicitous for amassing a great deal of Wealth; besides, that it
was very difficult to get the Powder I made use of, and that a
Man endangers his Health in the Operation unless he has a great
Laboratory, and all the Tools fit for a Work of such Importance.
You long Gentlemen, no doubt, to hear all these Particulars, but
to cut the matter short by omitting many others, which perhaps
would not be disagreeable at another Time, they did not put me
under the Necessity of starting the Affair of the Marriage, for
there were certain Matchmakers that propos'd it to me themselves.
I was willing that every thing should be done in form, and being
sure of my Point, I demanded the fair _Jew_ of her Parents who
granted her to me with Marks of entire Satisfaction, and took me
immediately into their House.

We had not been marry'd long before my Father-in-law began to
talk to me of the main Chance. You have a Talent, Son, _said he_,
which ought not to be bury'd, let us be doing while we have the
Means, and get Estates for ourselves and our Posterity, I
immediately gave into his Sentiment, and we resolv'd to erect
our Laboratory at his Country-House six Miles out of Town, that
we might work without being disturb'd or observ'd. But my
Multiplication Powder was all spent, more must be prepar'd, and
because it would take up Time, and could not be done without
great Charge and Trouble, we resolv'd to make enough of it at
once as should serve for a Million of Ducats. Thereupon I gave
him a List of the Drugs of which the Composition was to consist,
of which the greatest Ingredient was Mercury. Then I made him
believe that I must have Bay-Salt, Mineral-Salt, Antimony, the
Seed of Pearls, Coral, the Ashes of a Heifer, Hartshorn, and the
Horn of a Unicorn, the Eyes of a Lobster, Elephants Tooth,
Dragon's Blood, Eagle's Claws, Birds of Paradise, the Beaks of
_American_ Parrots, the Heads of Vipers, the Bones of a Camel,
the Tail of a Crocodile, the Head of a Porpoise, the Rib of a
Whale, all the Metals, and most of the Minerals; I told him
likewise that a certain determin'd Quantity of each of these must
be infus'd three Days in Sheep's Urine mix'd with one third in
Proportion of the Dung of a Grey Cow, which had been steep'd in
the Water of the Rhine the space of nine Days, which is the
Square of Number 3; and the Cubic Number of that same Quantity,
_viz._ 27 Days or a Periodical Month, was the Time requisite for
calcinating the whole Mass, and reducing it by, a slow Fire to
this pretended Powder of Projection.

All this did not daunt the Good Man. His Hopes of great Gain made
him think that easy, which another would have thought
impracticable. The Business was where to get the Ingredients I
desir'd. Some of them were to be had at Avignon and Parts
adjacent, and the rest must be fetch'd from _Holland_, where in
short there is something of every Thing in the World. I
afterwards gave him to understand, that Gold after it had once
pass'd thro' my Hands could not be multiply'd any more, and that
therefore he must get a great Sum of Money together either by
borrowing it upon Interest, or of some Friends who would be very
glad to be let into a Share of the Profits. The Goldsmith being
the first Man to whom he imparted the Secret, desir'd him to take
500 _Loui-dors_ of him on what Terms he pleas'd. Several others
did the same, but all under the Rose, and upon Oath not to reveal
it to any Body whatsoever, not even to their Wives, so that not
one Man knew any thing of what was transacted with another. As
fast as the Gold came in, it was carry'd to the Country-House
where I was often employ'd in putting Things in order.

At last when I saw every Thing was ready, I said to my
Father-in-law and my Wife, that I would now go and put the last
Hand to the Work; but that as it requir'd a great deal of
Application, and as I should want at least three Days for it, I
desir'd 'em not to come and interrupt me in the mean while; and
then seizing a Cabinet in which there were Jewels to the Value of
at least 60000 Livres, I went to the Farm, and rising early next
Morning, I took all the Money, and said to the Farmer that an
Affair of the last Importance, and which I did not think of
before, calling me to _Arles_, if my Wife happen'd to come three
or four Days hence as she promis'd she would, I begg'd him to
assure her from me that I would make as much Dispatch as I could,
and mounting my Horse I bade him Farewel. As soon as I was out of
the Countryman's Ken, I turn'd off another Way and rode to
_Lions_.

When I arriv'd at that famous Town, the Marquis _de Villeneuve_
happened to come and sup at the Inn where I lodg'd, and wanted to
be acquainted with me. I told him that I was a _Dutchman_ of the
Family of _Wassenaar_, and a Cornet in the Service of their
High-Mightinesses, but that having had the Misfortune to fight a
Duel with, and kill an Ensign of the Prince of _Orange_'s
Regiment of Guards, who was of a very good Family, I had been
oblig'd to fly my Country for fear of the Consequences, but that
to my Comfort I did not come away empty-handed, nor without good
Bills of Credit, upon which the Gentleman was extremely civil to
me. I know your Family, Sir, _said he_, 'tis considerable in the
_Netherlands_, and to shew you that I have an Esteem for it, if
you will be at the Expence of raising a Company in a Regiment of
Horse which I am going to form, it shall be your own Fault if you
be not the Captain; I am going to Court, whither we will travel
together, and I'll engage to make you acceptable to the King. I
take you at your Word Mr. Marquise, _said I_, and pulling a
Diamond of 500 Crowns off of my little Finger, which I had taken
out of the Cabinet I ran away with, and at which the Colonel
blink'd several times, there, _said I_, is a Present for you to
bind the Bargain. Next Day I bespoke a Sute of Clothes lac'd to
the Value of a hundred Pistoles, sold my Horse, got a _Valet de
Chambre_, and having furnish'd my self with all Necessaries we
took the Stage-Coach for _Paris_.

We had not been there long, but my Patron procur'd me a
Commission, and press'd me earnestly to lose no time in railing
my Company. M. _de St. John_, who was my Lieutenant, advis'd me
to go with him toward _Joinville_ in _Champaigne_, where he had
great Acquaintance, and we might be sure of finding Men and
Horses at a reasonable Rate. We had been there actually scarce
six Weeks when our Levies were almost full. But besides the
excessive Charge I was at in every respect, it was my Misfortune
to be known by that Rascal, my Footman, of _Avignon_, whom I had
not paid as I ought for his Trouble, and who being of this
Country happen'd to see me. The Knave, as well from a Principle
of Revenge, as in Hopes of a handsom Reward from my Wife,
immediately sent Advice of it to _Mascado_. This cunning Jew was
so expeditious, and made such a powerful interest, that I was not
only apprehended and clapp'd in Prison soon after, but being
accused and convicted of the most consummate Roguery, I was
stripp'd of all I had, and condemned for my Life to the Galleys.

Here, Gentlemen, continu'd _Peter Heudde_, was the Period of my
infamous course of Life, by which you perceive that I have been a
long time in Slavery. The Pleasures I have tasted are not equal
to the Pains which I have endur'd on their Account. But the
Governor of all Things wou'd have it so; and I bear his
Chastisements with Patience, 'till he is so gracious as to put
an End to them. We lamented his unhappy Fate, and Mr. _Elliot_
giving him a Crown, assur'd him that he wou'd endeavour to do him
Service. We wou'd fain have known where this unfortunate Person
was born and his Extraction, but he wou'd not tell us, so that we
retir'd in Admiration of the wife Dealings of the Almighty with
his Creatures both good and bad.

I car'd so little for _Algier_ while I stay'd there, and had so
little Curiosity to traverse the Town, that I was surpriz'd when
I was out at Sea to discover Beauties there which I cou'd not
have thought of. This charming City is situate in form of an
Amphitheatre upon the Declivity of a high Mountain, so that you
may see it all at one View, tho' 'tis large and contains above
100000 Inhabitants. But there was no returning to view it, nor
indeed did I much care for it. The Weather was agreeable, and we
had so happy a Voyage that I did not see the least Inconveniency.
At length I arriv'd at _London_, that famous magnificent City
(whose Lustre eclipses every thing that I had seen) the fourth of
_May_ 1694, in my seventy third Year, but strong and vigorous for
one of my Age.

The first thing I thought of was a new Sute of Clothes, because I
was not willing to let my Friends see me in the Garb I had on
then. My Landlord talk'd _French_ and I desir'd him to send for a
Tailor who likewise understood that Language. The Tailor came and
carry'd me to a Refugee Merchant's Shop, where, while we were
viewing the Stuffs, there came in a Man, who, as soon as he had
seen me, and heard that I had been a Slave in _Barbary_, was
taken with a Bleeding at the Nose, which could not be staunch'd
'till he had lost above twenty Ounces of Blood. Every one try'd
the Remedies he knew, but when I saw that all was to no purpose,
and that they actually talk'd of sending for a Surgeon to open a
Vein, I took his little Finger on that Side as the Nostril was
that bleeded, and ty'd it very hard with a Needle-full of Thread
between the Nail and the first Joint. This Remedy which never
fail'd, tho' few Persons know how to use it, had its Effect, and
was admir'd by the Company. The Merchant who knew the Man, call'd
for a Glass of Brandy, and taking it out of his Maid's Hands,
said, Here, Mr. _Massey_, 'tis necessary that you take some of
these Spirits towards supplying what you have now lost.

Tho' he was young when I went from Home, yet I presently knew him
by some Features that I remember'd, besides his being very much
pitted with the Small-Pox. Is your Name _Massey_? said I, Yes,
said he, at your Service. Did you know, reply'd I, Mr. _Elliot_
Consul at _Algier_? Intimately, said he. Very well, I reply'd,
there's a Letter which he order'd me to give you. He took it,
open'd and read it, and when he came to the Place where my Name
was mention'd, he threw it down in a Hurry on the Counter against
which he lean'd, and fell about my Neck without speaking one
Word.

As much as I labour'd at it, I was not able to pronounce a Word
for a long time; we held each other about the Neck like two
Statues, and I believe we should have died with Joy in one
another's Arms if Care had not been taken to separate us. You are
just come from Slavery, dear Brother, said he, with Tears in his
Eyes, and no doubt you want the good Things of this World. But
Heaven has bless'd me for us both, come home with me for the
remainder of your Life to enjoy my Plenty, and your own Liberty.
'Tis but reasonable that you should govern in your Turn. I, my
Wife and Children will now be your Slaves. I would have you be
Master at my House, and I will be the first to obey. I was going
to thank him for his Civilities, and to give him to understand
that a Man of my Age would not be very agreeable so young People,
that it would be better I should be put to board with some
Stranger, who for my Money would be oblig'd to put up with my
Infirmities. But he immediately interrupted me, and having
order'd the Tailor to finish my Clothes with all Speed, he
carry'd me to his House.

Yet, whatever I have said of my Brother is nothing in short to
what his Family did. I thought my Sister his Wife, and my Nephews
and Nieces his Children would have eaten me up alive for Joy. I
had a very fine Apartment for my Lodging, and a domestic Servant
always to attend me.

_Le Grand_ one of my Fellow Travellers having heard of my
Arrival, did me the Favour to come and see me. He told me how,
after having left _Goa_, he went to the Isle of _Java_, where he
had the Happiness to be introduc'd into the Family of M. _de St.
Martin_, and by him to M. _Van Reden_, Governor of Batavia, that
by M. _Martin_'s Means he had, an Opportunity to improve in the
Mathematical Lectures I had given him, by acting in the Post of
Engineer, which had enabled him to live genteelly the rest of his
Days. He told me also that _La Foret_ died in those Parts in very
good Circumstances, but he knew not what was become of the
others.

To do Justice to this Gentleman, I frankly own, that the frequent
Conversation I enjoy'd with him contributed not a little towards
refreshing my Memory with a great many Circumstances which I had
almost utterly forgot, and that tho' this Narrative wants very
much of being so perfect as it would have been, if I had
preserv'd my Journals, or had the Conveniency every where of
putting down what occurr'd, yet without him it would not have
been near so compleat as it is.

If I have omitted some Things, I have on the other hand advanc'd
nothing but what I was either a Witness of, or came to me from
the first hand. And I would have publish'd this Account of my
Travels some Years ago, had not substantial Reasons prevented me,
and especially these two. 1. My Brother being concern'd in the
great Farms of _France_, had such ill Success in them that he was
forc'd to leave all, and come and settle in _England_, where he
lives as private as possible, for fear the Court should hear of
him, and give him Trouble. The other Reason is of no less Weight,
and affects myself in particular. I was afraid lest my Book would
excite the Ambition of some insatiable Monarch to conquer the
Kingdom I describe and that he would compel me to serve as a
Guide to those who should be employed in so difficult an
Expedition. But alas! I am weary of travelling, and too old to
bear the Fatigues which I have endur'd heretofore. My Nephews are
intrusted with the Care of this Manuscript, after my Brother and
I are dead, so that when it comes out in print the World may be
assur'd that we are not in Being.




   INDEX.

   A.
   _Algier_, its Description, Page 314.
   Anatomy of the Human Body, 22. &c.
   Animals, their Production, 271.
   Ark of _Noah_, its Dimensions, 243.

   B.
   _Bashaw_, at _Algier_, how he was frighten'd in his
     Bed by a Mad-man, 278, 279, &c.
     The Trouble our Author came into for it, who was his Keeper,
     281, 282, &c.
   Bawd and a young Whore at _Paris_, their Design upon a
     Counsellor of the Parliament, 144 to 148.
   Beasts, whether they have Reason, 25.
   Bees, Fable of, 292.
   Beginning, in the Book of _Genesis_, the Word accounted
     for, 26.
   Bible, the Author's prophane Account of it, 15, &c.
     How his Mind was alter'd, 28.
   _Bissextile_ Year, why call'd so, 55.
   Blasphemy against God reckoned the most enormous Crime, 94.
   Bleeding, an infallible Remedy to staunch it, 315.
   Bodies, human; how liable to change, 45.
   _Brasil_ Women, how their Husbands lie in for 'em, 17.
   _Bustrol_ the King of this strange Country; his Character,
     Dress, Children and Wives, Palace, Revenues, Coin, &c. 127 to
     132, 136.
     Ridiculous Account of the Origin of his Ancestors, and the
     Methods used to enforce the Belief of it, 135, 150, 151.
     His way of travelling, 168.
     His Marriage to a Woman that was to have been the Wife of a
     Carpenter, 169.
     His other Marriages, 170.

   C.
   Calendar, its Origin and Correction, 54, 55.
   Cantons, a particular Description of them, 83. 99.
   _Christ_, what Notion they have of him in those Parts,
     95, 96.
     How his Miracles are to be understood, 267.
   Christian Religion, some Account of it, 141, &c.
   Chronologies of the World, various, 110, &c.
   Clock-making, the Author and his Comrades Genius for it, 91,
     How they were employ'd in it by the King of the Country,
     127, 137.
     The Honours paid them for their Ingenuity, 161.
   Cock-fighting, and Eagle catching two yearly Ceremonies,
     78, 79.
   Creation, gross Accounts of it, 106, 107, 123.
   Crimes how punish'd in this unknown Country, 94.
     Why they put no Criminals to Death, 92, 93.
   Cubit in the Scripture, what it was, 243, 244.

   D.
   Days and Hours how measur'd in this strange Country before
     the Invention of Clocks, 91, &c.
   Days thought to be all alike, 99.
   Deluge, whether Universal or only Partial, 241, &c. to 245.
   _Descartes_'s Works, Reflections on them, 6, 7.

   E.
   Eagle-baiting, a yearly Ceremony, 79.
   Earth, its Motions describ'd, 53, 54, 137.
   Earth, its Motion further illustrated, 162 to 165.
   Earthquake and a Tempest describ'd, 235.
   Eclipses defin'd, 58, 59.
   Empress, which of the King's Wives has that Name, 153:
     Her Delivery of a Son, and the Ceremonies on that Occasion,
     152, 153, &c.

   F.

   Father's remarkable Quarrel with his Son, and the Decision of
     it, 157 to 160.
   Funerals, an Account of them, 167.

   G.
   _Galileo_, his Sufferings from the Court of Inquisition, 7.
   Gall-nut, a Description of that Fruit, 272.
   Glass, the Want of it how supply'd, 130.
   _Goa_ City, its Description and Inhabitants, 251, 254.
     How our Author was frighten'd in his Bed at one of the Inns,
     252, &c.
     His Practice there in Surgery, 254.
     His Imprisonment in the Inquisition, 255.
     His Discourse with a _Chinese_ Prisoner about Religion, 256, &c.
     His Defence before the Inquisition, and Condemnation to the
     Galleys for Life, 273, 274.
     How he was taken by a Pirate, and carry'd to _Algier_, 276.
     His Redemption from Slavery, 300.
   Goats large and strong us'd for Draught, 82.
     Story of an unruly one, 88.
   GOD, by what Name he, is call'd in this unknown Country, 93.
     Their Opinion of the Divine Being, 98, 118, 119.

   H.
   Hair, long, a Dissertation upon it, and why our Author consented
     to have his cut off, 29, 30.
   Heat and Cold, what they consist in, 59, 61.
   Heaven, a crude Notion of it, 114.
   _Heudde, Peter_, how he bit _Vandyke_ a _Dutch_ Factor at _Lisbon_,
     32, &c. 302.
     How he was, afterwards taken by the Pirates, 283.
     How he pretended to make Gold, 306 to 309.
     His own Narrative of his Rogueries, 301 to 313.

   I.
   Immortality of the Soul ridicul'd, 116, &c.
   Incarnation of Christ, that Mystery freely treated of, 265, 266.

   L.
   Language of the unknown Country, 75 to 78.
   Light, its Creation defin'd, 26, 107.
   _Lisbon_ City describ'd, 14.

   M.
   Marriages at what Age they are allow'd in this unknown Country,
     and to whom prohibited, 153, 167.
   _Massey, John_, a Mercer at _London_, our Author's Brother and their
     Caresses at Meeting there, 315.
   _Massey, David_, Captain of a Ship his Misfortune, 2.
   Matter, its Operation on our Organs, 60.
   Microscopes, the Use of 'em, 269, 270.
   Mines of Iron and Coal describ'd, 85, 86.
   Miracles of our Saviour how to be understood, 266, 267.

   N.
   _Negro_, Story of one who hang'd himself for fear of banging, 19.
     The Dissection of his Body, 20.
     Why _Negroes_ are black, 21.
   Nests of strange Birds describ'd, 44, 45.
   News, the Method of spreading it through this unknown Country, 155.

   O.
   Oak-Apples describ'd, 272.

   P.
   _Paris_, the Author's Account of it, 4.
   _Pascal, M_. an Account of his Conic Sections, 5.
   Perception, what is the sole Cause of it, 24.
   Philosophy, natural, a curious Discourse on it, 236 to 240.
   Pillar of Fire that conducted the _Israelites_, what it was, 105.
   _Pole_, a strange Animal of that Name describ'd, 131.
   _Polybius_, a Quotation from him with respect to the Gods, and
     to Rewards and Punishments, 264.
   Polygamy, to whom allow'd, 128.
   Prayer reckon'd needless, 99, 101.
     The Necessity of it, 101, 103.
   Princes why they don't love Alterations in Worship, 96.
   Purgatory, an Account of it, 141.

   R.
   Religious Differences not so essential as pretended, 264, 265.
   Resurrection, the Pagan Notion of it, 107, 108, &c. 113, 116.
   Revelation Divine vindicated, 103, 104, &c.
   Revelation Divine defended by our Author against a Christian
     Renegadoe, 284, 285, 286.

   S.
   Savages, our Author and his Comrades encounter with them, 226, &c.
     to 230.
   Scriptures, Holy, whether they were all inspir'd, 286, 287.
     Their Antiquity and Authenticity, 287, 288 to 290.
   Serpent, a hideous one like to have devour'd our Author, &c. 50.
   Small-Pox, its Fatality, 170.
   _Spaniard_'s scuffle with a _Portuguese_ in which they
     murder'd each other, 250, 251.
   Sun, how worthy he is thought of Adoration, 52, 53.
     Computation of his Dimensions, 57, 58, 162.
   Sun-Dialling, an Account of that Art, 171.

   T.
   Temperance, the good Effects of it, 31, 32.
   Thought defin'd, 24.
   Time internal and external, how defin'd and measur'd, 26, 27.
   Tortoises, the Excellency of their Fat, 39.
   Touch, the Effects of it, 24, 25.
   Trinity, a Discourse on that Subject betwixt a Chinese Pagan and
     a _French_ Jesuit, 258, 259.
     Compared to a Fruit-Tree, 259, 260.
     The Infidelity of the Chinese, 261.

   V.
   Virgin, what it means in the Original, 266.

   W.
   Wandering _Jew_, an Account of him, 8, &c.
   Wars, just, vindicated, 139, 140.
   Watch, a Present of one made to the King by our Author's Comrade, 172.
     How it involv'd him in a very dangerous Intrigue with one of
     the King's Wives, 173 to 200.
   Woolpack at Sea describ'd, 36, &c.

   Y.
   Year, the Variety of its Computations, 54, 55.
     The Difference betwixt the _Gregorian_ and _Julian_, 56.


FINIS.