CYCLING AND SHOOTING
   KNICKERBOCKER STOCKINGS

   HOW TO KNIT THEM

  [Illustration]

  [Illustration]

  [Illustration]

  CYCLING AND SHOOTING
  KNICKERBOCKER STOCKINGS

  HOW TO KNIT THEM
  WITH PLAIN AND FANCY TURNOVER TOPS

  BY
  H. P. RYDER

  London
  MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.
  NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN CO.
  1896

  RICHARD CLAY AND SONS, LIMITED,
  LONDON AND BUNGAY.




HOW TO KNIT KNICKERBOCKER STOCKINGS

GENERAL DIRECTIONS


The difficulty in giving knitting directions arises from no two people
knitting alike. Some do so too loosely, others too tightly. In good
work the loops should just run easily on the needles.

In order to secure your stocking being the right size, it will be well
before you start it to test your knitting by casting on 8 stitches and
knitting 8 rows. If, with Alloa yarn and No. 12 needles, the knitting
measures about a square inch, your stocking will work out medium size.
If, however, the square is much larger or smaller, then alter the size
of needles to suit your knitting, taking bigger or smaller needles as
required. _This is a very important point to attend to._ The
directions given are for a medium-sized stocking, both in length and
width. Any one who has knitted a stocking by them will see at _once_
how easy it is to enlarge or diminish the size.


_How to join Wool_

Never make a knot, but knit a few stitches with both wools. The extra
thickness never shows, and the ends may be cut off close with
impunity.


_Raising_

It is helpful and saves much counting, if, when you raise or decrease,
you knit along with the wool, on that stitch _only_, a piece of fine
white wool or thread. It is easily withdrawn afterwards, but it
enables you to see at a glance which is your back needle, and the last
time you raised or decreased.

You _raise_, by putting your needle before knitting next stitch
through the loop below, in reality the stitch of the last round, and
drawing the wool through it. You must be very careful not to make a
hole, a slight twist as you take up the stitch prevents this.


_Tops in Fingering_

When you knit with two wools, carrying them on at the back, the
knitting is much more even if one colour, say the dark, is knitted
with wool from right hand in the usual English way, but keep the
lighter coloured wool over finger on _left_ hand, and take it up as
the Germans always knit. This sounds troublesome, but is really quite
easy with a little practice.

Another simple but useful direction in knitting with wool carried on
at the back I must give.

When you knit 6 or more stitches with one colour, to avoid too long a
loop at the back, which is apt to get pulled, at the 3rd or 4th stitch
lay the wool you are _not_ using level with your needle so as to come
above or rather _between_ the needle and the wool you are going to
knit with. When the stitch is knitted, you will find the wool caught
lightly through at the back.




KNICKERBOCKER STOCKING WITH FANCY TOP. NO. 1.


_Required._--4 needles No. 12, tested by Walker's Bell Gauge, 3 cuts
of Alloa yarn (heather mixture), 1/2 cut of red to correspond.

K stands for knit, P for purl.

With heather mixture cast on 78 stitches, 26 on each needle. Knit 4
rounds of k 1, p 1 alternately.

Purl two rounds.

In the next round you use the two colours alternately. Don't break off
the wool until directed to do so.

[Illustration]

1st pattern round.--With red wool, k 4. Heather wool k 2, but in
knitting these put the wool _twice_ round the needle instead of once
as in ordinary knitting; this is done to lengthen the stitch. Repeat.

2nd round.--_Red_ wool, k 4, slip the 2 knitted stitches on to the
same needle, letting the wool drop to make a long stitch. When you
slip, put in needle, as if to purl, from right to left. Repeat.

3rd, 4th, and 5th rounds.--Same as 2nd.

6th round.--_Heather_ wool. Knit all.

7th and 8th rounds.--Purl all.

9th round.--_Red_ wool, k 1, *, _heather_ wool, k 2, putting wool
_twice_ round needle, _red_ wool, k 4, repeat from *, end with k 3
_red_ wool.

10th, 11th, 12th and 13th rounds.--_Red_ wool, k 1, *, slip 2, k 4,
repeat from *, end with k 3.

14th round.--_Heather_ wool. Knit all.

15th and 16th rounds.--Purl all.

Repeat from 1st round _once_ more.

Repeat up to 9th round _once_.

You will have 5 coloured squares. Break off red wool.

With heather wool k 1, p 1 alternately every round until your stocking
measures, from casting on, a length of _six_ inches.


_Stocking Leg_

Before beginning to rib the stocking leg, you must turn what you have
knitted inside out to make the fancy top fall over correctly. Do this
and arrange your stitches as follows. Place 31 on 1st needle, which
will be called the _back_ or heel needle, 24 on the 2nd, 23 on the 3rd
needle.

1st round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 3, knit 2 together, k 3, knit 2
together, k 1, *, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 9, repeat from *.

You will have 29 stitches on back needle, 76 in all.

2nd round.--* P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 9, repeat from *.

This ribbing broad and narrow alternately is carried down the leg. In
future, directions are only given for the increasings and decreasings
made on the 1st or back needle.

Repeat the 2nd round until your stocking measures from casting on
_eight_ inches.


_To increase for Calf of Leg_

1st round.--Back needle. P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, raise 1 (see
general directions), knit till within 2 of end of broad rib, when
raise 1, k 2, _etc._ By _etc._ please understand you are to knit the
ribs according to pattern rest of round.

Rib 5 rounds with 11 stitches in centre back needle, broad rib.

7th round.--Same as 1st.

Rib 5 rounds with 13 stitches in centre back, broad rib.

13th round.--Same as 1st.

Rib, with 15 stitches in centre back needle, broad rib, until your
stocking measures _eleven_ inches from casting on.


_Decreasing_

This is done _twice_ in the round at first, afterwards only once.

1st round.--Back needle. P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, knit two
together; knit until within 4 of end of this broad rib, when knit 2
together, k 2, etc.

Rib 4 rounds.--You will have 13 stitches in back needle rib.

6th round.--Same as 1st.

Rib 4 rounds.--11 stitches back needle rib.

11th round.--Same as 1st.

Rib 4 rounds.--9 stitches back needle rib.

16th round.--Same as 1st.

Rib 4 rounds.--7 stitches on back needle rib.


_Decreasing once in Round_

1st round.--Back needle. P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, knit 2
together, k 3, etc. After the decreasings, purl or knit the next rib
according to pattern.

2nd and 3rd rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 6, etc.

Observe two rounds only are knitted between decreasings.

4th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, knit 2 together, k 2, etc.

5th and 6th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 5, etc.

7th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 1, knit 2 together, k 2, etc.

8th and 9th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 4, etc.

10th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 1, knit 2 together, k 1, etc.

11th and 12th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 3, etc.

13th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 1, knit 2 together, etc.

14th and 15th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, etc.

16th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, knit 2 together, etc.

17th and 18th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 1, etc.

19th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 1, purl 2 together, p 2, k 2, p 2,
k 2, p 2, etc.

20th and 21st rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 4, etc.

22nd round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 1, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

23rd and 24th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 3, etc.

25th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

26th and 27th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, etc.

28th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, purl 2 together, etc.

29th and 30th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 1, etc.

31st round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, knit 2 together, k 1, etc.

32nd and 33rd rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 4, etc.

34th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 1, knit 2 together, k 1, etc.

35th and 36th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 3, etc.

37th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 1, knit 2 together, etc.

38th and 39th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, etc.

40th round.--P 2, k 2, p 2, knit 2 together, etc.

41st and 42nd rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 2, k 1, etc.

43rd round.--P 2, k 2, p 1, purl 2 together, p 2, etc.

44th and 45th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 4, etc.

46th round.--P 2, k 2, p 1, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

47th and 48th rounds.--P 2, k 2, p 3, etc.

49th round.--P 2, k 2, p 1, p 2 together, etc.

This finishes the decreasings. You will have 10 stitches left on your
back needle, 57 stitches in all on the needles. Your decreasings will
have formed a good =V=-shaped slant.

Continue ribbing until the stocking measures, from casting on, 22
inches. You must not pull out the stocking, but place it flat on the
table and measure it with a rule.


_Heel_

Prepare for heel by ribbing to end of back needle, from next needle
knit off on back needle the broad rib of 9 stitches. Knit on a 2nd
needle the small ribs and 5 of the next broad rib stitches, in all 15
stitches. On a 3rd needle k 4 and next small ribs, 14 stitches in all.
Now pass the 9 stitches of broad rib on to the heel or back needle.
This gives you 28 stitches on the heel needle.

The heel is formed by knitting the heel needle backwards and forwards.

1st row.--Slip 1 (when you slip 1st stitch put in needle from right to
left), k 8, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 9, turn.

2nd row.--Slip 1, p 8, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2, p 9, turn.

Repeat these _two_ rows until you have knitted 30 rows.


_To round Heel_

1st row.--Slip 1, k 15, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

2nd row.--Slip 1, p 5, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

3rd row.--Slip 1, k 6, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

4th row.--Slip 1, p 7, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

5th row.--Slip 1, k 8, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

6th row.--Slip 1, p 9, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

7th row.--Slip 1, k 10, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

8th row.--Slip 1, p 11, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

9th row.--Slip 1, k 12, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

10th row.--Slip 1, p 13, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

11th row.--Slip 1, k 14, knit 2 together, turn.

12th row.--Slip 1, p 14, purl 2 together. 16 stitches will be left on
the heel needle.


_To form the Foot_

This is done by taking up, and as you take up knitting through the
loops down side of length of heel. In taking up be particular to put
your needle through both sides of the loops.

1st side needle. Slip 1, k 15 (these are the heel stitches). Take up,
and as you take up knit 17 stitches down side of heel. Purl 2 stitches
off next needle on this 1st side needle. With a 2nd needle rib all the
stitches on the next two needles but the _two_ last. This needle is
henceforward called the instep needle. On a 3rd needle purl the 2
stitches left, and with it take up, and as you take up knit 17
stitches down other side of heel, also knit on to it 8 stitches off
the 1st side needle; these 8 are the half of the heel stitches left
after rounding it.

Count loops on your needles. You ought to have 27 on each side needle,
25 on the instep needle.


_To shape the Foot_

1st round.--1st side needle. Knit plain until within 4 stitches of end
of needle, when knit 2 together, p 2.

Instep needle. K 2, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 9, p 2, k 2, p 2, k 2. 2nd side
needle. P 2, knit 2 together, knit to end of needle.

Repeat this round four times. You will have 23 stitches left on each
side needle.

5th round.--1st side needle. Knit all but 2 last, which are purled.
Instep needle. Rib according to pattern. 2nd side needle. P 2, knit
the rest.

6th round.--Same as 1st.

Repeat 5th and 6th rounds until you have only 16 stitches left on each
side needle, 25 on instep needle, 57 in all.

Repeat the 5th round until your foot measures, including the heel,
8-1/2 inches.


_Toe_

Prepare for toe by knitting to end of instep needle, and on that
needle knit 2 stitches off the next.

Next needle. Knit plain. 3rd needle. Knit to within 5 stitches of end,
when knit 2 together, k 2, and pass the last stitch on to instep
needle. You will have 28 stitches on instep needle, 14 on each of the
others.


_To decrease the Toe_

1st round.--Instep needle. K 2, knit 2 together, knit to within 4 of
end, when knit 2 together, k 2. Next needle. Knit 2, knit 2 together,
knit to end. 3rd needle. Knit to within 4 of end, knit 2 together, k
2.

2nd, 3rd and 4th rounds.--Knit all.

Repeat these 4 rounds _twice_ more.

13th round.--Same as 1st.

14th and 15th rounds.--Knit all.

Repeat 13th, 14th and 15th rounds _once_ more.

19th round.--Same as 1st.

Repeat this until you have only 8 stitches left on the instep and 8 on
back needles, 16 in all.

Slip the back 8 stitches on one needle, knit the back and front
needles together, casting off at the same time.




STOCKING, NO. 1.--PLAIN TOP


Cast on same number of stitches as for fancy top.

Rib, by k 1, p 1 alternately, or k 3, p 3 alternately a length of six
inches from casting on. You do not need with plain top to turn your
stocking inside out, as both sides are alike. Arrange your stitches as
directed for "stocking leg," and follow out the pattern.




STOCKING, NO. 2


_Required._--4 needles No. 12, 2-1/2 cuts of blue speckled Alloa yarn,
1/2 cut of blue Alloa yarn, 1/2 cut of tan-coloured ditto.

K stands for knit, p for purl.

_With speckled Wool._--Cast on 77 stitches, 28 on two, 21 on the third
needle. The rib throughout the stocking is knit 5, purl 2.

Work 6 rounds of this rib, k 5, p 2.

_Blue Wool._--One round plain knitting.

2nd round.--The rib, k 5, p 2. Each time you change the wool the 1st
round must be plain knitting, the other rounds are ribbed. Don't break
off the different coloured wool until told to do so.

_Tan Wool._--Seven rounds. Recollect to knit all 1st round.

_Speckled Wool._--Two rounds.

_Blue Wool._--Nine rounds.

_Speckled Wool._--Two rounds.

_Tan Wool._--Seven rounds.

_Blue Wool._--Two rounds.

Now break off all the wools, excepting the speckled.

[Illustration]

_Speckled Wool._--Rib until your stocking measures, from casting on,
_six_ inches. To make your stocking top fall over correctly, you must
now turn your work inside out and continue the rib until your stocking
measures, from casting on, _nine_ inches. Be careful after you have
turned it to knit 5 over the knitted stitches, and to purl over the 2
purled ones.


_Increasing for Calf_

Directions are only given for the _back_ needle, where the increasing
is made. Follow the usual ribbing in the rounds.

Back needle. 1st round.--This must be a needle with 28 stitches on it.
(See directions for _raising_ in general directions.) K 5, p 2, k 5, p
1, raise 1, p 1, _etc._ By _etc._ understand is meant _continue the
usual rib_.

2nd round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 3, etc.

3rd round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 1, raise 1, p 2, etc.

4th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 4, etc.

5th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, raise 1, p 2, etc.

6th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 1, p 2, etc.

7th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, raise 1, k 1, p 2, etc.

8th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 2, p 2, etc.

9th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 1, raise 1, k 1, p 2, etc.

10th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 3, p 2, etc.

11th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 2, raise 1, k 1, p 2, etc.

12th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 4, p 2, etc.

13th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 3, raise 1, k 1, p 2, etc.

14th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, etc.

15th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 4, raise 1, k 1, p 2, etc.

16th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 6, p 2, etc.

17th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 5, raise 1, k 1, p 2, etc.

18th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 7, p 2, etc.

Repeat 18th round until your stocking measures, from casting on,
12-1/2 inches. You will have 37 stitches on your _back_ needle.


_Decreasing_

This is done every other round. In the _intermediate_ rounds follow
the ribbing as usual, and where the decreasing has been made knit, if
over knitted stitches, purl when over-purled.

1st round.--Back needle. K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, knit 2 together, k 5,
etc.

3rd round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, knit 2 together, k 4, etc.

5th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, knit 2 together, k 3, etc.

7th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, knit 2 together, k 2, etc.

9th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, knit 2 together, k 1, etc.

11th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, knit 2 together, p 2, etc.

13th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

15th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, p 1, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

17th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

19th round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, purl 2 together, etc.

21st round.--K 5, p 2, k 5, knit 2 together, k 4, p 2, etc.

23rd round.--K 5, p 2, k 4, knit 2 together, k 4, p 2, etc.

25th round.--K 5, p 2, k 4, knit 2 together, k 3, p 2, etc.

27th round.--K 5, p 2, k 3, knit 2 together, k 3, p 2, etc.

29th round.--K 5, p 2, k 3, knit 2 together, k 2, p 2, etc.

31st round.--K 5, p 2, k 2, knit 2 together, k 2, p 2, etc.

33rd round.--K 5, p 2, k 2, knit 2 together, k 1, p 2, etc.

35th round.--K 5, p 2, k 1, knit 2 together, k 1, p 2, etc.

37th round.--K 5, p 2, k 1, knit 2 together, p 2, etc.

39th round.--K 5, p 2, knit 2 together, p 2, etc.

41st round.--K 5, p 2, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

43rd round.--K 5, p 1, purl 2 together, p 1, etc.

45th round.--K 5, p 1, purl 2 together, etc.

47th round.--K 5, purl 2 together, etc.

49th round.--K 5, knit 2 together, k 4, etc.

51st round.--K 4, knit 2 together, k 4, etc.

53rd round.--K 4, knit 2 together, k 3, etc.

55th round.--K 3, knit 2 together, k 3, etc.

57th round.--K 3, knit 2 together, k 2, etc.

59th round.--K 2, knit 2 together, k 2, etc.

60th round.--K 5, p 2.

Repeat this round until your stocking measures, from casting on, 22
inches. You will have 56 stitches in all on your needles.


_Heel_

Prepare for heel by knitting to end of back needle; from next needle
knit off on back needle as follows, k 5, p 2, k 3. On a 2nd needle, k
2, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 2. On a 3rd needle, k 3, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 2, then
pass the remaining 12 loops on to the heel needle.

You will have 29 stitches on heel needle, 13 on the 2nd, 14 on the
3rd.

The heel is made by knitting the back needle backwards and forwards.

1st row.--Slip 1 (when you slip 1st stitch, put in needle from right
to left), k 2, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 5, p 2, k 3, _turn_ and work
back.

2nd row.--Slip 1, p 2, k 2, p 5, k 2, p 5, k 2, p 5, k 2, p 3, _turn_.

Repeat these _two_ rows for 30 rows.


_To round Heel_

1st row.--Slip 1, k 15, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

2nd row.--Slip 1, p 5, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

3rd row.--Slip 1, k 6, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

4th row.--Slip 1, p 7, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

5th row.--Slip 1, k 8, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

6th row.--Slip 1, p 9, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

7th row.--Slip 1, k 10, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

8th row.--Slip 1, p 11, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

9th row.--Slip 1, k 12, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

10th row.--Slip 1, p 13, purl 2 together, p 1, turn.

11th row.--Slip 1, k 14, knit 2 together, k 1, turn.

12th row.--Slip 1, p 15, purl 2 together.

You will have 17 stitches left on heel needle.


_To form the Foot_

This is done by taking up, and as you take up knitting through the
slipped loops down side of heel. Be particular in taking up to put
your needle through both sides of the loops.

1st side needle. Slip 1, k 16 (these are the heel stitches). Take up,
and as you take up knit 17 stitches down side of heel. On _same_
needle knit 2 stitches off next needle. Work on a 2nd needle ribbing
according to pattern, all the stitches on the next two needles
_excepting_ the two last. This needle is henceforward called the
_instep_ needle. On a 3rd needle knit the 2 stitches left, and with it
take up, and as you take up knit 17 stitches down other side of heel,
also knit on it 9 stitches off 1st side needle (these are part of the
heel stitches). Count loops on your needles. You should have 27 on 1st
side needle, 23 on instep, 28 on 2nd side needle, 78 in all.


_To shape the Foot_

1st round.--1st side needle. Knit plain until within 4 of end of
needle, when knit 2 together, k 2. Instep needle. Rib to pattern. 2nd
side needle. K 2, knit two together, knit to end.

Repeat this round _four_ times.

5th round.--Knit plain side needles, rib the instep.

6th round.--Same as 1st.

Repeat 5th and 6th rounds until you have only 16 stitches left on 1st
side needle, 23 on instep, 17 stitches on 2nd side needle. In all 56
stitches.

Repeat 6th round until your foot measures, including heel, 8-1/2
inches.


_Toe_

This is all knitted plain. Prepare for it by knitting to end of instep
needle on same needle, knit 3 stitches off next needle. Knit plain
next needle. 3rd needle. Knit plain to within 2 stitches of end, slip
these two on to instep needle. You will have 28 stitches on instep
needle, 28 on the back needles.


_To decrease the Toe.--Knit_

1st round.--Instep needle. K 2, knit 2 together, knit to within 4 of
end, when knit 2 together, k 2. Next needle. K 2, knit 2 together,
knit to end. 3rd needle. Knit to within 4 of end, when knit 2
together, k 2.

2nd, 3rd and 4th rounds.--Knit all.

Repeat these _four_ rounds _twice_ more.

13th round.--Same as 1st.

14th and 15th rounds.--Knit all.

Repeat 13th, 14th and 15th rounds _once_ more.

19th round.--Same as 1st.

Repeat this round until you have only 8 stitches left on your instep
needle, and 8 on the back needles. Slip the 8 on back needles all on
one needle. Cast off by knitting back and front needles together in
the usual way.




STOCKING, NO. 2.--PLAIN TOP


Cast on same number of stitches as for Fancy Top. Rib, that is, k 5, p
2 alternately, a length of _nine_ inches. (Follow directions from
"Increasing for Calf.")




FANCY TOP, NO. 3


This top can be knitted as a change with either stocking leg. Same
quantity of wool required.

With stocking wool cast on 78 stitches, 26 on each needle. Knit 4
rounds of k 1, p 1 alternately.

5th round.--* Slip 1 (taking it off as if purled, that is, putting the
needle-point through the loop from right to left. All slipped stitches
in this pattern are to be worked in this way). Knit 2 together; repeat
from *. Knit loosely, not to draw the wool tight.

6th round.--* Throw wool over needle _twice from back to the front_,
purl 1. This purled stitch is the slipped one of previous round. With
wool still in front of needle slip 1 (the knit 2 together of last
round), after which pass the wool to the back. Repeat from *.

7th round.--Knit plain, letting the thrown over _twice_ wool drop, and
knit it as one stitch. To make sure you have done this correctly,
count over your stitches; there should be 26 on each needle.

_Coloured stripe._--8th round, knit all.

9th round.--Same as 5th.

10th round.--Same as 6th.

11th round.--Same as 7th.

These four rounds constitute the pattern. With wool your stocking is
knitted; repeat these four rounds _twice_, that is, 8 rounds.

_Coloured stripe._--Repeat pattern _three_ times.

[Illustration]

_Stocking wool._--Repeat pattern _twice_.

_Coloured stripe._--Repeat pattern _once_, break off coloured wool.

_Stocking wool._--Repeat pattern _once_.

Knit 1, purl 1 alternately until your top measures 6 inches from
casting on.

The rest of stocking knit according to receipt No. 1. (See directions
for Stocking Leg.)




[Illustration]

FANCY TOP, NO. 4


This is a very simple but effective top. With wool your stockings are
to be knitted, cast on 78 stitches.

Rib, that is k 2, p 1 alternately for five rounds.

_With red wool._--Make 1, by throwing wool over the needle, and knit
2 together. Repeat this throughout this round and three more rounds.

_Dark wool._--5 rounds of make 1 and knit 2 together.

_Red wool._--9 rounds of same.

_Dark wool._--5 rounds of same.

_Red wool._--4 rounds of same.

_Dark wool._--Knit 1 round plain.

Rib, that is k 2, p 1 alternately until your top measures 6 inches
from casting on.

Rest of stocking knit according to directions. (See receipts Nos. 1 or
2.)




STOCKING TOPS IN FINGERING WOOL. NO. 5


If checks and plaids are knitted in Alloa yarn, carrying on wool at
the back, they are so thick and clumsy no one likes them. I therefore
give directions for patterns to be knitted in 3-ply Fingering wool and
_larger_ needles. After you have knitted the top, you continue the
rest of leg with Alloa yarn and the smaller needles. Be careful to
match exactly colour of Fingering and Alloa.


No. 1

_Required._--4 needles No. 10. Small quantity, say 1/2 cut, of
Fingering wool, same colour as Alloa the stocking is to be knitted
with, and 1/2 cut of crimson Fingering.

Cast on 80 stitches, 30 on two, 20 on 3rd needle, with darker
Fingering.

1st round.--K 1, p 1 alternately.

2nd round.--P 1, k 1 alternately.

3rd round.--Same as 1st.

4th round.--Same as 2nd.

In next round you work with both colours, carrying them on at the
back. You must be particular not to pull or drag them too tightly.
(Read carefully the "General Directions.")

[Illustration]

1st _pattern_ round.--Crimson wool k 1, *, dark wool k 6, crimson k 2,
repeat from *, end with crimson k 1.

2nd round.--Crimson k 2, *, dark k 4, crimson k 4, repeat from *, end
with crimson k 2.

3rd round.--Crimson k 3, *, dark k 2, crimson k 6, repeat from *, end
crimson k 3.

4th round.--Crimson k 2, *, dark k 4, crimson k 4, repeat from *, end
crimson k 2.

5th round.--Crimson k 1, *, dark k 6, crimson k 2, repeat from *, end
crimson k 1.

6th round.--Dark k 3, *, crimson k 2, dark k 6, repeat from *, end
dark k 3.

7th round.--Dark k 2, *, crimson k 4, dark k 4, repeat from *, end
with k 2.

8th round.--Dark k 1, *, crimson k 6, dark k 2, repeat from *, end
with k 1.

9th round.--Dark k 2, *, crimson k 4, dark k 4, repeat from *, end
dark k 2.

10th round.--Dark k 3, *, crimson k 2, dark k 6, repeat from *, end
dark k 3.

Repeat these 10 rounds _three_ times _more_. Break off crimson wool.

41st round.--Knit all.

42nd round.--K 1, p 1 alternately.

43rd round.--P 1, k 1 alternately.

Repeat 42nd and 43rd rounds until your stocking top measures, from
casting on, _six_ inches.

The rest of stocking is knitted in Alloa yarn with needles No. 12. You
can knit it either as pattern No. 1 or 2. See "Stocking Leg." Having
80 stitches on your needle, you must, in commencing the ribbing,
narrow off the extra stitches.




[Illustration]

ZIGZAG TOP IN FINGERING, No. 6


_Required._--4 needles No. 10. 3-ply Fingering wool in two colours 1/2
cut of each.

With dark wool cast on 80 stitches, 30 on two, 20 on third needle.

1st round.--K 1, p 1 alternately.

2nd round.--P 1, k 1 alternately.

Repeat these two rounds.

1st pattern round.--The colours are used alternately. Red k 5, dark k
5, repeat to end of round.

2nd round.--Red k 4, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end with red
k 1.

3rd round.--Red k 3, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end red k 2.

4th round.--Red k 2, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end red k 3.

5th round.--Red k 1, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end red k 4.

6th round.--Dark k 5, red k 5, repeat.

7th round.--Red k 1, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end red k 4.

8th round.--Red k 2, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end red k 3.

9th round.--Red k 3, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end red k 2.

10th round.--Red k 4, *, dark k 5, red k 5, repeat from *, end red k
1.

Repeat these ten rounds _three_ times more.

41st round.--Knit all.

42nd round.--K 1, p 1 alternately.

43rd round.--P 1, k 1 alternately.

Repeat 42nd and 43rd rounds until your stocking measures, from casting
on, _six_ inches.

The rest of the stocking is knitted in Alloa wool with needles No. 12,
as in previous directions.




DIAMOND PATTERN TOP


_Required._--4 needles No. 10, 3-ply Fingering wool in two colours,
1/2 cut of each.

With dark wool cast on 84 stitches, 28 on each needle.

1st round.--K 1, p 1 alternately.

2nd round.--P 1, k 1 alternately.

Repeat these two rounds _twice_ more.

_Light wool._--Knit 1st round plain.

2nd round.--K 1 in light wool, k 1 in dark wool, repeat in two colours
rest of round.

[Illustration]

3rd round.--K 1st stitch dark wool, 2nd light, repeat in two colours
alternately.

4th round.--Knit in light colour.

5th, 6th and 7th rounds.--Knit in dark colour.

You now begin the pattern. It is knitted plain in alternate colours,
carrying on wool at the back. [L for light wool, D for dark.]

1st round.--Light k 1, dark k 6, repeat.

2nd round.--Light k 2, *, dark k 4, light k 3, dark k 4, repeat from
*, end with light k 1.

3rd round.--Dark k 1, light k 2, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 1, light
k 2, dark k 2, light k 2.

4th round.--Dark k 2, *, light k 2, dark k 2, light k 3, dark k 2,
light k 2, dark k 3, repeat from *, end with dark k 1.

5th round.--Light k 1, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 2, light k 1, dark
k 2, light k 2, dark k 2.

6th round.--Light k 2, *, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 3, light k 2,
dark k 2, light k 3, repeat from *, end with light k 1.

7th round.--Light k 3, *, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 1, light k 2,
dark k 2, light k 5, repeat from *, end light k 2.

8th round.--Dark k 1, light k 3, dark k 2, light k 3, dark k 2, light
k 3, repeat.

9th round.--Dark k 2, *, light k 3, dark k 2, light k 1, dark k 2,
light k 3, dark k 3, repeat from *, end dark k 1.

10th round.--Dark k 3, *, light k 3, dark k 1, light k 1, dark k 1,
light k 3, dark k 5, repeat from *, end dark k 2.

11th round.--Dark k 2, *, light k 3, dark k 2, light k 1, dark k 2,
light k 3, dark k 3, repeat from *, end dark k 1.

12th round.--Dark k 1, light k 3, dark k 2, light k 3, dark k 2, light
k 3, repeat.

13th round.--Light k 3, *, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 1, light k 2,
dark k 2, light k 5, repeat from *, end light k 2.

14th round.--Light k 2, *, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 3, light k 2,
dark k 2, light k 3, repeat from *, end light k 1.

15th round.--Light k 1, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 2, light k 1, dark
k 2, light k 2, dark k 2, repeat.

16th round.--Dark k 2, *, light k 2, dark k 2, light k 3, dark k 2,
light k 2, dark k 3, repeat from *, end dark k 1.

17th round.--Dark k 1, light k 2, dark k 2, light k 2, dark k 1, light
k 2, dark k 2, light k 2, repeat.

18th round.--Light k 2, *, dark k 4, light k 3, repeat from *, end
light k 1, repeat.

19th round.--Light k 1, dark k 6, repeat. This round finishes the
diamond.

Knit 3 rounds with dark wool.

Knit 1 round with light wool.

5th round.--K 1 with dark wool, k 1 with light alternately.

6th round.--K 1 with light wool, k 1 with dark alternately.

7th round.--Knit with light wool, which you afterwards break off.

8th round.--Knit with dark wool.

9th round.--K 1, p 1 alternately.

10th round.--P 1, k 1 alternately.

Repeat 9th and 10th rounds until your top measures, from casting on,
_six_ inches.

Knit the rest of your stocking in Alloa yarn with needles No. 12.
Don't forget in the 1st round to take two stitches together at
intervals, to make the number right for whichever stocking leg you are
going to knit.

The Scotch custom of having wooden legs to dry the stockings on when
they are washed, prevents their running up, and keeps them a very good
shape.




BY SAME AUTHOR.


   WINTER COMFORTS, AND HOW TO KNIT THEM. Post free, 1_s._ 1_d._

   CHILDREN'S COMFORTS, AND HOW I KNIT THEM. Post free, 1_s._ 6_d._

   HOW TO KNIT THE RICHMOND GLOVE. Post free, 6-1/2_d._

   HOW TO KNIT SOCKS. By E. RYDER. Post free, 1_s._ 1_d._

   HOW TO KNIT STOCKINGS. By E. RYDER. Post free, 1_s._ 1_d._

   HOW TO KNIT SPUN SILK SOCKS AND STOCKINGS. By E. RYDER. Post
   free, 1_s._ 1_d._

     These Knitting Cards can be procured from

     MR. COOKES,

     _Stationer_,

     RICHMOND, YORKSHIRE.