A thousand times or more had Dioneo's story moved the modest ladies to
laughter, so quaint and comical did his words appear to them; then,
whenas he had made an end thereof, the queen, knowing the term of her
sovranty to be come, lifted the laurel from her head and set it
merrily on that of Filostrato, saying: "We shall presently see if the
wolf will know how to govern the ewes better than the ewes have
governed the wolves." Filostrato, hearing this, said, laughing, "An I
were hearkened to, the wolves had taught the ewes to put the devil in
hell, no worse than Rustico taught Alibech; wherefore do ye not style
us wolven, since you yourselves have not been ewen. Algates, I will
govern the kingdom committed to me to the best of my power." "Harkye,
Filostrato," rejoined Neifile, "in seeking to teach us, you might have
chanced to learn sense, even as did Masetto of Lamporecchio of the
nuns, and find your tongue what time your bones should have learnt to
whistle without a master."

Filostrato, finding that he still got a Roland for his Oliver,[205]
gave over pleasantry and addressed himself to the governance of the
kingdom committed to him. Wherefore, letting call the seneschal, he
was fain to know at what point things stood all and after discreetly
ordained that which he judged would be well and would content the
company for such time as his seignory should endure. Then, turning to
the ladies, "Lovesome ladies," quoth he, "since I knew good from evil,
I have, for my ill fortune, been still subject unto Love for the
charms of one or other of you; nor hath humility neither obedience,
no, nor the assiduous ensuing him in all his usances, in so far as it
hath been known of me, availed me but that first I have been abandoned
for another and after have still gone from bad to worse; and so I
believe I shall fare unto my death; wherefore it pleaseth me that it
be discoursed to-morrow of none other matter than that which is most
conformable to mine own case, to wit, OF THOSE WHOSE LOVES HAVE HAD
UNHAPPY ENDING, for that I in the long run look for a most unhappy
[issue to mine own]; nor was the name by which you call me conferred
on me for otherwhat by such an one who knew well what it meant."[206]
So saying, he rose to his feet and dismissed every one until
supper-time.

[Footnote 205: Lit. that scythes were no less plenty that he had
arrows (_che falci si trovavano non meno che egli avesse strali_), a
proverbial expression the exact bearing of which I do not know, but
whose evident sense I have rendered in the equivalent English idiom.]

[Footnote 206: Syn. what he said (_che si dire_). See ante, p. 11,
note.]

The garden was so goodly and so delightsome that there was none who
elected to go forth thereof, in the hope of finding more pleasance
elsewhere. Nay, the sun, now grown mild, making it nowise irksome to
give chase to the fawns and kids and rabbits and other beasts which
were thereabout and which, as they sat, had come maybe an hundred
times to disturb them by skipping through their midst, some addressed
themselves to pursue them. Dioneo and Fiammetta fell to singing of
Messer Guglielmo and the Lady of Vergiu,[207] whilst Filomena and
Pamfilo sat down to chess; and so, some doing one thing and some
another, the time passed on such wise that the hour of supper came
well nigh unlooked for; whereupon, the tables being set round about
the fair fountain, they supped there in the evening with the utmost
delight.

[Footnote 207: Apparently the well-known fabliau of the Dame de Vergy,
upon which Marguerite d'AngoulÃªme founded the seventieth story of the
Heptameron.]

As soon as the tables were taken away, Filostrato, not to depart from
the course holden of those who had been queens before him, commanded
Lauretta to lead up a dance and sing a song. "My lord," answered she,
"I know none of other folk's songs, nor have I in mind any of mine own
which should best beseem so joyous a company; but, an you choose one
of those which I have, I will willingly sing it." Quote the king,
"Nothing of thine can be other than goodly and pleasing; wherefore
sing us such as thou hast." Lauretta, then, with a sweet voice enough,
but in a somewhat plaintive style, began thus, the other ladies
answering:

       No maid disconsolate
         Hath cause as I, alack!
       Who sigh for love in vain, to mourn her fate.

     He who moves heaven and all the stars in air
       Made me for His delight
     Lovesome and sprightly, kind and debonair,
       E'en here below to give each lofty spright
     Some inkling of that fair
       That still in heaven abideth in His sight;
       But erring men's unright,
         Ill knowing me, my worth
           Accepted not, nay, with dispraise did bate.

     Erst was there one who held me dear and fain
       Took me, a youngling maid,
     Into his arms and thought and heart and brain,
       Caught fire at my sweet eyes; yea time, unstayed
     Of aught, that flits amain
       And lightly, all to wooing me he laid.
       I, courteous, nought gainsaid
         And held[208] him worthy me;
           But now, woe's me, of him I'm desolate.

     Then unto me there did himself present
       A youngling proud and haught,
     Renowning him for valorous and gent;
       He took and holds me and with erring thought[209]
     To jealousy is bent;
       Whence I, alack! nigh to despair am wrought,
       As knowing myself,--brought
         Into this world for good
           Of many an one,--engrossed of one sole mate.

     The luckless hour I curse, in very deed,
       When I, alas! said yea,
     Vesture to change,--so fair in that dusk wede
       I was and glad, whereas in this more gay
     A weary life I lead,
       Far less than erst held honest, welaway!
       Ah, dolorous bridal day,
         Would God I had been dead
           Or e'er I proved thee in such ill estate!

     O lover dear, with whom well pleased was I
       Whilere past all that be,--
     Who now before Him sittest in the sky
       Who fashioned us,--have pity upon me
     Who cannot, though I die,
       Forget thee for another; cause me see
       The flame that kindled thee
         For me lives yet unquenched
           And my recall up thither[210] impetrate.

[Footnote 208: Lit. made (_Di me il feci digno_).]

[Footnote 209: _i.e._ false suspicion (_falso pensiero_).]

[Footnote 210: _i.e._ to heaven (_e costa su m'impetra la tornata_).]

Here Lauretta made an end of her song, wherein, albeit attentively
followed of all, she was diversely apprehended of divers persons, and
there were those who would e'en understand, Milan-fashion, that a good
hog was better than a handsome wench;[211] but others were of a
loftier and better and truer apprehension, whereof it booteth not to
tell at this present. Thereafter the king let kindle store of
flambeaux upon the grass and among the flowers and caused sing divers
other songs, until every star began to decline, that was above the
horizon, when, deeming it time for sleep, he bade all with a good
night betake themselves to their chambers.

[Footnote 211: The pertinence of this allusion, which probably refers
to some current Milanese proverbial saying, the word _tosa_, here used
by Boccaccio for "wench," belonging to the Lombard dialect, is not
very clear. The expression "Milan-fashion" (_alla melanese_) may be
supposed to refer to the proverbial materialism of the people of
Lombardy.]


HERE ENDETH THE THIRD DAY
OF THE DECAMERON




_Day the Fourth_

     HERE BEGINNETH THE FOURTH DAY OF THE DECAMERON WHEREIN UNDER
     THE GOVERNANCE OF FILOSTRATO IS DISCOURSED OF THOSE WHOSE
     LOVES HAVE HAD UNHAPPY ENDINGS


Dearest ladies, as well by words of wise men heard as by things many a
time both seen and read of myself, I had conceived that the boisterous
and burning blast of envy was apt to smite none but lofty towers or
the highest summits of the trees; but I find myself mistaken in my
conceit, for that, fleeing, as I have still studied to flee, from the
cruel onslaught of that raging wind, I have striven to go, not only in
the plains, but in the very deepest of the valleys, as many manifestly
enough appear to whoso considereth these present stories, the which
have been written by me, not only in vulgar Florentine and in prose
and without [author's] name, but eke in as humble and sober a style as
might be. Yet for all this have I not availed to escape being cruelly
shaken, nay, well nigh uprooted, of the aforesaid wind and all torn of
the fangs of envy; wherefore I can very manifestly understand that to
be true which the wise use to say, to wit, that misery alone in things
present is without envy.[212]

[Footnote 212: Sic (_senza invidia_); but the meaning is that misery
alone is without _enviers_.]

There are then, discreet ladies, some who, reading these stories, have
said that you please me overmuch and that it is not a seemly thing
that I should take so much delight in pleasuring and solacing you; and
some have said yet worse of commending you as I do. Others, making a
show of wishing to speak more maturely, have said that it sorteth ill
with mine age henceforth to follow after things of this kind, to wit,
to discourse of women or to study to please them. And many, feigning
themselves mighty tender of my repute, avouch that I should do more
wisely to abide with the Muses on Parnassus than to busy myself among
you with these toys. Again, there be some who, speaking more
despitefully than advisedly, have said that I should do more
discreetly to consider whence I might get me bread than to go peddling
after these baubles, feeding upon wind; and certain others, in
disparagement of my pains, study to prove the things recounted by me
to have been otherwise than as I present them to you.

With such, then, and so many blusterings,[213] such atrocious
backbitings, such needle-pricks, noble ladies, am I, what while I
battle in your service, baffled and buffeted and transfixed even to
the quick. The which things, God knoweth, I hear and apprehend with an
untroubled mind; and albeit my defence in this pertaineth altogether
unto you, natheless, I purpose not to spare mine own pains; nay,
without answering so much [at large] as it might behove, I mean to rid
mine ears of them with some slight rejoinder, and that without delay;
for that if even now, I being not yet come to[214] the third part of
my travail, they[215] are many and presume amain, I opine that, ere I
come to the end thereof, they may, having had no rebuff at the first,
on such wise be multiplied that with whatsoever little pains of theirs
they might overthrow me, nor might your powers, great though they be,
avail to withstand this.

[Footnote 213: _i.e._ blasts of calumny.]

[Footnote 214: _i.e._ having not yet accomplished.]

[Footnote 215: _i.e._ my censors.]

But, ere I come to make answer to any of them, it pleaseth me, in mine
own defence, to relate, not an entire story,--lest it should seem I
would fain mingle mine own stories with those of so commendable a
company as that which I have presented to you,--but a part of
one,--that so its very default [of completeness] may attest that it is
none of those,--and accordingly, speaking to my assailants, I say that
in our city, a good while agone, there was a townsman, by name Filippo
Balducci, a man of mean enough extraction, but rich and well addressed
and versed in such matters as his condition comported. He had a wife,
whom he loved with an exceeding love, as she him, and they lived a
peaceful life together, studying nothing so much as wholly to please
one another. In course of time it came to pass, as it cometh to pass
of all, that the good lady departed this life and left Filippo nought
of herself but one only son, begotten of him and maybe two years old.
Filippo for the death of his lady abode as disconsolate as ever man
might, having lost a beloved one, and seeing himself left alone and
forlorn of that company which most he loved, he resolved to be no more
of the world, but to give himself altogether to the service of God and
do the like with his little son. Wherefore, bestowing all his good for
the love of God,[216] he repaired without delay to the top of Mount
Asinajo, where he took up his abode with his son in a little hut and
there living with him upon alms, in the practice of fasts and prayers,
straitly guarded himself from discoursing whereas the boy was, of any
temporal thing, neither suffered him see aught thereof, lest this
should divert him from the service aforesaid, but still bespoke him of
the glories of life eternal and of God and the saints, teaching him
nought but pious orisons; and in this way of life he kept him many
years, never suffering him go forth of the hermitage nor showing him
aught other than himself.

[Footnote 216: _i.e._ in alms.]

Now the good man was used to come whiles into Florence, where being
succoured, according to his occasions, of the friends of God, he
returned to his hut, and it chanced one day that, his son being now
eighteen years old and Filippo an old man, the lad asked him whither
he went. Filippo told him and the boy said, "Father mine, you are now
an old man and can ill endure fatigue; why do you not whiles carry me
to Florence and bring me to know the friends and devotees of God and
yourself, to the end that I, who am young and better able to toil than
you, may after, whenas it pleaseth you, go to Florence for our
occasions, whilst you abide here?" The worthy man, considering that
his son was now grown to man's estate and thinking him so inured to
the service of God that the things of this world might thenceforth
uneath allure him to themselves, said in himself, "The lad saith
well"; and accordingly, having occasion to go thither, he carried him
with him. There the youth, seeing the palaces, the houses, the
churches and all the other things whereof one seeth all the city full,
began, as one who had never to his recollection beheld the like, to
marvel amain and questioned his father of many things what they were
and how they were called. Filippo told him and he, hearing him, abode
content and questioned of somewhat else.

As they went thus, the son asking and the father answering, they
encountered by chance a company of pretty and well-dressed young
women, coming from a wedding, whom as soon as the young man saw, he
asked his father what manner of things these were. "My son," answered
Filippo, "cast your eyes on the ground and look not at them, for that
they are an ill thing." Quoth the son, "And how are they called?" The
father, not to awaken in the lad's mind a carnal appetite less than
useful, would not name them by the proper name, to wit, women, but
said, "They are called green geese." Whereupon, marvellous to relate,
he who have never seen a woman and who recked not of palaces nor oxen
nor horses nor asses nor monies nor of aught else he had seen, said
suddenly, "Father mine, I prithee get me one of these green geese."
"Alack, my son," replied the father, "hold they peace; I tell thee
they are an ill thing." "How!" asked the youth. "Are ill things then
made after this fashion?" and Filippo answered, "Ay." Then said the
son, "I know not what you would say nor why these are an ill thing;
for my part, meseemeth I never yet saw aught goodly or pleasing as are
these. They are fairer than the painted angels you have shown me
whiles. For God's sake, an you reck of me, contrive that we may carry
one of yonder green geese back with us up yonder, and I will give it
to eat." "Nay," answered the father, "I will not: thou knowest not
whereon they feed." And he understood incontinent that nature was
stronger than his wit and repented him of having brought the youth to
Florence. But I will have it suffice me to have told this much of the
present story and return to those for whose behoof I have related it.

Some, then, of my censurers say that I do ill, young ladies, in
studying overmuch to please you and that you please me overmuch. Which
things I do most openly confess, to wit, that you please me and that I
study to please you, and I ask them if they marvel thereat,--considering
(let be the having known the dulcet kisses and amorous embracements
and delightsome couplings that are of you, most sweet ladies, often
gotten) only my having seen and still seeing your dainty manners and
lovesome beauty and sprightly grace and above all your womanly
courtesy,--whenas he who had been reared and bred on a wild and
solitary mountain and within the bounds of a little cell, without
other company than his father, no sooner set eyes on you than you
alone were desired of him, you alone sought, you alone followed with
the eagerness of passion. Will they, then, blame me, back bite me,
rend me with their tongues if I, whose body Heaven created all apt to
love you, I, who from my childhood vowed my soul to you, feeling the
potency of the light of your eyes and the sweetness of your honeyed
words and the flame enkindled by your piteous sighs,--if, I say, you
please me or if I study to please you, seeing that you over all else
pleased a hermitling, a lad without understanding, nay, rather, a wild
animal? Certes, it is only those, who, having neither sense nor
cognizance of the pleasures and potency of natural affection, love you
not nor desire to be loved of you, that chide me thus; and of these I
reck little.

As for those who go railing anent mine age, it would seem they know
ill that, for all the leek hath a white head, the tail thereof is
green. But to these, laying aside pleasantry, I answer that never, no,
not to the extreme limit of my life, shall I repute it to myself for
shame to seek to please those whom Guido Cavalcanti and Dante
Alighieri, when already stricken in years, and Messer Cino da Pistoja,
when a very old man, held in honour and whose approof was dear to
them. And were it not to depart from the wonted usance of discourse, I
would cite history in support and show it to be all full of stories of
ancient and noble men who in their ripest years have still above all
studied to please the ladies, the which an they know not, let them go
learn. That I should abide with the Muses on Parnassus, I confess to
be good counsel; but, since we can neither abide for ever with the
Muses, nor they with us, it is nothing blameworthy if, whenas it
chanceth a man is parted from them, he take delight in seeing that
which is like unto them. The muses are women, and albeit women may not
avail to match with them, yet at first sight they have a semblance of
them; insomuch that, an they pleased me not for aught else, for this
they should please me; more by token that women have aforetime been to
me the occasion of composing a thousand verses, whereas the Muses
never were to me the occasion of making any. They aided me, indeed,
and showed me how to compose the verses in question; and peradventure,
in the writing of these present things, all lowly though they be, they
have come whiles to abide with me, in token maybe and honour of the
likeness that women bear to them; wherefore, in inditing these toys, I
stray not so far from Mount Parnassus nor from the Muses as many
belike conceive.

But what shall we say to those who have such compassion on my hunger
that they counsel me provide myself bread? Certes, I know not, save
that, whenas I seek to imagine in myself what would be their answer,
an I should of necessity beseech them thereof, to wit, of bread,
methinketh they would reply, "Go seek it among thy fables." Indeed,
aforetime poets have found more thereof among their fables than many a
rich man among his treasures, and many, following after their fables,
have caused their age to flourish; whereas, on the contrary, many, in
seeking to have more bread than they needed, have perished miserably.
What more [shall I say?] Let them drive me forth, whenas I ask it of
them, not that, Godamercy, I have yet need thereof; and even should
need betide, I know with the Apostle Paul both how to abound and
suffer need;[217] wherefore let none be more careful of me than I am
of myself. For those who say that these things have not been such as I
have here set them down, I would fain have them produce the originals,
and an these latter accord not with that of which I write, I will
confess their objection for just and will study to amend myself; but
till otherwhat than words appeareth, I will leave them to their
opinion and follow mine own, saying of them that which they say of me.

[Footnote 217: "I know both how to be abased and I know how to abound;
everywhere and in all things I am instructed both to be full and to be
hungry, both to abound and suffer need."--_Philippians_ iv. 12.]

Wherefore, deeming that for the nonce I have answered enough, I say
that, armed, as I hope to be, with God's aid and yours, gentlest
ladies, and with fair patience, I will fare on with this that I have
begun, turning my back to the wind aforesaid and letting it blow, for
that I see not that aught can betide me other than that which betideth
thin dust, the which a whirlwind, whenas it bloweth, either stirreth
not from the earth, or, an it stir it, carrieth it aloft and leaveth
it oftentimes upon the heads of men and upon the crowns of kings and
emperors, nay, bytimes upon high palaces and lofty towers, whence an
it fall, it cannot go lower than the place wherefrom it was uplifted.
And if ever with all my might I vowed myself to seek to please you in
aught, now more than ever shall I address myself thereto; for that I
know none can with reason say otherwhat than that I and others who
love you do according to nature, whose laws to seek to gainstand
demandeth overgreat strength, and oftentimes not only in vain, but to
the exceeding hurt of whoso striveth to that end, is this strength
employed. Such strength I confess I have not nor ever desired in this
to have; and an I had it, I had liefer lend it to others than use it
for myself. Wherefore, let the carpers be silent and an they avail not
to warm themselves, let them live star-stricken[218] and abiding in
their delights--or rather their corrupt appetites,--leave me to abide
in mine for this brief life that is appointed me. But now, fair
ladies, for that we have strayed enough, needs must we return whence
we set out and ensue the ordinance commenced.

[Footnote 218: _i.e._ benumbed (_assiderati_).]

The sun had already banished every star from the sky and had driven
from the earth the humid vapours of the night, when Filostrato,
arising, caused all his company arise and with them betook himself to
the fair garden, where they all proceeded to disport themselves, and
the eating-hour come, they dined whereas they had supped on the
foregoing evening. Then, after having slept, what time the sun was at
its highest, they seated themselves, after the wonted fashion, hard by
the fair fountain, and Filostrato bade Fiammetta give beginning to the
story-telling; whereupon, without awaiting further commandment, she
began with womanly grace as follows:




THE FIRST STORY

[Day the Fourth]

     TANCRED, PRINCE OF SALERNO, SLAYETH HIS DAUGHTER'S LOVER AND
     SENDETH HER HIS HEART IN A BOWL OF GOLD; WHEREUPON, POURING
     POISONED WATER OVER IT, SHE DRINKETH THEREOF AND DIETH


"Our king hath this day appointed us a woeful subject of discourse,
considering that, whereas we came hither to make merry, needs must we
tell of others' tears, the which may not be recounted without moving
both those who tell and those who hearken to compassion thereof. He
hath mayhap done this somedele to temper the mirth of the foregoing
days; but, whatsoever may have moved him thereto, since it pertaineth
not to me to change his pleasure, I will relate a piteous chance, nay,
an ill-fortuned and a worthy of your tears.

Tancred, Lord of Salerno, was a humane prince and benign enough of
nature, (had he not in his old age imbrued his hands in lover's
blood,) who in all the course of his life had but one daughter, and
happier had he been if he had none. She was of him as tenderly loved
as ever daughter of father, and knowing not, by reason of this his
tender love for her, how to part with her, he married her not till she
had long overpassed the age when she should have had a husband. At
last, he gave her to wife to a son of the Duke of Capua, with whom
having abidden a little while, she was left a widow and returned to
her father. Now she was most fair of form and favour, as ever was
woman, and young and sprightly and learned perchance more than is
required of a lady. Abiding, then, with her father in all ease and
luxury, like a great lady as she was, and seeing that, for the love he
bore her, he recked little of marrying her again, nor did it seem to
her a seemly thing to require him thereof, she bethought herself to
seek, an it might be, to get her privily a worthy lover. She saw men
galore, gentle and simple, frequent her father's court, and
considering the manners and fashions of many, a young serving-man of
her father's, Guiscardo by name, a man of humble enough extraction,
but nobler of worth and manners than whatsoever other, pleased her
over all and of him, seeing him often, she became in secret ardently
enamoured, approving more and more his fashions every hour; whilst the
young man, who was no dullard, perceiving her liking for him, received
her into his heart, on such wise that his mind was thereby diverted
from well nigh everything other than the love of her.

Each, then, thus secretly tendering the other, the young lady, who
desired nothing so much as to foregather with him, but had no mind to
make any one a confidant of her passion, bethought herself of a rare
device to apprize him of the means; to wit, she wrote him a letter,
wherein she showed him how he should do to foregather with her on the
ensuing day, and placing it in the hollow of a cane, gave the letter
jestingly to Guiscardo, saying, 'Make thee a bellows thereof for thy
serving-maid, wherewith she may blow up the fire to-night.' Guiscardo
took the cane and bethinking himself that she would not have given it
him nor spoken thus, without some cause, took his leave and returned
therewith to his lodging. There he examined the cane and seeing it to
be cleft, opened it and found therein the letter, which having read
and well apprehended that which he had to do, he was the joyfullest
man alive and set about taking order how he might go to her, according
to the fashion appointed him of her.

There was, beside the prince's palace, a grotto hewn out of the rock
and made in days long agone, and to this grotto some little light was
given by a tunnel[219] by art wrought in the mountain, which latter,
for that the grotto was abandoned, was well nigh blocked at its mouth
with briers and weeds that had overgrown it. Into this grotto one
might go by a privy stair which was in one of the ground floor rooms
of the lady's apartment in the palace and which was shut in by a very
strong door. This stair was so out of all folk's minds, for that it
had been unused from time immemorial, that well nigh none remembered
it to be there; but Love, to whose eyes there is nothing so secret but
it winneth, had recalled it to the memory of the enamoured lady, who,
that none should get wind of the matter, had laboured sore many days
with such tools as she might command, ere she could make shift to open
the door; then, going down alone thereby into the grotto and seeing
the tunnel, she sent to bid Guiscardo study to come to her thereby and
acquainted him with the height which herseemed should be from the
mouth thereof to the ground.

[Footnote 219: Or airshaft (_spiraglio_).]

To this end Guiscardo promptly made ready a rope with certain knots
and loops, whereby he might avail to descend and ascend, and donning a
leathern suit, that might defend him from the briers, he on the
ensuing night repaired, without letting any know aught of the matter,
to the mouth of the tunnel. There making one end of the rope fast to a
stout tree-stump that had grown up in the mouth, he let himself down
thereby into the grotto and there awaited the lady, who, on the
morrow, feigning a desire to sleep, dismissed her women and shut
herself up alone in her chamber; then, opening the privy door, she
descended into the grotto, where she found Guiscardo. They greeted one
another with marvellous joy and betook themselves to her chamber,
where they abode great part of the day in the utmost delight; and
after they had taken order together for the discreet conduct of their
loves, so they might abide secret, Guiscardo returned to the grotto,
whilst she shut the privy door and went forth to her women. The night
come, Guiscardo climbed up by his rope to the mouth of the tunnel and
issuing forth whence he had entered in, returned to his lodging; and
having learned this road, he in process of time returned many times
thereafter.

But fortune, jealous of so long and so great a delight, with a woeful
chance changed the gladness of the two lovers into mourning and
sorrow; and it befell on this wise. Tancred was wont to come bytimes
all alone into his daughter's chamber and there abide with her and
converse awhile and after go away. Accordingly, one day, after dinner,
he came thither, what time the lady (whose name was Ghismonda) was in
a garden of hers with all her women, and willing not to take her from
her diversion, he entered her chamber, without being seen or heard of
any. Finding the windows closed and the curtains let down over the
bed, he sat down in a corner on a hassock at the bedfoot and leant his
head against the bed; then, drawing the curtain over himself, as if he
had studied to hide himself there, he fell asleep. As he slept thus,
Ghismonda, who, as ill chance would have it, had appointed her lover
to come thither that day, softly entered the chamber, leaving her
women in the garden, and having shut herself in, without perceiving
that there was some one there, opened the secret door to Guiscardo,
who awaited her. They straightway betook themselves to bed, as of
their wont, and what while they sported and solaced themselves
together, it befell that Tancred awoke and heard and saw that which
Guiscardo and his daughter did; whereat beyond measure grieved, at
first he would have cried out at them, but after bethought himself to
keep silence and abide, an he might, hidden, so with more secrecy and
less shame to himself he might avail to do that which had already
occurred to his mind.

The two lovers abode a great while together, according to their
usance, without observing Tancred, and coming down from the bed,
whenas it seemed to them time, Guiscardo returned to the grotto and
she departed the chamber; whereupon Tancred, for all he was an old
man, let himself down into the garden by a window and returned, unseen
of any, to his own chamber, sorrowful unto death. That same night, at
the time of the first sleep, Guiscardo, by his orders, was seized by
two men, as he came forth of the tunnel, and carried secretly, trussed
as he was in his suit of leather, to Tancred, who, whenas he saw him,
said, well nigh weeping, 'Guiscardo, my kindness to thee merited not
the outrage and the shame thou hast done me in mine own flesh and
blood, as I have this day seen with my very eyes.' Whereto Guiscardo
answered nothing but this, 'Love can far more than either you or I.'
Tancred then commanded that he should be kept secretly under guard and
in one of the chambers of the palace, and so was it done.

On the morrow, having meanwhile revolved in himself many and divers
devices, he betook himself, after eating, as of his wont, to his
daughter's chamber and sending for the lady, who as yet knew nothing
of these things, shut himself up with her and proceeded, with tears in
his eyes, to bespeak her thus: 'Ghismonda, meseemed I knew thy virtue
and thine honesty, nor might it ever have occurred to my mind, though
it were told me, had I not seen it with mine own eyes, that thou
wouldst, even so much as in thought, have abandoned thyself to any
man, except he were thy husband; wherefore in this scant remnant of
life that my eld reserveth unto me, I shall still abide sorrowful,
remembering me of this. Would God, an thou must needs stoop to such
wantonness, thou hadst taken a man sortable to thy quality! But,
amongst so many who frequent my court, thou hast chosen Guiscardo, a
youth of the meanest condition, reared in our court, well nigh of
charity, from a little child up to this day; wherefore thou hast put
me in sore travail of mind, for that I know not what course to take
with thee. With Guiscardo, whom I caused take yesternight, as he
issued forth of the tunnel and have in ward, I am already resolved how
to deal; but with thee God knoweth I know not what to do. On one side
love draweth me, which I still borne thee more than father ever bore
daughter, and on the other most just despite, conceived for thine
exceeding folly; the one would have me pardon thee, the other would
have me, against my nature, deal harshly by thee. But ere I come to a
decision, I would fain hear what thou hast to say to this.' So saying,
he bowed his head and wept sore as would a beaten child.

Ghismonda, hearing her father's words and seeing that not only was her
secret love discovered, but Guiscardo taken, felt an inexpressible
chagrin and came many a time near upon showing it with outcry and
tears, as women mostly do; nevertheless, her haughty soul
overmastering that weakness, with marvellous fortitude she composed
her countenance and rather than proffer any prayer for herself,
determined inwardly to abide no more on life, doubting not but her
Guiscardo was already dead. Wherefore, not as a woman rebuked and
woeful for her default, but as one undaunted and valiant, with dry
eyes and face open and nowise troubled, she thus bespoke her father:
'Tancred, I purpose neither to deny nor to entreat, for that the one
would profit me nothing nor would I have the other avail me; more by
token that I am nowise minded to seek to render thy mansuetude and
thine affection favourable to me, but rather, confessing the truth,
first with true arguments to vindicate mine honour and after with
deeds right resolutely to ensue the greatness of my soul. True is it I
have loved and love Guiscardo, and what while I live, which will be
little, I shall love him, nor, if folk live after death, shall I ever
leave loving him; but unto this it was not so much my feminine frailty
that moved me as thy little solicitude to remarry me and his own
worth.

It should have been manifest to thee, Tancred, being as thou art flesh
and blood, that thou hadst begotten a daughter of flesh and blood and
not of iron or stone; and thou shouldst have remembered and should
still remember, for all thou art old, what and what like are the laws
of youth and with what potency they work; nor, albeit thou, being a
man, hast in thy best years exercised thyself in part in arms,
shouldst thou the less know what ease and leisure and luxury can do in
the old, to say nothing of the young. I am, then, as being of thee
begotten, of flesh and blood and have lived so little that I am yet
young and (for the one and the other reason) full of carnal desire,
whereunto the having aforetime, by reason of marriage, known what
pleasure it is to give accomplishment to such desire hath added
marvellous strength. Unable, therefore, to withstand the strength of
my desires, I addressed myself, being young and a woman, to ensue that
whereto they prompted me and became enamoured. And certes in this I
set my every faculty to the endeavouring that, so far as in me lay, no
shame should ensue either to thee or to me through this to which
natural frailty moved me. To this end compassionate Love and favouring
Fortune found and showed me a very occult way, whereby, unknown of
any, I won to my desire, and this, whoever it be discovered it to
thee or howsoever thou knowest it, I nowise deny.

Guiscardo I took not at hazard, as many women do; nay, of deliberate
counsel I chose him before every other and with advisement prepense
drew him to me[220] and by dint of perseverance and discretion on my
part and on his, I have long had enjoyment of my desire. Whereof it
seemeth that thou, ensuing rather vulgar prejudice than truth,
reproachest me with more bitterness than of having sinned by way of
love, saying (as if thou shouldst not have been chagrined, had I
chosen therefor a man of gentle birth,) that I have committed myself
with a man of mean condition. Wherein thou seest not that thou blamest
not my default, but that of fortune, which too often advanceth the
unworthy to high estate, leaving the worthiest alow.

[Footnote 220: Lit. introduced him to me (_a me lo 'ntrodussi_); but
Boccaccio here uses the word _introdurre_ in its rarer literal sense
to lead, to draw, to bring in.]

But now let us leave this and look somewhat to the first principles of
things, whereby thou wilt see that we all get our flesh from one same
stock and that all souls were by one same Creator created with equal
faculties, equal powers and equal virtues. Worth it was that first
distinguished between us, who were all and still are born equal;
wherefore those who had and used the greatest sum thereof were called
noble and the rest abode not noble. And albeit contrary usance hath
since obscured this primary law, yet is it nowise done away nor
blotted out from nature and good manners; wherefore he who doth
worthily manifestly showeth himself a gentleman, and if any call him
otherwise, not he who is called, but he who calleth committeth
default. Look among all thy gentlemen and examine into their worth,
their usances and their manners, and on the other hand consider those
of Guiscardo; if thou wilt consent to judge without animosity, thou
wilt say that he is most noble and that these thy nobles are all
churls. With regard to his worth and virtue, I trusted not to the
judgment of any other, but to that of thy words and of mine own eyes.
Who ever so commended him as thou didst in all those praiseworthy
things wherefor a man of worth should be commended? And certes not
without reason; for, if mine eyes deceived me not, there was no praise
given him of thee which I saw him not justify by deeds, and that more
admirably than thy words availed to express; and even had I suffered
any deceit in this, it is by thyself I should have been deceived. An,
then, thou say that I have committed myself with a man of mean
condition, thou sayst not sooth; but shouldst thou say with a poor
man, it might peradventure be conceded thee, to thy shame who hast so
ill known to put a servant of thine and a man of worth in good case;
yet poverty bereaveth not any of gentilesse; nay, rather, wealth it is
that doth this. Many kings, many great princes were once poor and many
who delve and tend sheep were once very rich.

The last doubt that thou broachest, to wit, what thou shouldst do with
me, drive it away altogether; an thou in thine extreme old age be
disposed to do that which thou usedst not, being young, namely, to
deal cruelly, wreak thy cruelty upon me, who am minded to proffer no
prayer unto thee, as being the prime cause of this sin, if sin it be;
for of this I certify thee, that whatsoever thou hast done or shalt do
with Guiscardo, an thou do not the like with me, mine own hands shall
do it. Now begone; go shed tears with women and waxing cruel, slay him
and me with one same blow, an it seem to thee we have deserved it.'

The prince knew the greatness of his daughter's soul, but
notwithstanding believed her not altogether so firmly resolved as she
said unto that which her words gave out. Wherefore, taking leave of
her and having laid aside all intent of using rigour against her
person, he thought to cool her fervent love with other's suffering and
accordingly bade Guiscardo's two guardians strangle him without noise
that same night and taking out his heart, bring it to him. They did
even as it was commanded them, and on the morrow the prince let bring
a great and goodly bowl of gold and setting therein Guiscardo's heart,
despatched it to his daughter by the hands of a very privy servant of
his, bidding him say, whenas he gave it her, 'Thy father sendeth thee
this, to solace thee of the thing thou most lovest, even as thou hast
solaced him of that which he loved most.'

Now Ghismonda, unmoved from her stern purpose, had, after her father's
departure, let bring poisonous herbs and roots and distilled and
reduced them in water, so she might have it at hand, an that she
feared should come to pass. The serving-man coming to her with the
prince's present and message, she took the cup with a steadfast
countenance and uncovered it. Whenas she saw the heart and
apprehended the words of the message, she was throughly certified that
this was Guiscardo's heart and turning her eyes upon the messenger,
said to him, 'No sepulchre less of worth than one of gold had beseemed
a heart such as this; and in this my father hath done discreetly.' So
saying, she set the heart to her lips and kissing it, said, 'Still in
everything and even to this extreme limit of my life have I found my
father's love most tender towards me; but now more than ever;
wherefore do than render him on my part for so great a gift the last
thanks I shall ever have to give him.'

Then, bending down over the cup, which she held fast, she said,
looking upon the heart, 'Alack, sweetest harbourage of all my
pleasures, accursed be his cruelty who maketh me now to see thee with
the eyes of the body! Enough was it for me at all hours to behold thee
with those of the mind. Thou hast finished thy course and hast
acquitted thyself on such wise as was vouchsafed thee of fortune; thou
art come to the end whereunto each runneth; thou hast left the toils
and miseries of the world, and of thy very enemy thou hast that
sepulchre which thy worth hath merited. There lacked nought to thee to
make thy funeral rites complete save her tears whom in life thou so
lovedst, the which that thou mightest have, God put it into the heart
of my unnatural father to send thee to me and I will give them to
thee, albeit I had purposed to die with dry eyes and visage undismayed
of aught; and having given them to thee, I will without delay so do
that my soul, thou working it,[221] shall rejoin that soul which thou
erst so dearly guardedst. And in what company could I betake me more
contentedly or with better assurance to the regions unknown than with
it?[222] Certain am I that it abideth yet herewithin[223] and vieweth
the seats of its delights and mine and as that which I am assured
still loveth me, awaiteth my soul, whereof it is over all beloved.'

[Footnote 221: _i.e._ thou being the means of bringing about the
conjunction (_adoperandol tu_).]

[Footnote 222: _i.e._ Guiscardo's soul.]

[Footnote 223: _i.e._ in the heart.]

So saying, no otherwise than as she had a fountain of water in her
head, bowing herself over the bowl, without making any womanly outcry,
she began, lamenting, to shed so many and such tears that they were a
marvel to behold, kissing the dead heart the while an infinite number
of times. Her women, who stood about her, understood not what this
heart was nor what her words meant, but, overcome with compassion,
wept all and in vain questioned her affectionately of the cause of her
lament and studied yet more, as best they knew and might, to comfort
her. The lady, having wept as much as herseemed fit, raised her head
and drying her eyes, said, 'O much-loved heart, I have accomplished
mine every office towards thee, nor is there left me aught else to do
save to come with my soul and bear thine company.' So saying, she
called for the vial wherein was the water she had made the day before
and poured the latter into the bowl where was the heart bathed with so
many of her tears; then, setting her mouth thereto without any fear,
she drank it all off and having drunken, mounted, with the cup in her
hand, upon the bed, where composing her body as most decently she
might, she pressed her dead lover's heart to her own and without
saying aught, awaited death.

Her women, seeing and hearing all this, albeit they knew not what
water this was she had drunken, had sent to tell Tancred everything,
and he, fearing that which came to pass, came quickly down into his
daughter's chamber, where he arrived what time she laid herself on her
bed and addressed himself too late to comfort her with soft words;
but, seeing the extremity wherein she was, he fell a-weeping
grievously; whereupon quoth the lady to him, 'Tancred, keep these
tears against a less desired fate than this of mine and give them not
to me, who desire them not. Who ever saw any, other than thou, lament
for that which he himself hath willed? Nevertheless, if aught yet live
in thee of the love which once thou borest me, vouchsafe me for a last
boon that, since it was not thy pleasure that I should privily and in
secret live with Guiscardo, my body may openly abide with his,
whereassoever thou hast caused cast him dead.' The agony of his grief
suffered not the prince to reply; whereupon the young lady, feeling
herself come to her end, strained the dead heart to her breast and
said, 'Abide ye with God, for I go hence.' Then, closing her eyes and
losing every sense, she departed this life of woe. Such, then, as you
have heard, was the sorrowful ending of the loves of Guiscardo and
Ghismonda, whose bodies Tancred, after much lamentation, too late
repenting him of his cruelty, caused honourably bury in one same
sepulchre, amid the general mourning of all the people of Salerno."




THE SECOND STORY

[Day the Fourth]

     FRA ALBERTO GIVETH A LADY TO BELIEVE THAT THE ANGEL GABRIEL
     IS ENAMOURED OF HER AND IN HIS SHAPE LIETH WITH HER SUNDRY
     TIMES; AFTER WHICH, FOR FEAR OF HER KINSMEN, HE CASTETH
     HIMSELF FORTH OF HER WINDOW INTO THE CANAL AND TAKETH REFUGE
     IN THE HOUSE OF A POOR MAN, WHO ON THE MORROW CARRIETH HIM,
     IN THE GUISE OF A WILD MAN OF THE WOODS, TO THE PIAZZA,
     WHERE, BEING RECOGNIZED, HE IS TAKEN BY HIS BRETHREN AND PUT
     IN PRISON


The story told by Fiammetta had more than once brought the tears to
the eyes of the ladies her companions; but, it being now finished, the
king with a stern countenance said, "My life would seem to me a little
price to give for half the delight that Guiscardo had with Ghismonda,
nor should any of you ladies marvel thereat, seeing that every hour of
my life I suffer a thousand deaths, nor for all that is a single
particle of delight vouchsafed me. But, leaving be my affairs for the
present, it is my pleasure that Pampinea follow on the order of the
discourse with some story of woeful chances and fortunes in part like
to mine own; which if she ensue like as Fiammetta hath begun, I shall
doubtless begin to feel some dew fallen upon my fire." Pampinea,
hearing the order laid upon her, more by her affection apprehended the
mind of the ladies her companions than that of Filostrato by his
words,[224] wherefore, being more disposed to give them some diversion
than to content the king, farther than in the mere letter of his
commandment, she bethought herself to tell a story, that should,
without departing from the proposed theme, give occasion for laughter,
and accordingly began as follows:

[Footnote 224: _i.e._ was more inclined to consider the wishes of the
ladies her companions, which she divined by sympathy, than those of
Filostrato, as shown by his words (_piÃ¹ per la sua affezione cognobbe
l'animo delle campagne che quello del re per le sue parole_). It is
difficult, however, in this instance as in many others, to discover
with certainty Boccaccio's exact meaning, owing to his affectation of
Ciceronian concision and delight in obscure elliptical forms of
construction; whilst his use of words in a remote or unfamiliar sense
and the impossibility of deciding, in certain cases, the person of the
pronouns and adjectives employed tend still farther to darken counsel.
_E.g._, if we render _affezione_ sentiment, _cognobbe_ (as
_riconobbe_) acknowledged, recognized, and read _le sue parole_ as
meaning _her_ (instead of _his_) words, the whole sense of the passage
is changed, and we must read it "more by her sentiment (_i.e._ by the
tendency and spirit of her story) recognized the inclination of her
companions than that of the king by her [actual] words." I have
commented thus at large on this passage, in order to give my readers
some idea of the difficulties which at every page beset the translator
of the Decameron and which make Boccaccio perhaps the most troublesome
of all authors to render into representative English.]

"The vulgar have a proverb to the effect that he who is naught and is
held good may do ill and it is not believed of him; the which
affordeth me ample matter for discourse upon that which hath been
proposed to me and at the same time to show what and how great is the
hypocrisy of the clergy, who, with garments long and wide and faces
paled by art and voices humble and meek to solicit the folk, but
exceeding loud and fierce to rebuke in others their own vices, pretend
that themselves by taking and others by giving to them come to
salvation, and to boot, not as men who have, like ourselves, to
purchase paradise, but as in a manner they were possessors and lords
thereof, assign unto each who dieth, according to the sum of the
monies left them by him, a more or less excellent place there,
studying thus to deceive first themselves, an they believe as they
say, and after those who put faith for that matter in their words.
Anent whom, were it permitted me to discover as much as it behoved, I
would quickly make clear to many simple folk that which they keep
hidden under those huge wide gowns of theirs. But would God it might
betide them all of their cozening tricks, as it betided a certain
minor friar, and he no youngling, but held one of the first
casuists[225] in Venice; of whom it especially pleaseth me to tell
you, so as peradventure somewhat to cheer your hearts, that are full
of compassion for the death of Ghismonda, with laughter and pleasance.

[Footnote 225: Lit. of those who _was_ held of the greatest casuists
(_di quelli che de' maggior cassesi era tenuto_). This is another very
obscure passage. The meaning of the word _cassesi_ is unknown and we
can only guess it to be a dialectic (probably Venetian) corruption of
the word _casisti_ (casuists). The Giunta edition separates the word
thus, _casse si_, making _si_ a mere corroborative prefix to _era_,
but I do not see how the alteration helps us, the word _casse_
(chests, boxes) being apparently meaningless in this connection.]

There was, then, noble ladies, in Imola, a man of wicked and corrupt
life, who was called Berto della Massa and whose lewd fashions, being
well known of the Imolese, had brought him into such ill savour with
them that there was none in the town who would credit him, even when
he said sooth; wherefore, seeing that his shifts might no longer stand
him in stead there, he removed in desperation to Venice, the
receptacle of every kind of trash, thinking to find there new means of
carrying on his wicked practices. There, as if conscience-stricken for
the evil deeds done by him in the past, feigning himself overcome with
the utmost humility and waxing devouter than any man alive, he went
and turned Minor Friar and styled himself Fra Alberta da Imola; in
which habit he proceeded to lead, to all appearance, a very austere
life, greatly commending abstinence and mortification and never eating
flesh nor drinking wine, whenas he had not thereof that which was to
his liking. In short, scarce was any ware of him when from a thief, a
pimp, a forger, a manslayer, he suddenly became a great preacher,
without having for all that forsworn the vices aforesaid, whenas he
might secretly put them in practice. Moreover, becoming a priest, he
would still, whenas he celebrated mass at the altar, an he were seen
of many, beweep our Saviour's passion, as one whom tears cost little,
whenas he willed it. Brief, what with his preachings and his tears, he
contrived on such wise to inveigle the Venetians that he was trustee
and depository of well nigh every will made in the town and guardian
of folk's monies, besides being confessor and counsellor of the most
part of the men and women of the place; and doing thus, from wolf he
was become shepherd and the fame of his sanctity was far greater in
those parts than ever was that of St. Francis at Assisi.

It chanced one day that a vain simple young lady, by name Madam
Lisetta da Ca[226] Quirino, wife of a great merchant who was gone with
the galleys into Flanders, came with other ladies to confess to this
same holy friar, at whose feet kneeling and having, like a true
daughter of Venice as she was (where the women are all feather-brained),
told him part of her affairs, she was asked of him if she had a lover.
Whereto she answered, with an offended air, 'Good lack, sir friar,
have you no eyes in your head? Seem my charms to you such as those of
yonder others? I might have lovers and to spare, an I would; but my
beauties are not for this one nor that. How many women do you see
whose charms are such as mine, who would be fair in Paradise?' Brief,
she said so many things of this beauty of hers that it was a weariness
to hear. Fra Alberto incontinent perceived that she savoured of folly
and himseeming she was a fit soil for his tools, he fell suddenly and
beyond measure in love with her; but, reserving blandishments for a
more convenient season, he proceeded, for the nonce, so he might show
himself a holy man, to rebuke her and tell her that this was vainglory
and so forth. The lady told him he was an ass and knew not what one
beauty was more than another, whereupon he, unwilling to vex her
overmuch, took her confession and let her go away with the others.

[Footnote 226: Venetian contraction of _Casa_, house. Da Ca Quirino,
of the Quirino house or family.]

He let some days pass, then, taking with him a trusty companion of
his, he repaired to Madam Lisetta's house and withdrawing with her
into a room apart, where none might see him, he fell on his knees
before her and said, 'Madam, I pray you for God's sake pardon me that
which I said to you last Sunday, whenas you bespoke me of your beauty,
for that the following night I was so cruelly chastised there that I
have not since been able to rise from my bed till to-day.' Quoth
Mistress Featherbrain, 'And who chastised you thus?' 'I will tell
you,' replied the monk. 'Being that night at my orisons, as I still
use to be, I saw of a sudden a great light in my cell and ere I could
turn me to see what it might be, I beheld over against me a very fair
youth with a stout cudgel in his hand, who took me by the gown and
dragging me to my feet, gave me such a drubbing that he broke every
bone in my body. I asked him why he used me thus and he answered, "For
that thou presumedst to-day, to disparage the celestial charms of
Madam Lisetta, whom I love over all things, save only God." "Who,
then, are you?" asked I; and he replied that he was the angel Gabriel.
"O my lord," said I, "I pray you pardon me"; and he, "So be it; I
pardon thee on condition that thou go to her, as first thou mayst, and
get her pardon; but if she pardons thee not, I will return to thee and
give thee such a bout of it that I will make thee a woeful man for
all the time thou shalt live here below." That which he said to me
after I dare not tell you, except you first pardon me.'

My Lady Addlepate, who was somewhat scant of wit, was overjoyed to
hear this, taking it all for gospel, and said, after a little, 'I told
you, Fra Alberto, that my charms were celestial, but, so God be mine
aid, it irketh me for you and I will pardon you forthright, so you may
come to no more harm, provided you tell me truly that which the angel
said to you after.' 'Madam,' replied Fra Alberto, 'since you pardon
me, I will gladly tell it you; but I must warn you of one thing, to
wit, that whatever I tell you, you must have a care not to repeat it
to any one alive, an you would not mar your affairs, for that you are
the luckiest lady in the world. The angel Gabriel bade me tell you
that you pleased him so much that he had many a time come to pass the
night with you, but that he feared to affright you. Now he sendeth to
tell you by me that he hath a mind to come to you one night and abide
awhile with you and (for that he is an angel and that, if he came in
angel-form, you might not avail to touch him,) he purposeth, for your
delectation, to come in guise of a man, wherefore he biddeth you send
to tell him when you would have him come and in whose form, and he
will come hither; whereof you may hold yourself blest over any other
lady alive.'

My Lady Conceit answered that it liked her well that the angel Gabriel
loved her, seeing she loved him well nor ever failed to light a candle
of a groat before him, whereas she saw him depictured, and that what
time soever he chose to come to her, he should be dearly welcome and
would find her all alone in her chamber, but on this condition, that
he should not leave her for the Virgin Mary, whose great well-wisher
it was said he was, as indeed appeareth, inasmuch as in every place
where she saw him [limned], he was on his knees before her. Moreover,
she said it must rest with him to come in whatsoever form he pleased,
so but she was not affrighted.

Then said Fra Alberto, 'Madam, you speak sagely and I will without
fail take order with him of that which you tell me. But you may do me
a great favour, which will cost you nothing; it is this, that you will
him come with this my body. And I will tell you in what you will do me
a favour; you must know that he will take my soul forth of my body and
put it in Paradise, whilst he himself will enter into me; and what
while he abideth with you, so long will my soul abide in Paradise.'
'With all my heart,' answered Dame Littlewit. 'I will well that you
have this consolation, in requital of the buffets he gave you on my
account.' Then said Fra Alberto, 'Look that he find the door of your
house open to-night, so he may come in thereat, for that, coming in
human form, as he will, he might not enter save by the door.' The lady
replied that it should be done, whereupon the monk took his leave and
she abode in such a transport of exultation that her breech touched
not her shift and herseemed a thousand years till the angel Gabriel
should come to her.

Meanwhile, Fra Alberto, bethinking him that it behoved him play the
cavalier, not the angel, that night proceeded to fortify himself with
confections and other good things, so he might not lightly be
unhorsed; then, getting leave, as soon as it was night, he repaired
with one of his comrades to the house of a woman, a friend of his,
whence he was used whiles to take his start what time he went to
course the fillies; and thence, whenas it seemed to him time, having
disguised himself, he betook him to the lady's house. There he tricked
himself out as an angel with the trappings he had brought with him and
going up, entered the chamber of the lady, who, seeing this creature
all in white, fell on her knees before him. The angel blessed her and
raising her to her feet, signed to her to go to bed, which she,
studious to obey, promptly did, and the angel after lay down with his
devotee. Now Fra Alberto was a personable man of his body and a lusty
and excellent well set up on his legs; wherefore, finding himself in
bed with Madam Lisetta, who was young and dainty, he showed himself
another guess bedfellow than her husband and many a time that night
took flight without wings, whereof she avowed herself exceeding
content; and eke he told her many things of the glories of heaven.
Then, the day drawing near, after taking order for his return, he made
off with his trappings and returned to his comrade, whom the good
woman of the house had meanwhile borne amicable company, lest he
should get a fright, lying alone.

As for the lady, no sooner had she dined than, taking her
waiting-woman with her, she betook herself to Fra Alberto and gave him
news of the angel Gabriel, telling him that which she had heard from
him of the glories of life eternal and how he was made and adding to
boot, marvellous stories of her own invention. 'Madam,' said he, 'I
know not how you fared with him; I only know that yesternight, whenas
he came to me and I did your message to him, he suddenly transported
my soul amongst such a multitude of roses and other flowers that never
was the like thereof seen here below, and I abode in one of the most
delightsome places that was aye until the morning; but what became of
my body meanwhile I know not.' 'Do I not tell you?' answered the lady.
'Your body lay all night in mine arms with the angel Gabriel. If you
believe me not, look under your left pap, whereas I gave the angel
such a kiss that the marks of it will stay by you for some days to
come.' Quoth the friar, 'Say you so? Then will I do to-day a thing I
have not done this great while; I will strip myself, to see if you
tell truth.' Then, after much prating, the lady returned home and Fra
Alberto paid her many visits in angel-form, without suffering any
hindrance.

However, it chanced one day that Madam Lisetta, being in dispute with
a gossip of hers upon the question of female charms, to set her own
above all others, said, like a woman who had little wit in her noddle,
'An you but knew whom my beauty pleaseth, in truth you would hold your
peace of other women.' The other, longing to hear, said, as one who
knew her well, 'Madam, maybe you say sooth; but knowing not who this
may be, one cannot turn about so lightly.' Thereupon quoth Lisetta,
who was eath enough to draw, 'Gossip, it must go no farther; but he I
mean is the angel Gabriel, who loveth me more than himself, as the
fairest lady (for that which he telleth me) who is in the world or the
Maremma.'[227] The other had a mind to laugh, but contained herself,
so she might make Lisetta speak farther, and said, 'Faith, madam, an
the angel Gabriel be your lover and tell you this, needs must it be
so; but methought not the angels did these things.' 'Gossip,' answered
the lady, 'you are mistaken; zounds, he doth what you wot of better
than my husband and telleth me they do it also up yonder; but, for
that I seem to him fairer than any she in heaven, he hath fallen in
love with me and cometh full oft to lie with me; seestow now?'[228]

[Footnote 227: _cf._ Artemus Ward's "Natives of the Universe and other
parts."]

[Footnote 228: _Mo vedi vu_, Venetian for _Or vedi tu_, now dost thou
see? I have rendered it by the equivalent old English form.]

The gossip, to whom it seemed a thousand years till she should be
whereas she might repeat these things, took her leave of Madam Lisetta
and foregathering at an entertainment with a great company of ladies,
orderly recounted to them the whole story. They told it again to their
husbands and other ladies, and these to yet others, and so in less
than two days Venice was all full of it. Among others to whose ears
the thing came were Lisetta's brothers-in-law, who, without saying
aught to her, bethought themselves to find the angel in question and
see if he knew how to fly, and to this end they lay several nights in
wait for him. As chance would have it, some inkling of the matter[229]
came to the ears of Fra Alberto, who accordingly repaired one night to
the lady's house, to reprove her, but hardly had he put off his
clothes ere her brothers-in-law, who had seen him come, were at the
door of her chamber to open it.

[Footnote 229: _i.e._ not of the trap laid for him by the lady's
brothers-in-law, but of her indiscretion in discovering the secret.]

Fra Alberto, hearing this and guessing what was to do, started up and
having no other resource, opened a window, which gave upon the Grand
Canal, and cast himself thence into the water. The canal was deep
there and he could swim well, so that he did himself no hurt, but made
his way to the opposite bank and hastily entering a house that stood
open there, besought a poor man, whom he found within, to save his
life for the love of God, telling him a tale of his own fashion, to
explain how he came there at that hour and naked. The good man was
moved to pity and it behoving him to go do his occasions, he put him
in his own bed and bade him abide there against his return; then,
locking him in, he went about his affairs. Meanwhile, the lady's
brothers-in-law entered her chamber and found that the angel Gabriel
had flown, leaving his wings there; whereupon, seeing themselves
baffled, they gave her all manner hard words and ultimately made off
to their own house with the angel's trappings, leaving her
disconsolate.

Broad day come, the good man with whom Fra Alberto had taken refuge,
being on the Rialto, heard how the angel Gabriel had gone that night
to lie with Madam Lisetta and being surprised by her kinsmen, had cast
himself for fear into the canal, nor was it known what was come of
him, and concluded forthright that this was he whom he had at home.
Accordingly, he returned thither and recognizing the monk, found means
after much parley, to make him fetch him fifty ducats, an he would not
have him give him up to the lady's kinsmen. Having gotten the money
and Fra Alberto offering to depart thence, the good man said to him,
'There is no way of escape for you, an it be not one that I will tell
you. We hold to-day a festival, wherein one bringeth a man clad
bear-fashion and another one accoutred as a wild man of the woods and
what not else, some one thing and some another, and there is a hunt
held in St. Mark's Place, which finished, the festival is at an end
and after each goeth whither it pleaseth him with him whom he hath
brought. An you will have me lead you thither, after one or other of
these fashions, I can after carry you whither you please, ere it be
spied out that you are here; else I know not how you are to get away,
without being recognized, for the lady's kinsmen, concluding that you
must be somewhere hereabout, have set a watch for you on all sides.'

Hard as it seemed to Fra Alberto to go on such wise, nevertheless, of
the fear he had of the lady's kinsmen, he resigned himself thereto and
told his host whither he would be carried, leaving the manner to him.
Accordingly, the other, having smeared him all over with honey and
covered him with down, clapped a chain about his neck and a mask on
his face; then giving him a great staff in on hand and in the other
two great dogs which he had fetched from the shambles he despatched
one to the Rialto to make public proclamation that whoso would see the
angel Gabriel should repair to St. Mark's Place; and this was Venetian
loyalty! This done, after a while, he brought him forth and setting
him before himself, went holding him by the chain behind, to the no
small clamour of the folk, who said all, 'What be this? What be
this?'[230] till he came to the place, where, what with those who had
followed after them and those who, hearing the proclamation, were come
thither from the Rialto, were folk without end. There he tied his wild
man to a column in a raised and high place, making a show of awaiting
the hunt, whilst the flies and gads gave the monk exceeding annoy, for
that he was besmeared with honey. But, when he saw the place well
filled, making as he would unchain his wild man, he pulled off Fra
Alberto's mask and said, 'Gentlemen, since the bear cometh not and
there is no hunt toward, I purpose, so you may not be come in vain,
that you shall see the angel Gabriel, who cometh down from heaven to
earth anights, to comfort the Venetian ladies.'

[Footnote 230: _Che xe quel?_ Venetian for _che c'e quella cosa_, What
is this thing?]

No sooner was the mask off than Fra Alberto was incontinent recognized
of all, who raised a general outcry against him, giving him the
scurviest words and the soundest rating was ever given a canting
knave; moreover, they cast in his face, one this kind of filth and
another that, and so they baited him a great while, till the news came
by chance to his brethren, whereupon half a dozen of them sallied
forth and coming thither, unchained him and threw a gown over him;
then, with a general hue and cry behind them, they carried him off to
the convent, where it is believed he died in prison, after a wretched
life. Thus then did this fellow, held good and doing ill, without it
being believed, dare to feign himself the angel Gabriel, and after
being turned into a wild man of the woods and put to shame, as he
deserved, bewailed, when too late, the sins he had committed. God
grant it happen thus to all other knaves of his fashion!"




THE THIRD STORY

[Day the Fourth]

     THREE YOUNG MEN LOVE THREE SISTERS AND FLEE WITH THEM INTO
     CRETE, WHERE THE ELDEST SISTER FOR JEALOUSY SLAYETH HER
     LOVER. THE SECOND, YIELDING HERSELF TO THE DUKE OF CRETE,
     SAVETH HER SISTER FROM DEATH, WHEREUPON HER OWN LOVER
     SLAYETH HER AND FLEETH WITH THE ELDEST SISTER. MEANWHILE THE
     THIRD LOVER AND THE YOUNGEST SISTER ARE ACCUSED OF THE NEW
     MURDER AND BEING TAKEN, CONFESS IT; THEN, FOR FEAR OF DEATH,
     THEY CORRUPT THEIR KEEPERS WITH MONEY AND FLEE TO RHODES,
     WHERE THEY DIE IN POVERTY


Filostrato, having heard the end of Pampinea's story, bethought
himself awhile and presently, turning to her, said, "There was some
little that was good and that pleased me in the ending of your story;
but there was overmuch before that which gave occasion for laughter
and which I would not have had there." Then, turning to Lauretta,
"Lady," said he, "ensue you with a better, and it may be." Quoth she,
laughing, "You are too cruel towards lovers, an you desire of them
only an ill end;[231] but, to obey you, I will tell a story of three
who all ended equally ill, having had scant enjoyment of their loves."
So saying, she began thus: "Young ladies, as you should manifestly
know, every vice may turn to the grievous hurt of whoso practiseth it,
and often of other folk also; but of all others that which with the
slackest rein carrieth us away to our peril, meseemeth is anger, which
is none otherwhat than a sudden and unconsidered emotion, aroused by
an affront suffered, and which, banishing all reason and overclouding
the eyes of the understanding with darkness, kindleth the soul to the
hottest fury. And although this often cometh to pass in men and more
in one than in another, yet hath it been seen aforetime to work
greater mischiefs in women, for that it is lightlier enkindled in
these latter and burneth in them with a fiercer flame and urgeth them
with less restraint. Nor is this to be marvelled at, for that, an we
choose to consider, we may see that fire, of its nature, catcheth
quicklier to light and delicate things than to those which are denser
and more ponderous; and we women, indeed,--let men not take it
ill,--are more delicately fashioned than they and far more mobile.
Wherefore, seeing that we are naturally inclined thereunto[232] and
considering after how our mansuetude and our loving kindness are of
repose and pleasance to the men with whom we have to do and how big
with harm and peril are anger and fury, I purpose, to the intent that
we may with a more steadfast, mind keep ourselves from these latter,
to show you by my story how the loves of three young men and as many
ladies came, as I said before, to an ill end, becoming through the ire
of one of the latter, from happy most unhappy.

[Footnote 231: _i.e._ _semble_ "an you would wish them nought but an
ill end."]

[Footnote 232: _i.e._ to anger.]

Marseilles is, as you know, a very ancient and noble city, situate in
Provence on the sea-shore, and was once more abounding in rich and
great merchants than it is nowadays. Among the latter was one called
Narnald Cluada, a man of mean extraction, but of renowned good faith
and a loyal merchant, rich beyond measure in lands and monies, who had
by a wife of his several children, whereof the three eldest were
daughters. Two of these latter, born at a birth, were fifteen and the
third fourteen years old, nor was aught awaited by their kinsfolk to
marry them but the return of Narnald, who was gone into Spain with his
merchandise. The names of the two elder were the one Ninetta and the
other Maddalena and the third called Bertella. Of Ninetta a young man
of gentle birth, though poor, called Restagnone, was enamoured as much
as man might be, and she of him, and they had contrived to do on such
wise that, without any knowing it, they had enjoyment of their loves.

They had already a pretty while enjoyed this satisfaction when it
chanced that two young companions, named the one Folco and the other
Ughetto, whose fathers were dead, leaving them very rich, fell in
love, the one with Maddalena and the other with Bertella. Restagnone,
noting this (it having been shown him of Ninetta), bethought himself
that he might make shift to supply his own lack by means of the
newcomers' love. Accordingly, he clapped up an acquaintance with them,
so that now one, now the other of them accompanied him to visit their
mistresses and his; and when himseemed he was grown privy enough with
them and much their friend, he called them one day into his house and
said to them, 'Dearest youths, our commerce should have certified you
how great is the love I bear you and that I would do for you that
which I would do for myself; and for that I love you greatly, I
purpose to discover to you that which hath occurred to my mind, and
you and I together will after take such counsel thereof as shall seem
to you best. You, an your words lie not and for that to boot which
meseemeth I have apprehended by your deeds, both daily and nightly,
burn with an exceeding passion for the two young ladies beloved of
you, as do I for the third their sister; and to this ardour, an you
will consent thereunto,[233] my heart giveth me to find a very sweet
and pleasing remedy, the which is as follows. You are both very rich,
which I am not; now, if you will agree to bring your riches into a
common stock, making me a third sharer with you therein, and determine
in which part of the world we shall go lead a merry life with our
mistresses, my heart warranteth me I can without fail so do that the
three sisters, with a great part of their father's good, will go with,
us whithersoever we shall please, and there, each with his wench, like
three brothers, we may live the happiest lives of any men in the
world. It resteth with you now to determine whether you will go about
to solace yourself in this or leave it be.'

[Footnote 233: _i.e._ to the proposal I have to make.]

The two young men, who were beyond measure inflamed, hearing that they
were to have their lasses, were not long in making up their minds, but
answered that, so this[234] should ensue, they were ready to do as he
said. Restagnone, having gotten this answer from the young men, found
means a few days after to foregather with Ninetta, to whom he could
not come without great unease, and after he had abidden with her
awhile, he told her what he had proposed to the others and with many
arguments studied to commend the emprise to her. This was little
uneath to him, seeing that she was yet more desirous than himself to
be with him without suspect; wherefore she answered him frankly that
it liked her well and that her sisters would do whatever she wished,
especially in this, and bade him make ready everything needful
therefor as quickliest he might. Restagnone accordingly returned to
the two young men, who still importuned him amain to do that whereof
he had bespoken them, and told them that, so far as concerned their
mistresses, the matter was settled. Then, having determined among
themselves to go to Crete, they sold certain lands they had, under
colour of meaning to go a-trading with the price, and having made
money of all their other goods, bought a light brigantine and secretly
equipped it to the utmost advantage.

[Footnote 234: _i.e._ the possession of their mistresses.]

Meanwhile, Ninetta, who well enough knew her sisters' mind, with soft
words inflamed them with such a liking for the venture that themseemed
they might not live to see the thing accomplished. Accordingly, the
night come when they were to go aboard the brigantine, the three
sisters opened a great coffer of their father's and taking thence a
vast quantity of money and jewels, stole out of the house, according
to the given order. They found their gallants awaiting them and going
straightway all aboard the brigantine, they thrust the oars into the
water and put out to sea nor rested till they came, on the following
evening, to Genoa, where the new lovers for the first time took ease
and joyance of their loves. There having refreshed themselves with
that whereof they had need, they set out again and sailing from port
to port, came, ere it was the eighth day, without any hindrance, to
Crete, where they bought great and goodly estates near Candia and made
them very handsome and delightsome dwelling-houses thereon. Here they
fell to living like lords and passed their days in banquets and
joyance and merrymaking, the happiest men in the world, they and their
mistresses, with great plenty of servants and hounds and hawks and
horses.

Abiding on this wise, it befell (even as we see it happen all day long
that, how much soever things may please, they grow irksome, an one
have overgreat plenty thereof) that Restagnone, who had much loved
Ninetta, being now able to have her at his every pleasure, without let
or hindrance, began to weary of her, and consequently his love for her
began to wane. Having seen at entertainment a damsel of the country, a
fair and noble young lady, who pleased him exceedingly, he fell to
courting her with all his might, giving marvellous entertainments in
her honor and plying her with all manner gallantries; which Ninetta
coming to know, she fell into such a jealousy that he could not go a
step but she heard of it and after harassed both him and herself with
words and reproaches on account thereof. But, like as overabundance of
aught begetteth weariness, even so doth the denial of a thing desired
redouble the appetite; accordingly, Ninetta's reproaches did but fan
the flame of Restagnone's new love and in process of time it came to
pass that, whether he had the favours of the lady he loved or not,
Ninetta held it for certain, whoever it was reported it to her;
wherefore she fell into such a passion of grief and thence passed into
such a fit of rage and despite that the love which she bore Restagnone
was changed to bitter hatred, and blinded by her wrath, she bethought
herself to avenge, by his death, the affront which herseemed she had
received.

Accordingly, betaking herself to an old Greek woman, a past mistress
in the art of compounding poisons, she induced her with gifts and
promises to make her a death-dealing water, which she, without
considering farther, gave Restagnone one evening to drink he being
heated and misdoubting him not thereof; and such was the potency of
the poison that, ere morning came, it had slain him. Folco and Ughetto
and their mistresses, hearing of his death and knowing not of what
poison he had died,[235] bewept him bitterly, together with Ninetta,
and caused bury him honourably. But not many days after it chanced
that the old woman, who had compounded the poisoned water for Ninetta,
was taken for some other misdeed and being put to the torture,
confessed to this amongst her other crimes, fully declaring that which
had betided by reason thereof; whereupon the Duke of Crete, without
saying aught of the matter, beset Folco's palace by surprise one night
and without any noise or gainsayal, carried off Ninetta prisoner, from
whom, without putting her to the torture, he readily got what he would
know of the death of Restagnone.

[Footnote 235: Sic (_di che veleno fosse morto_), but this is probably
a copyist's error for _che di veleno fosse morto_, _i.e._ that he had
died of poison.]

Folco and Ughetto (and from them their ladies) had privy notice from
the duke why Ninetta had been taken, the which was exceeding grievous
to them and they used their every endeavour to save her from the fire,
whereto they doubted not she would be condemned, as indeed she richly
deserved; but all seemed vain, for that the duke abode firm in willing
to do justice upon her. However, Maddalena, who was a beautiful young
woman and had long been courted by the duke, but had never yet
consented to do aught that might pleasure him, thinking that, by
complying with his wishes, she might avail to save her sister from the
fire, signified to him by a trusty messenger that she was at his
commandment in everything, provided two things should ensue thereof,
to wit, that she should have her sister again safe and sound and that
the thing should be secret. Her message pleased the duke, and after
long debate with himself if he should do as she proposed, he
ultimately agreed thereto and said that he was ready. Accordingly, one
night, having, with the lady's consent, caused detain Folco and
Ughetto, as he would fain examine them of the matter, he went secretly
to couch with Maddalena and having first made a show of putting
Ninetta in a sack and of purposing to let sink her that night in the
sea, he carried her with him to her sister, to whom on the morrow he
delivered her at parting, in payment of the night he had passed with
her, praying her that this,[236] which had been the first of their
loves, might not be the last and charging her send the guilty lady
away, lest blame betide himself and it behove him anew proceed against
her with rigour.

[Footnote 236: _i.e._ that night.]

Next morning, Folco and Ughetto, having heard that Ninetta had been
sacked overnight and believing it, were released and returned home to
comfort their mistresses for the death of their sister. However, for
all Maddalena could do to hide her, Folco soon became aware of
Ninetta's presence in the palace, whereat he marvelled exceedingly and
suddenly waxing suspicious,--for that he had heard of the duke's
passion for Maddalena,--asked the latter how her sister came to be
there. Maddalena began a long story, which she had devised to account
to him therefor, but was little believed of her lover, who was shrewd
and constrained her to confess the truth, which, after long parley,
she told him. Folco, overcome with chagrin and inflamed with rage,
pulled out a sword and slew her, whilst she in vain besought mercy;
then, fearing the wrath and justice of the duke, he left her dead in
the chamber and repairing whereas Ninetta was, said to her, with a
feigned air of cheerfulness, 'Quick, let us begone whither it hath
been appointed of thy sister that I shall carry thee, so thou mayst
not fall again into the hands of the duke.' Ninetta, believing this
and eager, in her fearfulness, to begone, set out with Folco, it being
now night, without seeking to take leave of her sister; whereupon he
and she, with such monies (which were but few) as he could lay hands
on, betook themselves to the sea-shore and embarked on board a vessel;
nor was it ever known whither they went.

On the morrow, Maddalena being found murdered, there were some who, of
the envy and hatred they bore to Ughetto, forthright gave notice
thereof to the duke, whereupon the latter, who loved Maddalena
exceedingly, ran furiously to the house and seizing Ughetto and his
lady, who as yet knew nothing of the matter,--to wit, of the departure
of Folco and Ninetta,--constrained them to confess themselves guilty,
together with Folco, of his mistress's death. They, apprehending with
reason death in consequence of this confession, with great pains
corrupted those who had them in keeping, giving them a certain sum of
money, which they kept hidden in their house against urgent
occasions, and embarking with their guards, without having leisure to
take any of their goods, fled by night to Rhodes, where they lived no
great while after in poverty and distress. To such a pass, then, did
Restagnone's mad love and Ninetta's rage bring themselves and others."




THE FOURTH STORY

[Day the Fourth]

     GERBINO, AGAINST THE PLIGHTED FAITH OF HIS GRANDFATHER, KING
     GUGLIELMO OF SICILY, ATTACKETH A SHIP OF THE KING OF TUNIS,
     TO CARRY OFF A DAUGHTER OF HIS, WHO BEING PUT TO DEATH OF
     THOSE ON BOARD, HE SLAYETH THESE LATTER AND IS AFTER HIMSELF
     BEHEADED


Lauretta, having made an end of her story, was silent, whilst the
company bewailed the illhap of the lovers, some blaming Ninetta's
anger and one saying one thing and another another, till presently the
king, raising his head, as if aroused from deep thought, signed to
Elisa to follow on; whereupon she began modestly, "Charming ladies,
there are many who believe that Love launcheth his shafts only when
enkindled of the eyes and make mock of those who hold that one may
fall in love by hearsay; but that these are mistaken will very
manifestly appear in a story that I purpose to relate, wherein you
will see that report not only wrought this, without the lovers having
ever set eyes on each other, but it will be made manifest to you that
it brought both the one and the other to a miserable death.

Guglielmo, the Second, King of Sicily, had (as the Sicilians pretend)
two children, a son called Ruggieri and a daughter called Costanza.
The former, dying before his father, left a son named Gerbino, who was
diligently reared by his grandfather and became a very goodly youth
and a renowned for prowess and courtesy. Nor did his fame abide
confined within the limits of Sicily, but, resounding in various parts
of the world, was nowhere more glorious than in Barbary, which in
those days was tributary to the King of Sicily. Amongst the rest to
whose ears came the magnificent fame of Gerbino's valour and courtesy
was a daughter of the King of Tunis, who, according to the report of
all who had seen her, was one of the fairest creatures ever fashioned
by nature and the best bred and of a noble and great soul. She,
delighting to hear tell of men of valour, with such goodwill received
the tales recounted by one and another of the deeds valiantly done of
Gerbino and they so pleased her that, picturing to herself the
prince's fashion, she became ardently enamoured of him and discoursed
more willingly of him than of any other and hearkened to whoso spoke
of him.

On the other hand, the great renown of her beauty and worth had won to
Sicily, as elsewhither, and not without great delight nor in vain had
it reached the ears of Gerbino; nay, it had inflamed him with love of
her, no less than that which she herself had conceived for him.
Wherefore, desiring beyond measure to see her, against he should find
a colourable occasion of having his grandfather's leave to go to
Tunis, he charged his every friend who went thither to make known to
her, as best he might, his secret and great love and bring him news of
her. This was very dexterously done by one of them, who, under
pretence of carrying her women's trinkets to view, as do merchants,
throughly discovered Gerbino's passion to her and avouched the prince
and all that was his to be at her commandment. The princess received
the messenger and the message with a glad flavour and answering that
she burnt with like love for the prince, sent him one of her most
precious jewels in token thereof. This Gerbino received with the
utmost joy wherewith one can receive whatsoever precious thing and
wrote to her once and again by the same messenger, sending her the
most costly gifts and holding certain treaties[237] with her, whereby
they should have seen and touched one another, had fortune but allowed
it.

[Footnote 237: Or, in modern parlance, "laying certain plans."]

But, things going thus and somewhat farther than was expedient, the
young lady on the one hand and Gerbino on the other burning with
desire, it befell that the King of Tunis gave her in marriage to the
King of Granada, whereat she was beyond measure chagrined, bethinking
herself that not only should she be separated from her lover by long
distance, but was like to be altogether parted from him; and had she
seen a means thereto, she would gladly, so this might not betide, have
fled from her father and betaken herself to Gerbino. Gerbino, in like
manner, hearing of this marriage, was beyond measure sorrowful
therefor and often bethought himself to take her by force, if it
should chance that she went to her husband by sea. The King of Tunis,
getting some inkling of Gerbino's love and purpose and fearing his
valour and prowess, sent to King Guglielmo, whenas the time came for
despatching her to Granada, advising him of that which he was minded
to do and that, having assurance from him that he should not be
hindered therein by Gerbino or others, he purposed to do it. The King
of Sicily, who was an old man and had heard nothing of Gerbino's
passion and consequently suspected not that it was for this that such
an assurance was demanded, freely granted it and in token thereof,
sent the King of Tunis a glove of his. The latter, having gotten the
desired assurance, caused equip a very great and goodly ship in the
port of Carthage and furnish it with what was needful for those who
were to sail therein and having fitted and adorned it for the sending
of his daughter into Granada, awaited nought but weather.

The young lady, who saw and knew all this, despatched one of her
servants secretly to Palermo, bidding him salute the gallant Gerbino
on her part and tell him that she was to sail in a few days for
Granada, wherefore it would now appear if he were as valiant a man as
was said and if he loved her as much as he had sundry times declared
to her. Her messenger did his errand excellent well and returned to
Tunis, whilst Gerbino, hearing this and knowing that his grandfather
had given the King of Tunis assurance, knew not what to do. However,
urged by love and that he might not appear a craven, he betook himself
to Messina, where he hastily armed two light galleys and manning them
with men of approved valour, set sail with them for the coast of
Sardinia, looking for the lady's ship to pass there. Nor was he far
out in his reckoning, for he had been there but a few days when the
ship hove in sight with a light wind not far from the place where he
lay expecting it.

Gerbino, seeing this, said to his companions, 'Gentlemen, an you be
the men of mettle I take you for, methinketh there is none of you but
hath either felt or feeleth love, without which, as I take it, no
mortal can have aught of valour or worth in himself; and if you have
been or are enamoured, it will be an easy thing to you to understand
my desire. I love and love hath moved me to give you this present
pains; and she whom I love is in the ship which you see becalmed
yonder and which, beside that thing which I most desire, is full of
very great riches. These latter, an ye be men of valour, we may with
little difficulty acquire, fighting manfully; of which victory I
desire nothing to my share save one sole lady, for whose love I have
taken up arms; everything else shall freely be yours. Come, then, and
let us right boldly assail the ship; God is favourable to our emprise
and holdeth it here fast, without vouchsafing it a breeze.'

The gallant Gerbino had no need of many words, for that the Messinese,
who were with him being eager for plunder, were already disposed to do
that unto which he exhorted them. Wherefore, making a great outcry, at
the end of his speech, that it should be so, they sounded the trumpets
and catching up their arms, thrust the oars into the water and made
for the Tunis ship. They who were aboard this latter, seeing the
galleys coming afar off and being unable to flee,[238] made ready for
defence. The gallant Gerbino accosting the ship, let command that the
masters thereof should be sent on board the galleys, an they had no
mind to fight; but the Saracens, having certified themselves who they
were and what they sought, declared themselves attacked of them
against the faith plighted them by King Guglielmo; in token whereof
they showed the latter's glove, and altogether refused to surrender
themselves, save for stress of battle, or to give them aught that was
in the ship.

[Footnote 238: _i.e._ for lack of wind.]

Gerbino, who saw the lady upon the poop, far fairer than he had
pictured her to himself, and was more inflamed than ever, replied to
the showing of the glove that there were no falcons there at that
present and consequently there needed no gloves; wherefore, an they
chose not to give up the lady, they must prepare to receive battle.
Accordingly, without further parley, they fell to casting shafts and
stones at one another, and on this wise they fought a great while,
with loss on either side. At last, Gerbino, seeing that he did little
to the purpose, took a little vessel he had brought with him out of
Sardinia and setting fire therein, thrust it with both the galleys
aboard the ship. The Saracens, seeing this and knowing that they must
of necessity surrender or die, fetched the king's daughter, who wept
below, on deck and brought her to the ship's prow; then, calling
Gerbino, they butchered her before his eyes, what while she called for
mercy and succour, and cast her into the sea, saying, 'Take her; we
give her to thee, such as we may and such as thine unfaith hath
merited.'

Gerbino, seeing their barbarous deed, caused lay himself alongside the
ship and recking not of shaft or stone, boarded it, as if courting
death, in spite of those who were therein; then,--even as a hungry
lion, coming among a herd of oxen, slaughtereth now this, now that,
and with teeth and claws sateth rather his fury than his
hunger,--sword in hand, hewing now at one, now at another, he cruelly
slew many of the Saracens; after which, the fire now waxing in the
enkindled ship, he caused the sailors fetch thereout what they might,
in payment of their pains, and descended thence, having gotten but a
sorry victory over his adversaries. Then, letting take up the fair
lady's body from the sea, long and with many tears he bewept it and
steering for Sicily, buried it honourably in Ustica, a little island
over against Trapani; after which he returned home, the woefullest man
alive.

The King of Tunis, hearing the heavy news, sent his ambassadors, clad
all in black, to King Guglielmo, complaining of the ill observance of
the faith which he had plighted him. They recounted to him how the
thing had passed, whereat King Guglielmo was sore incensed and seeing
no way to deny them the justice they sought, caused take Gerbino; then
himself,--albeit there was none of his barons but strove with prayers
to move him from his purpose,--condemned him to death and let strike
off his head in his presence, choosing rather to abide without
posterity than to be held a faithless king. Thus, then, as I have told
you, did these two lovers within a few days[239] die miserably a
violent death, without having tasted any fruit of their loves."

[Footnote 239: _i.e._ of each other.]




THE FIFTH STORY

[Day the Fourth]

     LISABETTA'S[240] BROTHERS SLAY HER LOVER, WHO APPEARETH TO
     HER IN A DREAM AND SHOWETH HER WHERE HE IS BURIED, WHEREUPON
     SHE PRIVILY DISINTERRETH HIS HEAD AND SETTETH IT IN A POT OF
     BASIL. THEREOVER MAKING MOAN A GREAT WHILE EVERY DAY, HER
     BROTHERS TAKE IT FROM HER AND SHE FOR GRIEF DIETH A LITTLE
     THEREAFTERWARD

[Footnote 240: This is the proper name of the heroine of the story
immortalized by Keats as "Isabella or the Pot of Basil," and is one of
the many forms of the and name _Elisabetta_ (Elizabeth), _Isabetta_
and _Isabella_ being others. Some texts of the Decameron call the
heroine _Isabetta_, but in the heading only, all with which I am
acquainted agreeing in the use of the form _Lisabetta_ in the body of
the story.]


Elisa's tale being ended and somedele commended of the king, Filomena
was bidden to discourse, who, full of compassion for the wretched
Gerbino and his mistress, after a piteous sigh, began thus: "My story,
gracious ladies, will not treat of folk of so high condition as were
those of whom Elisa hath told, yet peradventure it will be no less
pitiful; and what brought me in mind of it was the mention, a little
before, of Messina, where the case befell.

There were then in Messina three young brothers, merchants and left
very rich by their father, who was a man of San Gimignano, and they
had an only sister, Lisabetta by name, a right fair and well-mannered
maiden, whom, whatever might have been the reason thereof, they had
not yet married. Now these brothers had in one of their warehouses a
youth of Pisa, called Lorenzo, who did and ordered all their affairs
and was very comely and agreeable of person; wherefore, Lisabetta
looking sundry times upon him, it befell that he began strangely to
please her; of which Lorenzo taking note at one time and another, he
in like manner, leaving his other loves, began to turn his thoughts to
her; and so went the affair, that, each being alike pleasing to the
other, it was no great while before, taking assurance, they did that
which each of them most desired.

Continuing on this wise and enjoying great pleasure and delight one of
the other, they knew not how to do so secretly but that, one night,
Lisabetta, going whereas Lorenzo lay, was, unknown to herself, seen of
the eldest of her brothers, who, being a prudent youth, for all the
annoy it gave him to know this thing, being yet moved by more
honourable counsel, abode without sign or word till the morning,
revolving in himself various things anent the matter. The day being
come, he recounted to his brothers that which he had seen the past
night of Lisabetta and Lorenzo, and after long advisement with them,
determined (so that neither to them nor to their sister should any
reproach ensue thereof) to pass the thing over in silence and feign to
have seen and known nothing thereof till such time as, without hurt or
unease to themselves, they might avail to do away this shame from
their sight, ere it should go farther. In this mind abiding and
devising and laughing with Lorenzo as was their wont, it befell that
one day, feigning to go forth the city, all three, a-pleasuring, they
carried him with them to a very lonely and remote place; and there,
the occasion offering, they slew him, whilst he was off his guard, and
buried him on such wise that none had knowledge of it; then, returning
to Messina, they gave out that they had despatched him somewhither for
their occasions, the which was the lightlier credited that they were
often used to send him abroad about their business.

Lorenzo returning not and Lisabetta often and instantly questioning
her brothers of him, as one to whom the long delay was grievous, it
befell one day, as she very urgently enquired of him, that one of them
said to her, 'What meaneth this? What hast thou to do often of him? An
thou question of him with Lorenzo, that thou askest thus more, we
will make thee such answer as thou deservest.' Wherefore the girl, sad
and grieving and fearful she knew not of what, abode without more
asking; yet many a time anights she piteously called him and prayed
him come to her, and whiles with many tears she complained of his long
tarrying; and thus, without a moment's gladness, she abode expecting
him alway, till one night, having sore lamented Lorenzo for that he
returned not and being at last fallen asleep, weeping, he appeared to
her in a dream, pale and all disordered, with clothes all rent and
mouldered, and herseemed he bespoke her thus: 'Harkye, Lisabetta; thou
dost nought but call upon me, grieving for my long delay and cruelly
impeaching me with thy tears. Know, therefore, that I may never more
return to thee, for that, the last day thou sawest me, thy brothers
slew me.' Then, having discovered to her the place where they had
buried him, he charged her no more call him nor expect him and
disappeared; whereupon she awoke and giving faith to the vision, wept
bitterly.

In the morning, being risen and daring not say aught to her brothers,
she determined to go to the place appointed and see if the thing were
true, as it had appeared to her in the dream. Accordingly, having
leave to go somedele without the city for her disport, she betook
herself thither,[241] as quickliest she might, in company of one who
had been with them[242] otherwhiles and knew all her affairs; and
there, clearing away the dead leaves from the place, she dug whereas
herseemed the earth was less hard. She had not dug long before she
found the body of her unhappy lover, yet nothing changed nor rotted,
and thence knew manifestly that her vision was true, wherefore she was
the most distressful of women; yet, knowing that this was no place for
lament, she would fain, an she but might, have borne away the whole
body, to give it fitter burial; but, seeing that this might not be,
she with a knife did off[243] the head from the body, as best she
could, and wrapping it in a napkin, laid it in her maid's lap. Then,
casting back the earth over the trunk, she departed thence, without
being seen of any, and returned home, where, shutting herself in her
chamber with her lover's head, she bewept it long and bitterly,
insomuch that she bathed it all with her tears, and kissed it a
thousand times in every part. Then, taking a great and goodly pot, of
those wherein they plant marjoram or sweet basil, she set the head
therein, folded in a fair linen cloth, and covered it with earth, in
which she planted sundry heads of right fair basil of Salerno; nor did
she ever water these with other water than that of her tears or rose
or orange-flower water. Moreover she took wont to sit still near the
pot and to gaze amorously upon it with all her desire, as upon that
which held her Lorenzo hid; and after she had a great while looked
thereon, she would bend over it and fall to weeping so sore and so
long that her tears bathed all the basil, which, by dint of long and
assiduous tending, as well as by reason of the fatness of the earth,
proceeding from the rotting head that was therein, waxed passing fair
and very sweet of savour.

[Footnote 241: _i.e._ to the place shown her in the dream.]

[Footnote 242: _i.e._ in their service.]

[Footnote 243: Lit. unhung (_spiccÃ²_).]

The damsel, doing without cease after this wise, was sundry times seen
of her neighbours, who to her brothers, marvelling at her waste beauty
and that her eyes seemed to have fled forth her head [for weeping],
related this, saying, 'We have noted that she doth every day after
such a fashion.' The brothers, hearing and seeing this and having once
and again reproved her therefor, but without avail, let secretly carry
away from her the pot, which she, missing, with the utmost instance
many a time required, and for that it was not restored to her, stinted
not to weep and lament till she fell sick; nor in her sickness did she
ask aught other than the pot of basil. The young men marvelled greatly
at this continual asking and bethought them therefor to see what was
in this pot. Accordingly, turning out the earth, they found the cloth
and therein the head, not yet so rotted but they might know it, by the
curled hair, to be that of Lorenzo. At this they were mightily amazed
and feared lest the thing should get wind; wherefore, burying the
head, without word said, they privily departed Messina, having taken
order how they should withdraw thence, and betook themselves to
Naples. The damsel, ceasing never from lamenting and still demanding
her pot, died, weeping; and so her ill-fortuned love had end. But,
after a while the thing being grown manifest unto many, there was one
who made thereon the song that is yet sung, to wit:

     Alack! ah, who can the ill Christian be,
       That stole my pot away?" etc.[244]

[Footnote 244: The following is a translation of the whole of the song
in question, as printed, from a MS. in the Medicean Library, in
Fanfani's edition of the Decameron.

Alack! ah, who can the ill Christian be,
  That stole my pot away,
My pot of basil of Salern, from me?
  'Twas thriv'n with many a spray
And I with mine own hand did plant the tree,
  Even on the festal[A] day.
'Tis felony to waste another's ware.

'Tis felony to waste another's ware;
  Yea, and right grievous sin.
And I, poor lass, that sowed myself whilere
  A pot with flowers therein,
Slept in its shade, so great it was and fair;
  But folk, that envious bin,
Stole it away even from my very door.

'Twas stolen away even from my very door.
  Full heavy was my cheer,
(Ah, luckless maid, would I had died tofore!)
  Who brought[B] it passing dear,
Yet kept ill ward thereon one day of fear.
  For him I loved so sore,
I planted it with marjoram about.

I planted it with marjoram about,
  When May was blithe and new;
Yea, thrice I watered it, week in, week out,
  And watched how well it grew:
But now, for sure, away from me 'tis ta'en.

Ay, now, for sure, away from me 'tis ta'en;
  I may 't no longer hide.
Had I but known (alas, regret is vain!)
  That which should me betide,
Before my door on guard I would have lain
  To sleep, my flowers beside.
Yet might the Great God ease me at His will.

Yea, God Most High might ease me, at His will,
  If but it liked Him well,
Of him who wrought me such unright and ill;
  He into pangs of hell
Cast me who stole my basil-pot, that still
  Was full of such sweet smell,
Its savour did all dole from me away.

All dole its savour did from me away;
  It was so redolent,
When, with the risen sun, at early day
  To water it I went,
The folk would marvel all at it and say,
  "Whence comes the sweetest scent?"
And I for love of it shall surely die.

Yea, I for love of it shall surely die,
  For love and grief and pain.
If one would tell me where it is, I'd buy
  It willingly again.
Fivescore gold crowns, that in my pouch have I,
  I'd proffer him full fain,
And eke a kiss, if so it liked the swain.]

[Footnote A: QuÃ¦re--natal?--perhaps meaning her birthday (_lo giorno
della festa_).]

[Footnote B: Or "purchased" in the old sense of obtained, acquired
(_accattai_).]




THE SIXTH STORY

[Day the Fourth]

     ANDREVUOLA LOVETH GABRIOTTO AND RECOUNTETH TO HIM A DREAM
     SHE HATH HAD, WHEREUPON HE TELLETH HER ONE OF HIS OWN AND
     PRESENTLY DIETH SUDDENLY IN HER ARMS. WHAT WHILE SHE AND A
     WAITING WOMAN OF HERS BEAR HIM TO HIS OWN HOUSE, THEY ARE
     TAKEN BY THE OFFICERS OF JUSTICE AND CARRIED BEFORE THE
     PROVOST, TO WHOM SHE DISCOVERETH HOW THE CASE STANDETH. THE
     PROVOST WOULD FAIN FORCE HER, BUT SHE SUFFERETH IT NOT AND
     HER FATHER, COMING TO HEAR OF THE MATTER, PROCURETH HER TO
     BE SET AT LIBERTY, SHE BEING FOUND INNOCENT; WHEREUPON,
     ALTOGETHER REFUSING TO ABIDE LONGER IN THE WORLD, SHE
     BECOMETH A NUN


Filomela's story was very welcome to the ladies, for that they had
many a time heard sing this song, yet could never, for asking, learn
the occasion of its making. But the king, having heard the end
thereof, charged Pamfilo follow on the ordinance; whereupon quoth he,
"The dream in the foregoing story giveth me occasion to recount one
wherein is made mention of two dreams, which were of a thing to come,
even as the former was of a thing [already] betided, and scarce were
they finished telling by those who had dreamt them than the
accomplishment followed of both. You must know, then, lovesome ladies,
that it is an affection common to all alive to see various things in
sleep, whereof,--albeit to the sleeper, what while he sleepeth, they
all appear most true and he, awakened, accounteth some true, others
probable and yet others out of all likelihood,--many are natheless
found to be come to pass. By reason whereof many lend to every dream
as much belief as they would to things they should see, waking, and
for their proper dreams they sorrow or rejoice, according as by these
they hope or fear. And contrariwise, there are those who believe none
thereof, save after they find themselves fallen into the peril
foreshown. Of these,[245] I approve neither the one nor other, for
that dreams are neither always true nor always false. That they are
not all true, each one of us must often enough have had occasion to
know; and that they are not all false hath been already shown in
Filomena her story, and I also purpose, as I said before, to show it
in mine. Wherefore I am of opinion that, in the matter of living and
doing virtuously, one should have no fear of any dream contrary
thereto nor forego good intentions by reason thereof; as for perverse
and wicked things, on the other hand, however favourable dreams may
appear thereto and how much soever they may hearten him who seeth them
with propitious auguries, none of them should be credited, whilst full
faith should be accorded unto all that tend to the contrary.[246] But
to come to the story.

[Footnote 245: _i.e._ these two classes of folk.]

[Footnote 246: _i.e._ to the encouragement of good and virtuous
actions and purposes.]

There was once in the city of Brescia a gentleman called Messer Negro
da Ponte Carraro, who amongst sundry other children had a daughter
named Andrevuola, young and unmarried and very fair. It chanced she
fell in love with a neighbour of hers, Gabriotto by name, a man of
mean condition, but full laudable fashions and comely and pleasant of
his person, and by the means and with the aid of the serving-maid of
the house, she so wrought that not only did Gabriotto know himself
beloved of her, but was many and many a time brought, to the delight
of both parties, into a goodly garden of her father's. And in order
that no cause, other than death, should ever avail to sever those
their delightsome loves, they became in secret husband and wife, and
so stealthily continuing their foregatherings, it befell that the
young lady, being one night asleep, dreamt that she was in her garden
with Gabriotto and held him in her arms, to the exceeding pleasure of
each; but, as they abode thus, herseemed she saw come forth of his
body something dark and frightful, the form whereof she could not
discern; the which took Gabriotto and tearing him in her despite with
marvellous might from her embrace, made off with him underground, nor
ever more might she avail to see either the one or the other.

At this she fell into an inexpressible passion of grief, whereby she
awoke, and albeit, awaking, she was rejoiced to find that it was not
as she had dreamed, nevertheless fear entered into her by reason of
the dream she had seen. Wherefore, Gabriotto presently desiring to
visit her that next night, she studied as most she might to prevent
his coming; however, seeing his desire and so he might not misdoubt
him of otherwhat, she received him in the garden and having gathered
great store of roses, white and red (for that it was the season), she
went to sit with him at the foot of a very goodly and clear fountain
that was there. After they had taken great and long delight together,
Gabriotto asked her why she would have forbidden his coming that
night; whereupon she told him, recounting to him the dream she had
seen the foregoing night and the fear she had gotten therefrom.

He, hearing this, laughed it to scorn and said that it was great folly
to put any faith in dreams, for that they arose of excess of food or
lack thereof and were daily seen to be all vain, adding, 'Were I
minded to follow after dreams, I had not come hither, not so much on
account of this of thine as of one I myself dreamt last night; which
was that meseemed I was in a fair and delightsome wood, wherein I went
hunting and had taken the fairest and loveliest hind was ever seen;
for methought she was whiter than snow and was in brief space become
so familiar with me that she never left me a moment. Moreover,
meseemed I held her so dear that, so she might not depart from me, I
had put a collar of gold about her neck and held her in hand with a
golden chain. After this medreamed that, once upon a time, what while
this hind lay couched with its head in my bosom,[247] there issued I
know not whence a greyhound bitch as black as coal, anhungred and
passing gruesome of aspect, and made towards me. Methought I offered
it no resistance, wherefore meseemed it thrust its muzzle into my
breast on the left side and gnawed thereat till it won to my heart,
which methought it tore from me, to carry it away. Therewith I felt
such a pain that my sleep was broken and awaking, I straightway
clapped my hand to my side, to see if I had aught there; but, finding
nothing amiss with me, I made mock of myself for having sought. But,
after all, what booteth this dream?[248] I have dreamed many such and
far more frightful, nor hath aught in the world befallen me by reason
thereof; wherefore let it pass and let us think to give ourselves a
good time.'

[Footnote 247: Or "lap" (_seno_).]

[Footnote 248: Lit. what meaneth this? (_che vuol dire questo?_)]

The young lady, already sore adread for her own dream, hearing this,
waxed yet more so, but hid her fear, as most she might, not to be the
occasion of any unease to Gabriotto. Nevertheless, what while she
solaced herself with him, clipping and kissing him again and again and
being of him clipped and kissed, she many a time eyed him in the face
more than of her wont, misdoubting she knew not what, and whiles she
looked about the garden, and she should see aught of black come
anywhence. Presently, as they abode thus, Gabriotto heaved a great
sigh and embracing her said, 'Alas, my soul, help me, for I die!' So
saying, he fell to the ground upon the grass of the lawn. The young
lady, seeing this, drew him up into her lap and said, well nigh
weeping, 'Alack, sweet my lord, what aileth thee?' He answered not,
but, panting sore and sweating all over, no great while after departed
this life.

How grievous, how dolorous was this to the young lady, who loved him
more than her life, each one of you may conceive for herself. She
bewept him sore and many a time called him in vain; but after she had
handled him in every part of his body and found him cold in all,
perceiving that he was altogether dead and knowing not what to do or
to say, she went, all tearful as she was and full of anguish, to call
her maid, who was privy to their loves, and discovered to her misery
and her grief. Then, after they had awhile made woeful lamentation
over Gabriotto's dead face, the young lady said to the maid, 'Since
God hath bereft me of him I love, I purpose to abide no longer on
life; but, ere I go about to slay myself, I would fain take fitting
means to preserve my honour and the secret of the love that hath been
between us twain and that the body, wherefrom the gracious spirit is
departed, may be buried.'

'Daughter mine,' answered the maid, 'talk not of seeking to slay
thyself, for that, if thou have lost him in this world, by slaying
thyself thou wouldst lose him in the world to come also, since thou
wouldst go to hell, whither I am assured his soul hath not gone; for
he was a virtuous youth. It were better far to comfort thyself and
think of succouring his soul with prayers and other good works, so
haply he have need thereof for any sin committed. The means of burying
him are here at hand in this garden and none will ever know of the
matter, for none knoweth that he ever came hither. Or, an thou wilt
not have it so, let us put him forth of the garden and leave him be;
he will be found to-morrow morning and carried to his house, where his
kinsfolk will have him buried.' The young lady, albeit she was full of
bitter sorrow and wept without ceasing, yet gave ear to her maid's
counsels and consenting not to the first part thereof, made answer to
the second, saying, 'God forbid that I should suffer so dear a youth
and one so beloved of me and my husband to be buried after the fashion
of a dog or left to lie in the street! He hath had my tears and
inasmuch as I may, he shall have those of his kinsfolk, and I have
already bethought me of that which we have to do to that end.'

Therewith she despatched her maid for a piece of cloth of silk, which
she had in a coffer of hers, and spreading it on the earth, laid
Gabriotto's body thereon, with his head upon a pillow. Then with many
tears she closed his eyes and mouth and weaving him a chaplet of
roses, covered him with all they had gathered, he and she; after which
she said to the maid, 'It is but a little way hence to his house;
wherefore we will carry him thither, thou and I, even as we have
arrayed him, and lay him before the door. It will not be long ere it
be day and he will be taken up; and although this may be no
consolation to his friends, yet to me, in whose arms he died, it will
be a pleasure.' So saying, once more with most abundant tears she cast
herself upon his face and wept a great while. Then, being urged by her
maid to despatch, for that the day was at hand, she rose to her feet
and drawing from her finger the ring wherewith Gabriotto had espoused
her, she set it on his and said, weeping, 'Dear my lord, if thy soul
now seeth my tears or if any sense or cognizance abide in the body,
after the departure thereof, benignly receive her last gift, whom,
living, thou lovedst so well.' This said, she fell down upon him in a
swoon, but, presently coming to herself and rising, she took up,
together with her maid, the cloth whereon the body lay and going forth
the garden therewith, made for his house.

As they went, they were discovered and taken with the dead body by
the officers of the provostry, who chanced to be abroad at that hour
about some other matter. Andrevuola, more desirous of death than of
life, recognizing the officers, said frankly, 'I know who you are and
that it would avail me nothing to seek to flee; I am ready to go with
you before the Seignory and there declare how the case standeth; but
let none of you dare to touch me, provided I am obedient to you, or to
remove aught from this body, an he would not be accused of me.'
Accordingly, without being touched of any, she repaired, with
Gabriotto's body, to the palace, where the Provost, hearing what was
to do, arose and sending for her into his chamber, proceeded to
enquire of this that had happened. To this end he caused divers
physicians look if the dead man had been done to death with poison or
otherwise, who all affirmed that it was not so, but that some
imposthume had burst near the heart, the which had suffocated him. The
magistrate hearing this and feeling her to be guilty in [but] a small
matter, studied to make a show of giving her that which he could not
sell her and told her that, an she would consent to his pleasures, he
would release her; but, these words availing not, he offered, out of
all seemliness, to use force. However, Andrevuola, fired with disdain
and waxed strong [for indignation], defended herself manfully,
rebutting him with proud and scornful words.

Meanwhile, broad day come and these things being recounted to Messer
Negro, he betook himself, sorrowful unto death, to the palace, in
company with many of his friends, and being there acquainted by the
Provost with the whole matter, demanded resentfully[249] that his
daughter should be restored to him. The Provost, choosing rather to
accuse himself of the violence he would have done her than to be
accused of her, first extolled the damsel and her constancy and in
proof thereof, proceeded to tell that which he had done; by reason
whereof, seeing her of so excellent a firmness, he had vowed her an
exceeding love and would gladly, an it were agreeable to him, who was
her father, and to herself, espouse her for his lady, notwithstanding
she had had a husband of mean condition. Whilst they yet talked,
Andrevuola presented herself and weeping, cast herself before her
father and said, 'Father mine, methinketh there is no need that I
recount to you the story of my boldness and my illhap, for I am
assured that you have heard and know it; wherefore, as most I may, I
humbly ask pardon of you for my default, to wit, the having without
your knowledge taken him who most pleased me to husband. And this boon
I ask of you, not for that my life may be spared me, but to die your
daughter and not your enemy.' So saying, she fell weeping at his feet.

[Footnote 249: Lit. complaining, making complaint (_dolendosi_).]

Messer Negro, who was an old man and kindly and affectionate of his
nature, hearing these words, began to weep and with tears in his eyes
raised his daughter tenderly to her feet and said, 'Daughter mine, it
had better pleased me that thou shouldst have had such a husband as,
according to my thinking, behoved unto thee; and that thou shouldst
have taken such an one as was pleasing unto thee had also been
pleasing to me; but that thou shouldst have concealed him, of thy
little confidence in me, grieveth me, and so much the more as I see
thee to have lost him, ere I knew it. However, since the case is so,
that which had he lived, I had gladly done him, to content thee, to
wit, honour, as to my son-in-law, be it done him, now he is dead.'
Then, turning to his sons and his kinsfolk, he commanded that great
and honourable obsequies should be prepared for Gabriotto.

Meanwhile, the kinsmen and kinswomen of the young man, hearing the
news, had flocked thither, and with them well nigh all the men and
women in the city. Therewith, the body, being laid out amiddleward the
courtyard upon Andrevuola's silken cloth and strewn, with all her
roses, was there not only bewept by her and his kinsfolk, but publicly
mourned by well nigh all the ladies of the city and by many men, and
being brought forth of the courtyard of the Seignory, not as that of a
plebeian, but as that of a nobleman, it was with the utmost honour
borne to the sepulchre upon the shoulders of the most noble citizens.
Some days thereafterward, the Provost ensuing that which he had
demanded, Messer Negro propounded it to his daughter, who would hear
nought thereof, but, her father being willing to comply with her in
this, she and her maid made themselves nuns in a convent very famous
for sanctity and there lived honourably a great while after."




THE SEVENTH STORY

[Day the Fourth]

     SIMONA LOVETH PASQUINO AND THEY BEING TOGETHER IN A GARDEN,
     THE LATTER RUBBETH A LEAF OF SAGE AGAINST HIS TEETH AND
     DIETH. SHE, BEING TAKEN AND THINKING TO SHOW THE JUDGE HOW
     HER LOVER DIED, RUBBETH ONE OF THE SAME LEAVES AGAINST HER
     TEETH AND DIETH ON LIKE WISE


Pamfilo having delivered himself of his story, the king, showing no
compassion for Andrevuola, looked at Emilia and signed to her that it
was his pleasure she should with a story follow on those who had
already told; whereupon she, without delay, began as follows: "Dear
companions, the story told by Pamfilo putteth me in mind to tell you
one in nothing like unto his save that like as Andrevuola lost her
beloved in a garden, even so did she of whom I have to tell, and being
taken in like manner as was Andrevuola, freed herself from the court,
not by dint of fortitude nor constancy, but by an unlooked-for death.
And as hath otherwhile been said amongst us, albeit Love liefer
inhabiteth the houses of the great, yet not therefor doth he decline
the empery of those of the poor; nay, whiles in these latter he so
manifesteth his power that he maketh himself feared, as a most
puissant seignior, of the richer sort. This, if not in all, yet in
great part, will appear from my story, with which it pleaseth me to
re-enter our own city, wherefrom this day, discoursing diversely of
divers things and ranging over various parts of the world, we have so
far departed.

There was, then, no great while ago, in Florence a damsel very
handsome and agreeable, according to her condition, who was the
daughter of a poor father and was called Simona; and although it
behoved her with her own hands earn the bread she would eat and
sustain her life by spinning wool, she was not therefor of so poor a
spirit but that she dared to admit into her heart Love, which,--by
means of the pleasing words and fashions of a youth of no greater
account than herself, who went giving wool to spin for a master of
his, a wool-monger,--had long made a show of wishing to enter there.
Having, then, received Him into her bosom with the pleasing aspect of
the youth who loved her whose name was Pasquino, she heaved a thousand
sighs, hotter than fire, at every hank of yarn she wound about the
spindle, bethinking her of him who had given it her to spin and
ardently desiring, but venturing not to do more. He, on his side,
grown exceeding anxious that his master's wool should be well spun,
overlooked Simona's spinning more diligently than that of any other,
as if the yarn spun by her alone and none other were to furnish forth
the whole cloth; wherefore, the one soliciting and the other
delighting to be solicited, it befell that, he growing bolder than of
his wont and she laying aside much of the timidity and shamefastness
she was used to feel, they gave themselves up with a common accord to
mutual pleasures, which were so pleasing to both that not only did
neither wait to be bidden thereto of the other, but each forewent
other in the matter of invitation.

Ensuing this their delight from day to day and waxing ever more
enkindled for continuance, it chanced one day that Pasquino told
Simona he would fain have her find means to come to a garden, whither
he wished to carry her so they might there foregather more at their
ease and with less suspect. Simona answered that she would well and
accordingly on Sunday, after eating, giving her father to believe that
she meant to go a-pardoning to San Gallo,[250] she betook herself,
with a friend of hers, called Lagina, to the garden appointed her of
Pasquino. There she found him with a comrade of his, whose name was
Puccino, but who was commonly called Stramba,[251] and an amorous
acquaintance being quickly clapped up between the latter and Lagina,
Simona and her lover withdrew to one part of the garden, to do their
pleasure, leaving Stramba and Lagina in another.

[Footnote 250: _i.e._ to attend the ecclesiastical function called a
Pardon, with which word, used in this sense, Meyerbeer's opera of
Dinorah (properly Le Pardon de PloÃ«rmel) has familiarized opera-goers.
A Pardon is a sort of minor jubilee of the Roman Catholic Church, held
in honour of some local saint, at which certain indulgences and
remissions of sins (hence the name) are granted to the faithful
attending the services of the occasion.]

[Footnote 251: _i.e._ Bandy-legs.]

Now in that part of the garden, whither Pasquino and Simona had
betaken themselves, was a very great and goodly bush of sage, at the
foot whereof they sat down and solaced themselves together a great
while, holding much discourse of a collation they purposed to make
there at their leisure. Presently, Pasquino turned to the great
sage-bush and plucking a leaf thereof, began to rub his teeth and gums
withal, avouching that sage cleaned them excellent well of aught that
might be left thereon after eating. After he had thus rubbed them
awhile, he returned to the subject of the collation, of which he had
already spoken, nor had he long pursued his discourse when he began
altogether to change countenance and well nigh immediately after lost
sight and speech, and in a little while he died. Simona, seeing this,
fell to weeping and crying out and called Stramba and Lagina, who ran
thither in haste and seeing Pasquino not only dead, but already grown
all swollen and full of dark spots about his face and body, Stramba
cried out of a sudden, 'Ah, wicked woman! Thou hast poisoned him.'
Making a great outcry, he was heard of many who dwelt near the garden
and who, running to the clamour, found Pasquino dead and swollen.

Hearing Stramba lamenting and accusing Simona of having poisoned him
of her malice, whilst she, for dolour of the sudden mishap that had
carried off her lover, knew not how to excuse herself, being as it
were beside herself, they all concluded that it was as he said; and
accordingly she was taken and carried off, still weeping sore, to the
Provost's palace, where, at the instance of Stramba and other two
comrades of Pasquino, by name Atticciato and Malagevole, who had come
up meanwhile, a judge addressed himself without delay to examine her
of the fact and being unable to discover that she had done malice in
the matter or was anywise guilty, he bethought himself, in her
presence, to view the dead body and the place and manner of the
mishap, as recounted to him by her, for that he apprehended it not
very well by her words.

Accordingly, he let bring her, without any stir, whereas Pasquino's
body lay yet, swollen as it were a tun, and himself following her
thither, marvelled at the dead man and asked her how it had been;
whereupon, going up to the sage-bush, she recounted to him all the
foregoing story and to give him more fully to understand how the thing
had befallen, she did even as Pasquino had done and rubbed one of the
sage-leaves against her teeth. Then,--whilst her words were, in the
judge's presence, flouted by Stramba and Atticciato and the other
friends and comrades of Pasquino as frivolous and vain and they all
denounced her wickedness with the more instance, demanding nothing
less than that the fire should be the punishment of such
perversity,--the wretched girl, who abode all confounded for dolour of
her lost lover and fear of the punishment demanded by Stramba fell,
for having rubbed the sage against her teeth, into that same
mischance, whereinto her lover had fallen [and dropped dead], to the
no small wonderment of as many as were present. O happy souls, to whom
it fell in one same day to terminate at once your fervent love and
your mortal life! Happier yet, an ye went together to one same place!
And most happy, if folk love in the other life and ye love there as
you loved here below! But happiest beyond compare,--at least in our
judgment who abide after her on life,--was Simona's soul, whose
innocence fortune suffered not to fall under the testimony of Stramba
and Atticciato and Malagevole, wool-carders belike or men of yet
meaner condition, finding her a more honourable way, with a death like
unto that of her lover, to deliver herself from their calumnies and to
follow the soul, so dearly loved of her, of her Pasquino.

The judge, in a manner astonied, as were likewise as many as were
there, at this mischance and unknowing what to say, abode long silent;
then, recollecting himself, he said, 'It seemeth this sage is
poisonous, the which is not wont to happen of sage. But, so it may not
avail to offend on this wise against any other, be it cut down even to
the roots and cast into the fire.' This the keeper of the garden
proceeded to do in the judge's presence, and no sooner had he levelled
the great bush with the ground than the cause of the death of the two
unfortunate lovers appeared; for thereunder was a toad of marvellous
bigness, by whose pestiferous breath they concluded the sage to have
become venomous. None daring approach the beast, they made a great
hedge of brushwood about it and there burnt it, together with the
sage. So ended the judge's inquest upon the death of the unfortunate
Pasquino, who, together with his Simona, all swollen as they were, was
buried by Stramba and Atticciato and Guccio Imbratta and Malagevole in
the church of St. Paul, whereof it chanced they were parishioners."




THE EIGHTH STORY

[Day the Fourth]

     GIROLAMO LOVETH SALVESTRA AND BEING CONSTRAINED BY HIS
     MOTHER'S PRAYERS TO GO TO PARIS, RETURNETH AND FINDETH HIS
     MISTRESS MARRIED; WHEREUPON HE ENTERETH HER HOUSE BY STEALTH
     AND DIETH BY HER SIDE; AND HE BEING CARRIED TO A CHURCH,
     SALVESTRA DIETH BESIDE HIM


Emilia's story come to an end, Neifile, by the king's commandment,
began thus: "There are some, noble ladies, who believe themselves to
know more than other folk, albeit, to my thinking, they know less, and
who, by reason thereof, presume to oppose their judgment not only to
the counsels of men, but even to set it up against the very nature of
things; of which presumption very grave ills have befallen aforetime,
nor ever was any good known to come thereof. And for that of all
natural things love is that which least brooketh contrary counsel or
opposition and whose nature is such that it may lightlier consume of
itself than be done away by advisement, it hath come to my mind to
narrate to you a story of a lady, who, seeking to be wiser than
pertained unto her and than she was, nay, than the matter comported in
which she studied to show her wit, thought to tear out from an
enamoured heart a love which had belike been set there of the stars,
and so doing, succeeded in expelling at once love and life from her
son's body.

There was, then, in our city, according to that which the ancients
relate, a very great and rich merchant, whose name was Lionardo
Sighieri and who had by his wife a son called Girolamo, after whose
birth, having duly set his affairs in order, he departed this life.
The guardians of the boy, together with his mother, well and loyally
ordered his affairs, and he, growing up with his neighbour's children,
became familiar with a girl of his own age, the daughter of the
tailor, more than with any other of the quarter. As he waxed in age,
use turned to love so great and so ardent that he was never easy save
what time he saw her, and certes she loved him no less than she was
loved of him. The boy's mother, observing this, many a time chid and
rebuked him therefor and after, Girolamo availing not to desist
therefrom, complained thereof to his guardians, saying to them, as if
she thought, thanks to her son's great wealth, to make an orange-tree
of a bramble, 'This boy of ours, albeit he is yet scarce fourteen
years old, is so enamoured of the daughter of a tailor our neighbour,
by name Salvestra, that, except we remove her from his sight, he will
peradventure one day take her to wife, without any one's knowledge,
and I shall never after be glad; or else he will pine away from her,
if he see her married to another; wherefore meseemeth, to avoid this,
you were best send him somewhither far from here, about the business
of the warehouse; for that, he being removed from seeing her, she will
pass out of his mind and we may after avail to give him some well-born
damsel to wife.'

The guardians answered that the lady said well and that they would do
this to the best of their power; wherefore, calling the boy into the
warehouse, one of them began very lovingly to bespeak him thus, 'My
son, thou art now somewhat waxen in years and it were well that thou
shouldst begin to look for thyself to thine affairs; wherefore it
would much content us that thou shouldst go sojourn awhile at Paris,
where thou wilt see how great part of thy wealth is employed, more by
token that thou wilt there become far better bred and mannered and
more of worth than thou couldst here, seeing the lords and barons and
gentlemen who are there in plenty and learning their usances; after
which thou mayst return hither.' The youth hearkened diligently and
answered curtly that he was nowise disposed to do this, for that he
believed himself able to fare as well at Florence as another. The
worthy men, hearing this, essayed him again with sundry discourse,
but, failing to get other answer of him, told his mother, who, sore
provoked thereat, gave him a sound rating, not because of his
unwillingness to go to Paris, but of his enamourment; after which, she
fell to cajoling him with fair words, coaxing him and praying him
softly be pleased to do what his guardians wished; brief, she
contrived to bespeak him to such purpose that he consented to go to
France and there abide a year and no more.

Accordingly, ardently enamoured as he was, he betook himself to Paris
and there, being still put off from one day to another, he was kept
two years; at the end of which time, returning, more in love than
ever, he found his Salvestra married to an honest youth, a tent maker.
At this he was beyond measure woebegone; but, seeing no help for it,
he studied to console himself therefor and having spied out where she
dwelt, began, after the wont of young men in love, to pass before
her, expecting she should no more have forgotten him than he her. But
the case was otherwise; she had no more remembrance of him than if she
had never seen him; or, if indeed she remembered aught of him, she
feigned the contrary; and of this, in a very brief space of time,
Girolamo became aware, to his no small chagrin. Nevertheless, he did
all he might to bring himself to her mind; but, himseeming he wrought
nothing, he resolved to speak with her, face to face, though he should
die for it.

Accordingly, having learned from a neighbour how her house stood, one
evening that she and her husband were gone to keep wake with their
neighbours, he entered therein by stealth and hiding himself behind
certain tent cloths that were spread there, waited till, the twain
having returned and gotten them to bed, he knew her husband to be
asleep; whereupon he came whereas he had seen Salvestra lay herself
and putting his hand upon her breast, said softly, 'Sleepest thou yet,
O my soul?' The girl, who was awake, would have cried out; but he said
hastily, 'For God's sake, cry not, for I am thy Girolamo.' She,
hearing this, said, all trembling, 'Alack, for God's sake, Girolamo,
get thee gone; the time is past when it was not forbidden unto our
childishness to be lovers. I am, as thou seest, married and it
beseemeth me no more to have regard to any man other than my husband;
wherefore I beseech thee, by God the Only, to begone, for that, if my
husband heard thee, even should no other harm ensue thereof, yet would
it follow that I might never more avail to live with him in peace or
quiet, whereas now I am beloved of him and abide with him in weal and
in tranquility.'

The youth, hearing these words, was grievously endoloured and recalled
to her the time past and his love no whit grown less for absence,
mingling many prayers and many great promises, but obtained nothing;
wherefore, desiring to die, he prayed her at last that, in requital of
so much love, she would suffer him couch by her side, so he might warm
himself somewhat, for that he was grown chilled, awaiting her,
promising her that he would neither say aught to her nor touch her and
would get him gone, so soon as he should be a little warmed.
Salvestra, having some little compassion of him, granted him this he
asked, upon the conditions aforesaid, and he accordingly lay down
beside her, without touching her. Then, collecting into one thought
the long love he had borne her and her present cruelty and his lost
hope, he resolved to live no longer; wherefore, straitening in himself
his vital spirits,[252] he clenched his hands and died by her side,
without word or motion.

[Footnote 252: _Ristretti in sÃ¨ gli spiriti._ An obscure passage;
perhaps "holding his breath" is meant; but in this case we should read
"_lo spirito_" instead of "_gli spiriti_."]

After a while the young woman, marvelling at his continence and
fearing lest her husband should awake, began to say, 'Alack, Girolamo,
why dost thou not get thee gone?' Hearing no answer, she concluded
that he had fallen asleep and putting out her hand to awaken him,
found him cold to the touch as ice, whereat she marvelled sore; then,
nudging him more sharply and finding that he stirred not, she felt him
again and knew that he was dead; whereat she was beyond measure
woebegone and abode a great while, unknowing what she should do. At
last she bethought herself to try, in the person of another, what her
husband should say was to do [in such a case]; wherefore, awakening
him, she told him, as having happened to another, that which had
presently betided herself and after asked him what counsel she should
take thereof,[253] if it should happen to herself. The good man
replied that himseemed the dead man should be quietly carried to his
house and there left, without bearing any ill will thereof to the
woman, who, it appeared to him, had nowise done amiss. Then said
Salvestra, 'And so it behoveth us do'; and taking his hand, made him
touch the dead youth; whereupon, all confounded, he arose, without
entering into farther parley with his wife, and kindled a light; then,
clothing the dead body in its own garments, he took it, without any
delay, on his shoulders and carried it, his innocence aiding him, to
the door of Girolamo's house, where he set it down and left it.

[Footnote 253: _i.e._ what course she should take in the matter,
_consiglio_ used as before (see notes, pp. 2 and 150) in this special
sense.]

When the day came and Girolamo was found dead before his own door,
great was outcry, especially on the part of his mother, and the
physicians having examined him and searched his body everywhere, but
finding no wound nor bruise whatsoever on him, it was generally
concluded that he had died of grief, as was indeed the case. Then was
the body carried into a church and the sad mother, repairing thither
with many other ladies, kinswomen and neighbours, began to weep
without stint and make sore moan over him, according to our usance.
What while the lamentation was at it highest, the good man, in whose
house he had died, said to Salvestra, 'Harkye, put some mantlet or
other on thy head and get thee to the church whither Girolamo hath
been carried and mingle with the women and hearken to that which is
discoursed of the matter; and I will do the like among the men, so we
may hear if aught be said against us.' The thing pleased the girl, who
was too late grown pitiful and would fain look upon him, dead, whom,
living, she had not willed to pleasure with one poor kiss, and she
went thither. A marvellous thing it is to think how uneath to search
out are the ways of love! That heart, which Girolamo's fair fortune
had not availed to open, his illhap opened and the old flames reviving
all therein, whenas she saw the dead face it[254] melted of a sudden
into such compassion that she pressed between the women, veiled as she
was in the mantlet, and stayed not till she won to the body, and
there, giving a terrible great shriek, she cast herself, face
downward, on the dead youth, whom she bathed not with many tears, for
that no sooner did she touch him than grief bereaved her of life, even
as it had bereft him.

[Footnote 254: _i.e._ her heart.]

The women would have comforted her and bidden her arise, not yet
knowing her; but after they had bespoken her awhile in vain, they
sought to lift her and finding her motionless, raised her up and knew
her at once for Salvestra and for dead; whereupon all who were there,
overcome with double pity, set up a yet greater clamour of
lamentation. The news soon spread abroad among the men without the
church and came presently to the ears of her husband, who was amongst
them and who, without lending ear to consolation or comfort from any,
wept a great while; after which he recounted to many of those who were
there the story of that which had befallen that night between the dead
youth and his wife; and so was the cause of each one's death made
everywhere manifest, the which was grievous unto all. Then, taking up
the dead girl and decking her, as they use to deck the dead, they laid
her beside Girolamo on the same bier and there long bewept her; after
which the twain were buried in one same tomb, and so these, whom love
had not availed to conjoin on life, death conjoined with an
inseparable union."




THE NINTH STORY

[Day the Fourth]

     SIR GUILLAUME DE ROUSSILLON GIVETH HIS WIFE TO EAT THE HEART
     OF SIR GUILLAUME DE GUARDESTAING BY HIM SLAIN AND LOVED OF
     HER, WHICH SHE AFTER COMING TO KNOW, CASTETH HERSELF FROM A
     HIGH CASEMENT TO THE GROUND AND DYING, IS BURIED WITH HER
     LOVER


Neifile having made an end of her story, which had awakened no little
compassion in all the ladies her companions, the king, who purposed
not to infringe Dioneo his privilege, there being none else to tell
but they twain, began, "Gentle ladies, since you have such compassion
upon ill-fortuned loves, it hath occurred to me to tell you a story
whereof it will behove you have no less pity than of the last, for
that those to whom that which I shall tell happened were persons of
more account than those of whom it hath been spoken and yet more cruel
was the mishap that befell them.

You must know, then, that according to that which the ProvenÃ§als
relate, there were aforetime in Provence two noble knights, each of
whom had castles and vassals under him, called the one Sir Guillaume
de Roussillon and the other Sir Guillaume de Guardestaing, and for
that they were both men of great prowess in arms, they loved each
other with an exceeding love and were wont to go still together and
clad in the same colours to every tournament or jousting or other act
of arms. Although they abode each in his own castle and were distant,
one from other, a good half score miles, yet it came to pass that, Sir
Guillaume de Roussillon having a very fair and lovesome lady to wife,
Sir Guillaume de Guardestaing, notwithstanding the friendship and
fellowship that was between them, become beyond measure enamoured of
her and so wrought, now with one means and now with another, that the
lady became aware of his passion and knowing him for a very valiant
knight, it pleased her and she began to return his love, insomuch that
she desired and tendered nothing more than him nor awaited otherwhat
than to be solicited of him; the which was not long in coming to pass
and they foregathered once and again.

Loving each other amain and conversing together less discreetly than
behoved, it befell that the husband became aware of their familiarity
and was mightily incensed thereat, insomuch that the great love he
bore to Guardestaing was turned into mortal hatred; but this he knew
better to keep hidden than the two lovers had known to conceal their
love and was fully resolved in himself to kill him. Roussillon being
in this mind, it befell that a great tourneying was proclaimed in
France, the which he forthright signified to Guardestaing and sent to
bid him come to him, an it pleased him, so they might take counsel
together if and how they should go thither; whereto the other very
joyously answered that he would without fail come to sup with him on
the ensuing day. Roussillon, hearing this, thought the time come
whenas he might avail to kill him and accordingly on the morrow he
armed himself and mounting to horse with a servant of his, lay at
ambush, maybe a mile from his castle, in a wood whereas Guardestaing
must pass.

There after he had awaited him a good while, he saw him come, unarmed
and followed by two servants in like case, as one who apprehends
nothing from him; and when he saw him come whereas he would have him,
he rushed out upon him, lance in hand, full of rage and malice,
crying, 'Traitor, thou art dead!' And to say thus and to plunge the
lance into his breast were one and the same thing. Guardestaing,
without being able to make any defence or even to say a word, fell
from his horse, transfixed of the lance, and a little after died,
whilst his servants, without waiting to learn who had done this,
turned their horses' heads and fled as quickliest they might, towards
their lord's castle. Roussillon dismounted and opening the dead man's
breast with a knife, with his own hands tore out his heart, which he
let wrap in the pennon of a lance and gave to one of his men to carry.
Then, commanding that none should dare make words of the matter, he
remounted, it being now night, and returned to his castle.

The lady, who had heard that Guardestaing was to be there that evening
to supper and looked for him with the utmost impatience, seeing him
not come, marvelled sore and said to her husband, 'How is it, sir,
that Guardestaing is not come?' 'Wife,' answered he, 'I have had
[word] from him that he cannot be here till to-morrow'; whereat the
lady abode somewhat troubled. Roussillon then dismounted and calling
the cook, said to him, 'Take this wild boar's heart and look thou make
a dainty dish thereof, the best and most delectable to eat that thou
knowest, and when I am at table, send it to me in a silver porringer.'
The cook accordingly took the heart and putting all his art thereto
and all his diligence, minced it and seasoning it with store of rich
spices, made of it a very dainty ragout.

When it was time, Sir Guillaume sat down to table with his wife and
the viands came; but he ate little, being hindered in thought for the
ill deed he had committed. Presently the cook sent him the ragout,
which he caused set before the lady, feigning himself disordered[255]
that evening and commending the dish to her amain. The lady, who was
nowise squeamish, tasted thereof and finding it good, ate it all;
which when the knight saw, he said to her, 'Wife, how deem you of this
dish?' 'In good sooth, my lord,' answered she, 'it liketh me
exceedingly.' Whereupon, 'So God be mine aid,' quoth Roussillon; 'I do
indeed believe it you, nor do I marvel if that please you, dead,
which, alive, pleased you more than aught else.' The lady, hearing
this, hesitated awhile, then said, 'How? What have you made me eat?'
'This that you have eaten,' answered the knight, 'was in very truth
the heart of Sir Guillaume de Guardestaing, whom you, disloyal wife as
you are, so loved; and know for certain that it is his very heart, for
that I tore it from his breast with these hands a little before my
return.'

[Footnote 255: Or surfeited (_svogliato_).]

It needeth not to ask if the lady were woebegone, hearing this of him
whom she loved more than aught else; and after awhile she said, 'You
have done the deed of a disloyal and base knight, as you are; for, if
I, unenforced of him, made him lord of my love and therein offended
against you, not he, but I should have borne the penalty thereof. But
God forfend that ever other victual should follow upon such noble meat
the heart of so valiant and so courteous a gentleman as was Sir
Guillaume de Guardestaing!' Then, rising to her feet, without any
manner of hesitation, she let herself fall backward through a window
which was behind her and which was exceeding high above the ground;
wherefore, as she fell, she was not only killed, but well nigh broken
in pieces.

Sir Guillaume, seeing this, was sore dismayed and himseemed he had
done ill; wherefore, being adread of the country people and of the
Count of Provence, he let saddle his horses and made off. On the
morrow it was known all over the country how the thing had passed;
whereupon the two bodies were, with the utmost grief and lamentation,
taken up by Guardestaing's people and those of the lady and laid in
one same sepulchre in the chapel of the latter's own castle; and
thereover were verses written, signifying who these were that were
buried therewithin and the manner and occasion of their death."[256]

[Footnote 256: This is the well-known story of the Troubadour Guillem
de Cabestanh or Cabestaing, whose name Boccaccio alters to
Guardastagno or Guardestaing.]




THE TENTH STORY

[Day the Fourth]

     A PHYSICIAN'S WIFE PUTTETH HER LOVER FOR DEAD IN A CHEST,
     WHICH TWO USURERS CARRY OFF TO THEIR OWN HOUSE, GALLANT AND
     ALL. THE LATTER, WHO IS BUT DRUGGED, COMETH PRESENTLY TO
     HIMSELF AND BEING DISCOVERED, IS TAKEN FOR A THIEF; BUT THE
     LADY'S MAID AVOUCHETH TO THE SEIGNORY THAT SHE HERSELF HAD
     PUT HIM INTO THE CHEST STOLEN BY THE TWO USURERS, WHEREBY HE
     ESCAPETH THE GALLOWS AND THE THIEVES ARE AMERCED IN CERTAIN
     MONIES


Filostrato having made an end of his telling, it rested only with
Dioneo to accomplish his task, who, knowing this and it being
presently commanded him of the king, began as follows: 'The sorrows
that have been this day related of ill fortuned loves have saddened
not only your eyes and hearts, ladies, but mine also; wherefore I have
ardently longed for an end to be made thereof. Now that, praised be
God, they are finished (except I should choose to make an ill addition
to such sorry ware, from which God keep me!), I will, without farther
ensuing so dolorous a theme, begin with something blither and better,
thereby perchance affording a good argument for that which is to be
related on the ensuing day.

You must know, then, fairest lasses, that there was in Salerno, no
great while since, a very famous doctor in surgery, by name Master
Mazzeo della Montagna, who, being already come to extreme old age,
took to wife a fair and gentle damsel of his city and kept better
furnished with sumptuous and rich apparel and jewels and all that can
pleasure a lady than any woman of the place. True it is she went
a-cold most of her time, being kept of her husband ill covered abed;
for, like as Messer Ricardo di Chinzica (of whom we already told)
taught his wife to observe saints' days and holidays, even so the
doctor pretended to her that once lying with a woman necessitated I
know not how many days' study to recruit the strength and the like
toys; whereof she abode exceeding ill content and like a discreet and
high-spirited woman as she was, bethought herself, so she might the
better husband the household good, to betake herself to the highway
and seek to spend others' gear. To this end, considering divers young
men, at last she found one to her mind and on him she set all her
hope; whereof he becoming aware and she pleasing him mightily, he in
like manner turned all his love upon her.

The spark in question was called Ruggieri da Jeroli, a man of noble
birth, but of lewd life and blameworthy carriage, insomuch that he had
left himself neither friend nor kinsman who wished him well or cared
to see him and was defamed throughout all Salerno for thefts and other
knaveries of the vilest; but of this the lady recked little, he
pleasing her for otherwhat, and with the aid of a maid of hers, she
wrought on such wise that they came together. After they had taken
some delight, the lady proceeded to blame his past way of life and to
pray him, for the love of her, to desist from these ill fashions; and
to give him the means of doing this, she fell to succouring him, now
with one sum of money and now with another. On this wise they abode
together, using the utmost discretion, till it befell that a sick man
was put into the doctor's hands, who had a gangrened leg, and Master
Mazzeo, having examined the case, told the patient's kinsfolk that,
except a decayed bone he had in his leg were taken out, needs must he
have the whole limb cut off or die, and that, by taking out the bone,
he might recover, but that he would not undertake him otherwise than
for a dead man; to which those to whom the sick man pertained agreed
and gave the latter into his hands for such. The doctor, judging that
the patient might not brook the pain nor would suffer himself to be
operated, without an opiate, and having appointed to set about the
matter at evensong, let that morning distil a certain water of his
composition, which being drunken by the sick man, should make him
sleep so long as he deemed necessary for the performing of the
operation upon him, and fetching it home, set it in his chamber,
without telling any what it was.

The hour of vespers come and the doctor being about to go to the
patient in question, there came to him a messenger from certain very
great friends of his at Malfi, charging him fail not for anything to
repair thither incontinent, for that there had been a great fray
there, in which many had been wounded. Master Mazzeo accordingly put
off the tending of the leg until the ensuing morning and going aboard
a boat, went off to Malfi, whereupon his wife, knowing that he would
not return home that night, let fetch Ruggieri, as of her wont, and
bringing him into her chamber, locked him therewithin, against certain
other persons of the house should be gone to sleep. Ruggieri, then,
abiding in the chamber, awaiting his mistress, and being,--whether for
fatigue endured that day or salt meat that he had eaten or maybe for
usance,--sore, athirst, caught sight of the flagon of water, which the
doctor had prepared for the sick man and which stood in the window,
and deeming it drinking water, set it to his mouth and drank it all
off; nor was it long ere a great drowsiness took him and he fell
asleep.

The lady came to the chamber as first she might and finding Ruggieri
asleep, nudged him and bade him in a low voice arise, but to no
effect, for he replied not neither stirred anywhit; whereat she was
somewhat vexed and nudged him more sharply, saying, 'Get up, slugabed!
An thou hadst a mind to sleep, thou shouldst have betaken thee to
thine own house and not come hither.' Ruggieri, being thus pushed,
fell to the ground from a chest whereon he lay and gave no more sign
of life than a dead body; whereupon the lady, now somewhat alarmed,
began to seek to raise him up and to shake him more roughly, tweaking
him by the nose and plucking him by the beard, but all in vain; he had
tied his ass to a fast picket.[257] At this she began to fear lest he
were dead; nevertheless she proceeded to pinch him sharply and burn
his flesh with a lighted taper, but all to no purpose; wherefore,
being no doctress, for all her husband was a physician, she doubted
not but he was dead in very deed. Loving him over all else as she
did, it needeth no asking if she were woebegone for this and daring
not make any outcry, she silently fell a-weeping over him and
bewailing so sore a mishap.

[Footnote 257: A proverbial way of saying that he was fast asleep.]

After awhile, fearing to add shame to her loss, she bethought herself
that it behoved her without delay find a means of carrying the dead
man forth of the house and knowing not how to contrive this, she
softly called her maid and discovering to her her misadventure sought
counsel of her. The maid marvelled exceedingly and herself pulled and
pinched Ruggieri, but, finding him without sense or motion, agreed
with her mistress that he was certainly dead and counselled her put
him forth of the house. Quoth the lady, 'And where can we put him, so
it may not be suspected, whenas he shall be seen to-morrow morning,
that he hath been brought out hence?' 'Madam,' answered the maid, 'I
saw, this evening at nightfall, over against the shop of our neighbour
yonder the carpenter, a chest not overbig, the which, an the owner
have not taken it in again, will come very apt for our affair; for
that we can lay him therein, after giving him two or three slashes
with a knife, and leave him be. I know no reason why whoso findeth him
should suppose him to have been put there from this house rather than
otherwhence; nay, it will liefer be believed, seeing he was a young
man of lewd life, that he hath been slain by some enemy of his, whilst
going about to do some mischief or other, and after clapped in the
chest.'

The maid's counsel pleased the lady, save that she would not hear of
giving him any wound, saying that for naught in the world would her
heart suffer her to do that. Accordingly she sent her to see if the
chest were yet whereas she had noted it and she presently returned and
said, 'Ay.' Then, being young and lusty, with the aid of her mistress,
she took Ruggieri on her shoulders and carrying him out,--whilst the
lady forewent her, to look if any came,--clapped him into the chest
and shutting down the lid, left him there. Now it chanced that, a day
or two before, two young men, who lent at usance, had taken up their
abode in a house a little farther and lacking household gear, but
having a mind to gain much and spend little, had that day espied the
chest in question and had plotted together, if it should abide there
the night, to carry it off to their own house. Accordingly, midnight
come, they sallied forth and finding the chest still there, without
looking farther, they hastily carried it off, for all it seemed to
them somewhat heavy, to their own house, where they set it down beside
a chamber in which their wives slept and there leaving it, without
concerning themselves for the nonce to settle it overnicely, betook
them to bed.

Presently, the morning drawing near, Ruggieri, who had slept a great
while, having by this time digested the sleeping draught and exhausted
its effects, awoke and albeit his sleep was broken and his senses in
some measure restored, there abode yet a dizziness in his brain, which
held him stupefied, not that night only, but some days after. Opening
his eyes and seeing nothing, he put out his hands hither and thither
and finding himself in the chest, bethought himself and said, 'What is
this? Where am I? Am I asleep or awake? Algates I mind me that I came
this evening into my mistress's chamber and now meseemeth I am in a
chest. What meaneth this? Can the physician have returned or other
accident befallen, by reason whereof the lady hath hidden me here, I
being asleep? Methinketh it must have been thus; assuredly it was so.'
Accordingly, he addressed himself to abide quiet and hearken if he
could hear aught and after he had abidden thus a great while, being
somewhat ill at ease in the chest, which was small, and the side
whereon he lay irking him, he would have turned over to the other and
wrought so dexterously that, thrusting his loins against one of the
sides of the chest, which had not been set on a level place, he caused
it first to incline to one side and after topple over. In falling, it
made a great noise, whereat the women who slept therenigh awoke and
being affrighted, were silent for fear. Ruggieri was sore alarmed at
the fall of the chest, but, finding that it had opened in the fall,
chose rather, if aught else should betide, to be out of it than to
abide therewithin. Accordingly, he came forth and what with knowing
not where he was and what with one thing and another, he fell to
groping about the house, so haply he should find a stair or a door,
whereby he might get him gone.

The women, hearing this, began to say, 'Who is there?' But Ruggieri,
knowing not the voice, answered not; whereupon they proceeded to call
the two young men, who, for that they had overwatched themselves,
slept fast and heard nothing of all this. Thereupon the women, waxing
more fearful, arose and betaking themselves to the windows, fell
a-crying, 'Thieves! Thieves!' At this sundry of the neighbours ran up
and made their way, some by the roof and some by one part and some by
another, into the house; and the young men also, awaking for the
noise, arose and seized Ruggieri, who finding himself there, was in a
manner beside himself for wonderment and saw no way of escape. Then
they gave him into the hands of the officers of the governor of the
city, who had now run thither at the noise and carried him before
their chief. The latter, for that he was held of all a very sorry
fellow, straightway put him to the question and he confessed to having
entered the usurers' house to steal; whereupon the governor thought to
let string him up by the neck without delay.

The news was all over Salerno by the morning that Ruggieri had been
taken in the act of robbing the money-lenders' house, which the lady
and her maid hearing, they were filled with such strange and exceeding
wonderment that they were like to persuade themselves that they had
not done, but had only dreamed of doing, that which they had done
overnight; whilst the lady, to boot, was so concerned at the news of
the danger wherein Ruggieri was that she was like to go mad. Soon
after half tierce[258] the physician, having returned from Malfi and
wishing to medicine his patient, called for his prepared water and
finding the flagon empty, made a great outcry, saying that nothing
could abide as it was in his house. The lady, who was troubled with
another great chagrin, answered angrily, saying 'What wouldst thou
say, doctor, of grave matter, whenas thou makest such an outcry anent
a flagonlet of water overset? Is there no more water to be found in
the world?' 'Wife,' rejoined the physician, 'thou thinkest this was
common water; it was not so; nay, it was a water prepared to cause
sleep'; and told her for what occasion he had made it. When she heard
this, she understood forthright that Ruggieri had drunken the opiate
and had therefore appeared to them dead and said to her husband,
'Doctor, we knew it not; wherefore do you make yourself some more';
and the physician, accordingly, seeing he might not do otherwise, let
make thereof anew.

[Footnote 258: _i.e._ about half-past seven a.m.]

A little after, the maid, who had gone by her mistress's commandment
to learn what should be reported of Ruggieri, returned and said to
her, 'Madam, every one missaith of Ruggieri; nor, for aught I could
hear, is there friend or kinsman who hath risen up or thinketh to rise
up to assist him, and it is held certain that the prefect of police
will have him hanged to-morrow. Moreover, I have a strange thing to
tell you, to wit, meseemeth I have discovered how he came into the
money-lenders' house, and hear how. You know the carpenter overagainst
whose shop was the chest wherein we laid him; he was but now at the
hottest words in the world with one to whom it seemeth the chest
belonged; for the latter demanded of him the price of his chest, and
the carpenter replied that he had not sold it, but that it had that
night been stolen from him. Whereto, "Not so," quoth the other, "nay,
thou soldest it to the two young men, the money-lenders yonder, as
they told me yesternight, when I saw it in their house what time
Ruggieri was taken." "They lie," answered the carpenter. "I never sold
it to them; but they stole it from me yesternight. Let us go to them."
So they went off with one accord to the money-lenders' house, and I
came back hither. On this wise, as you may see, I conclude that
Ruggieri was transported whereas he was found; but how he came to life
again I cannot divine.'

The lady now understood very well how the case stood and telling the
maid what she had heard from the physician, besought her help to save
Ruggieri, for that she might, an she would, at once save him and
preserve her honour. Quoth she, 'Madam, teach me how, and I will
gladly do anything.' Whereupon the lady, whose wits were sharpened by
the urgency of the case, having promptly bethought herself of that
which was to do, particularly acquainted the maid therewith, who first
betook herself to the physician and weeping, began to say to him,
'Sir, it behoveth me ask you pardon of a great fault, which I have
committed against you.' 'In what?' asked the doctor, and she, never
giving over weeping, answered, 'Sir, you know what manner young man is
Ruggieri da Jeroli. He took a liking to me awhile agone and partly for
fear and partly for love, needs must I become his mistress.
Yesternight, knowing that you were abroad, he cajoled me on such wise
that I brought him into your house to lie with me in my chamber, and
he being athirst and I having no whither more quickly to resort for
water or wine, unwilling as I was that your lady, who was in the
saloon, should see me, I remembered me to have seen a flagon of water
in your chamber. Accordingly, I ran for it and giving him the water to
drink, replaced the flagon whence I had taken it, whereof I find you
have made a great outcry in the house. And certes I confess I did ill;
but who is there doth not ill bytimes? Indeed, I am exceeding grieved
to have done it, not so much for the thing itself as for that which
hath ensued of it and by reason whereof Ruggieri is like to lose his
life. Wherefore I pray you, as most I may, pardon me and give me leave
to go succour Ruggieri inasmuch as I can.' The physician, hearing
this, for all he was angry, answered jestingly, 'Thou hast given
thyself thine own penance therefor, seeing that, whereas thou
thoughtest yesternight to have a lusty young fellow who would shake
thy skincoats well for thee, thou hadst a sluggard; wherefore go and
endeavour for the deliverance of thy lover; but henceforth look thou
bring him not into the house again, or I will pay thee for this time
and that together.'

The maid, thinking she had fared well for the first venue, betook
herself, as quickliest she might, to the prison, where Ruggieri lay
and coaxed the gaoler to let her speak with the prisoner, whom after
she had instructed what answers he should make to the prefect of
police, an he would fain escape, she contrived to gain admission to
the magistrate himself. The latter, for that she was young and buxom,
would fain, ere he would hearken to her, cast his grapnel aboard the
good wench, whereof she, to be the better heard, was no whit chary;
then, having quitted herself of the grinding due,[259] 'Sir,' said
she, 'you have here Ruggieri da Jeroli taken for a thief; but the
truth is not so.' Then, beginning from the beginning, she told him the
whole story; how she, being his mistress, had brought him into the
physician's house and had given him the drugged water to drink,
unknowing what it was, and how she had put him for dead into the
chest; after which she told him the talk she had heard between the
master carpenter and the owner of the chest, showing him thereby how
Ruggieri had come into the money-lenders' house.

[Footnote 259: Or "having risen from the grinding" (_levatasi dal
macinio_).]

The magistrate, seeing it an easy thing to come at the truth of the
matter, first questioned the physician if it were true of the water
and found that it was as she had said; whereupon he let summon the
carpenter and him to whom the chest belonged and the two money-lenders
and after much parley, found that the latter had stolen the chest
overnight and put it in their house. Ultimately he sent for Ruggieri
and questioned him where he had lain that night, whereto he replied
that where he had lain he knew not; he remembered indeed having gone
to pass the night with Master Mazzeo's maid, in whose chamber he had
drunken water for a sore thirst he had; but what became of him after
he knew not, save that, when he awoke, he found himself in the
money-lenders' house in a chest. The prefect, hearing these things and
taking great pleasure therein, caused the maid and Ruggieri and the
carpenter and the money-lenders repeat their story again and again;
and in the end, seeing Ruggieri to be innocent, he released him and
amerced the money-lenders in half a score ounces for that they had
stolen the chest. How welcome this was to Ruggieri, none need ask, and
it was beyond measure pleasing to his mistress, who together with her
lover and the precious maid, who had proposed to give him the slashes
with the knife, many a time after laughed and made merry of the
matter, still continuing their loves and their disport from good to
better; the which I would well might so betide myself, save always the
being put in the chest."



If the former stories had saddened the hearts of the lovesome ladies,
this last one of Dioneo's made them laugh heartily, especially when he
spoke of the prefect casting his grapnel aboard the maid, that they
were able thus to recover themselves of the melancholy caused by the
others. But the king, seeing that the sun began to grow yellow and
that the term of his seignory was come, with very courteous speech
excused himself to the fair ladies for that which he had done, to wit,
that he had caused discourse of so sorrowful a matter as that of
lovers' infelicity; which done, he rose to his feet and taking from
his head the laurel wreath, whilst the ladies waited to see on whom he
should bestow it, set it daintily on Fiammetta's fair head, saying, "I
make over this crown to thee, as to her who will, better than any
other, know how with to-morrow's pleasance to console these ladies our
companions of to-day's woefulness."

Fiammetta, whose locks were curled and long and golden and fell over
her white and delicate shoulders and whose soft-rounded face was all
resplendent with white lilies and vermeil roses commingled, with two
eyes in her head as they were those of a peregrine falcon and a dainty
little mouth, the lips whereof seemed twin rubies, answered, smiling,
"And I, Filostrato, I take it willingly, and that thou mayst be the
better cognizant of that which thou hast done, I presently will and
command that each prepare to discourse to-morrow of THAT WHICH HATH
HAPPILY BETIDED LOVERS AFTER SUNDRY CRUEL AND MISFORTUNATE
ADVENTURES." Her proposition[260] was pleasing unto all and she, after
summoning the seneschal and taking counsel with him of things needful,
arising from session, blithely dismissed all the company until
supper-time. Accordingly, they all proceeded, according to their
various appetites, to take their several pleasures, some wandering
about the garden, whose beauties were not such as might lightly tire,
and other some betaking themselves towards the mills which wrought
therewithout, whilst the rest fared some hither and some thither,
until the hour of supper, which being come, they all foregathered, as
of their wont, anigh the fair fountain and there supped with exceeding
pleasance and well served. Presently, arising thence, they addressed
themselves, as of their wont, to dancing and singing, and Filomena
leading off the dance, the queen said, "Filostrato, I purpose not to
depart from the usance of those who have foregone me in the sovranty,
but, like as they have done, so I intend that a song be sung at my
commandment; and as I am assured that thy songs are even such as are
thy stories, it is our pleasure that, so no more days than this be
troubled with thine ill fortunes, thou sing such one thereof as most
pleaseth thee." Filostrato replied that he would well and forthright
proceeded to sing on this wise:

[Footnote 260: _i.e._ the theme proposed by her.]

         Weeping, I demonstrate
     How sore with reason doth my heart complain
     Of love betrayed and plighted faith in vain.

       Love, whenas first there was of thee imprest
         Thereon[261] her image for whose sake I sigh,
           Sans hope of succour aye,
           So full of virtue didst thou her pourtray,
         That every torment light accounted I
       That through thee to my breast
       Grown full of drear unrest
     And dole, might come; but now, alack! I'm fain
     To own my error, not withouten pain.

       Yea, of the cheat first was I made aware,
         Seeing myself of her forsaken sheer,
           In whom I hoped alone;
           For, when I deemed myself most fairly grown
         Into her favour and her servant dear,
       Without her thought or care
       Of my to-come despair,
     I found she had another's merit ta'en
     To heart and put me from her with disdain.

       Whenas I knew me banished from my stead,
         Straight in my heart a dolorous plaint there grew,
           That yet therein hath power,
           And oft I curse the day and eke the hour
         When first her lovesome visage met my view,
       Graced with high goodlihead;
       And more enamourÃ©d
     Than eye, my soul keeps up its dying strain,
     Faith, ardour, hope, blaspheming still amain.
       How void my misery is of all relief
         Thou mayst e'en feel, so sore I call thee, sire,
           With voice all full of woe;
           Ay, and I tell thee that it irks me so
         That death for lesser torment I desire.
       Come, death, then; shear the sheaf
       Of this my life of grief
     And with thy stroke my madness eke assain;
     Go where I may, less dire will be my bane.

       No other way than death is left my spright,
         Ay, and none other solace for my dole;
           Then give it[262] me straightway,
           Love; put an end withal to my dismay:
       Ah, do it; since fate's spite
       Hath robbed me of delight;
     Gladden thou her, lord, with my death, love-slain,
     As thou hast cheered her with another swain.

       My song, though none to learn thee lend an ear,
         I reck the less thereof, indeed, that none
           Could sing thee even as I;
           One only charge I give thee, ere I die,
         That thou find Love and unto him alone
       Show fully how undear
       This bitter life and drear
     Is to me, craving of his might he deign
     Some better harbourage I may attain.

         Weeping I demonstrate
     How sore with reason doth my heart complain
     Of love betrayed and plighted faith in vain.

[Footnote 261: _i.e._ on my heart.]

[Footnote 262: _i.e._ death.]

The words of this song clearly enough discovered the state of
Filostrato's mind and the cause thereof, the which belike the
countenance of a certain lady who was in the dance had yet plainlier
declared, had not the shades of the now fallen night hidden the
blushes that rose to her face. But, when he had made an end of his
song, many others were sung, till such time as the hour of sleep
arrived, whereupon, at the queen's commandment, each of the ladies
withdrew to her chamber.


HERE ENDETH THE FOURTH DAY
OF THE DECAMERON




_Day the Fifth_

     HERE BEGINNETH THE FIFTH DAY OF THE DECAMERON WHEREIN UNDER
     THE GOVERNANCE OF FIAMMETTA IS DISCOURSED OF THAT WHICH HATH
     HAPPILY BETIDED LOVERS AFTER SUNDRY CRUEL AND MISFORTUNATE
     ADVENTURES


The East was already all white and the rays of the rising sun had made
it light through all our hemisphere, when Fiammetta, allured by the
sweet song of the birds that blithely chanted the first hour of the
day upon the branches, arose and let call all the other ladies and the
three young men; then, with leisured pace descending into the fields,
she went a-pleasuring with her company about the ample plain upon the
dewy grasses, discoursing with them of one thing and another, until
the sun was somewhat risen, when, feeling that its rays began to grow
hot, she turned their steps to their abiding-place. There, with
excellent wines and confections, she let restore the light fatigue had
and they disported themselves in the delightsome garden until the
eating hour, which being come and everything made ready by the
discreet seneschal, they sat blithely down to meat, such being the
queen's pleasure, after they had sung sundry roundelays and a ballad
or two. Having dined orderly and with mirth, not unmindful of their
wonted usance of dancing, they danced sundry short dances to the sound
of songs and tabrets, after which the queen dismissed them all until
the hour of slumber should be past. Accordingly, some betook
themselves to sleep, whilst others addressed themselves anew to their
diversion about the fair garden; but all, according to the wonted
fashion, assembled together again, a little after none, near the fair
fountain, whereas it pleased the queen. Then she, having seated
herself in the chief room, looked towards Pamfilo and smilingly
charged him make a beginning with the fair-fortuned stories; whereto
he willingly addressed himself and spoke as follows:




THE FIRST STORY

[Day the Fifth]

     CIMON, LOVING, WAXETH WISE AND CARRIETH OFF TO SEA IPHIGENIA
     HIS MISTRESS. BEING CAST INTO PRISON AT RHODES, HE IS
     DELIVERED THENCE BY LYSIMACHUS AND IN CONCERT WITH HIM
     CARRIETH OFF IPHIGENIA AND CASSANDRA ON THEIR WEDDING-DAY,
     WITH WHOM THE TWAIN FLEE INTO CRETE, WHERE THE TWO LADIES
     BECOME THEIR WIVES AND WHENCE THEY ARE PRESENTLY ALL FOUR
     RECALLED HOME


"Many stories, delightsome ladies, apt to give beginning to so glad a
day as this will be, offer themselves unto me to be related; whereof
one is the most pleasing to my mind, for that thereby, beside the
happy issue which is to mark this day's discourses, you may understand
how holy, how puissant and how full of all good is the power of Love,
which many, unknowing what they say, condemn and vilify with great
unright; and this, an I err not, must needs be exceeding pleasing to
you, for that I believe you all to be in love.

There was, then, in the island of Cyprus, (as we have read aforetime
in the ancient histories of the Cypriots,) a very noble gentleman, by
name Aristippus, who was rich beyond any other of the country in all
temporal things and might have held himself the happiest man alive,
had not fortune made him woeful in one only thing, to wit, that
amongst his other children he had a son who overpassed all the other
youths of his age in stature and goodliness of body, but was a
hopeless dullard and well nigh an idiot. His true name was Galesus,
but for that neither by toil of teacher nor blandishment nor beating
of his father nor study nor endeavour of whatsoever other had it been
found possible to put into his head any inkling of letters or good
breeding and that he had a rough voice and an uncouth and manners more
befitting a beast than a man, he was of well nigh all by way of
mockery called Cimon, which in their tongue signified as much as brute
beast in ours. His father brooked his wastrel life with the most
grievous concern and having presently given over all hope of him, he
bade him begone to his country house[263] and there abide with his
husbandmen, so he might not still have before him the cause of his
chagrin; the which was very agreeable to Cimon, for that the manners
and usages of clowns and churls were much more to his liking than
those of the townsfolk.

[Footnote 263: Or farm (_villa_).]

Cimon, then, betaking himself to the country and there employing
himself in the things that pertained thereto, it chanced one day,
awhile after noon, as he passed from one farm to another, with his
staff on his shoulder, that he entered a very fair coppice which was
in those parts and which was then all in leaf, for that it was the
month of May. Passing therethrough, he happened (even as his fortune
guided him thither) upon a little mead compassed about with very high
trees, in one corner whereof was a very clear and cool spring, beside
which he saw a very fair damsel asleep upon the green grass, with so
thin a garment upon her body that it hid well nigh nothing of her
snowy flesh. She was covered only from the waist down with a very
white and light coverlet; and at her feet slept on like wise two women
and a man, her servants. When Cimon espied the young lady, he halted
and leaning upon his staff, fell, without saying a word, to gazing
most intently upon her with the utmost admiration, no otherwise than
as he had never yet seen a woman's form, whilst in his rude breast,
wherein for a thousand lessonings no least impression of civil
pleasance had availed to penetrate, he felt a thought awaken which
intimated to his gross and material spirit that this maiden was the
fairest thing that had been ever seen of any living soul. Thence he
proceeded to consider her various parts,--commending her hair, which
he accounted of gold, her brow, her nose, her mouth, her throat and
her arms, and above all her breast, as yet but little upraised,--and
grown of a sudden from a churl a judge of beauty, he ardently desired
in himself to see the eyes, which, weighed down with deep sleep, she
kept closed. To this end, he had it several times in mind to awaken
her; but, for that she seemed to him beyond measure fairer than the
other women aforetime seen of him, he misdoubted him she must be some
goddess. Now he had wit enough to account things divine worthy of more
reverence than those mundane; wherefore he forbore, waiting for her to
awake of herself; and albeit the delay seemed overlong to him, yet,
taken as he was with an unwonted pleasure, he knew not how to tear
himself away.

It befell, then, that, after a long while, the damsel, whose name was
Iphigenia, came to herself, before any of her people, and opening her
eyes, saw Cimon (who, what for his fashion and uncouthness and his
father's wealth and nobility, was known in a manner to every one in
the country) standing before her, leant on his staff, marvelled
exceedingly and said, 'Cimon, what goest thou seeking in this wood at
this hour?' He made her no answer, but, seeing her eyes open, began to
look steadfastly upon them, himseeming there proceeded thence a
sweetness which fulfilled him with a pleasure such as he had never
before felt. The young lady, seeing this, began to misdoubt her lest
his so fixed looking upon her should move his rusticity to somewhat
that might turn to her shame; wherefore, calling her women, she rose
up, saying, 'Cimon, abide with God.' To which he replied, 'I will
begone with thee'; and albeit the young lady, who was still in fear of
him, would have declined his company, she could not win to rid herself
of him till he had accompanied her to her own house.

Thence he repaired to his father's house [in the city,] and declared
to him that he would on no wise consent to return to the country; the
which was irksome enough to Aristippus and his kinsfolk; nevertheless
they let him be, awaiting to see what might be the cause of his change
of mind. Love's arrow having, then, through Iphigenia's beauty,
penetrated into Cimon's heart, whereinto no teaching had ever availed
to win an entrance, in a very brief time, proceeding from one idea to
another, he made his father marvel and all his kinsfolk and every
other that knew him. In the first place he besought his father that he
would cause him go bedecked with clothes and every other thing, even
as his brothers, the which Aristippus right gladly did. Then,
consorting with young men of condition and learning the fashions and
carriage that behoved unto gentlemen and especially unto lovers, he
first, to the utmost wonderment of every one, in a very brief space of
time, not only learned the first [elements of] letters, but became
very eminent among the students of philosophy, and after (the love
which he bore Iphigenia being the cause of all this) he not only
reduced his rude and rustical manner of speech to seemliness and
civility, but became a past master of song and sound[264] and
exceeding expert and doughty in riding and martial exercises, both by
land and by sea. In short, not to go recounting every particular of
his merits, the fourth year was not accomplished from the day of his
first falling in love, ere he was grown the sprightliest and most
accomplished gentleman of all the young men in the island of Cyprus,
ay, and the best endowed with every particular excellence. What, then,
charming ladies, shall we say of Cimon? Certes, none other thing than
that the lofty virtues implanted by heaven in his generous soul had
been bounden with exceeding strong bonds of jealous fortune and shut
in some straitest corner of his heart, all which bonds Love, as a
mightier than fortune, broke and burst in sunder and in its quality of
awakener and quickener of drowsed and sluggish wits, urged forth into
broad daylight the virtues aforesaid, which had till then been
overdarkened with a barbarous obscurity, thus manifestly discovering
from how mean a room it can avail to uplift those souls that are
subject unto it and to what an eminence it can conduct them with its
beams.

[Footnote 264: _i.e._ of music, vocal and instrumental.]

Although Cimon, loving Iphigenia as he did, might exceed in certain
things, as young men in love very often do, nevertheless Aristippus,
considering that Love had turned him from a dunce into a man, not only
patiently bore with the extravagances into which it might whiles lead
him, but encouraged him to ensue its every pleasure. But Cimon, (who
refused to be called Galesus, remembering that Iphigenia had called
him by the former name,) seeking to put an honourable term to his
desire, once and again caused essay Cipseus, Iphigenia's father, so he
should give him his daughter to wife; but Cipseus still answered that
he had promised her to Pasimondas, a young nobleman of Rhodes, to whom
he had no mind to fail of his word. The time coming the covenanted
nuptials of Iphigenia and the bridegroom having sent for her, Cimon
said to himself, 'Now, O Iphigenia, is the time to prove how much thou
are beloved of me. By thee am I become a man and so I may but have
thee, I doubt not to become more glorious than any god; and for
certain I will or have thee or die.'

Accordingly, having secretly recruited certain young noblemen who were
his friends and let privily equip a ship with everything apt for naval
battle, he put out to sea and awaited the vessel wherein Iphigenia was
to be transported to her husband in Rhodes. The bride, after much
honour done of her father to the bridegroom's friends, took ship with
the latter, who turned their prow towards Rhodes and departed. On the
following day, Cimon, who slept not, came out upon them with his ship
and cried out, in a loud voice, from the prow, to those who were on
board Iphigenia's vessel, saying, 'Stay, strike your sails or look to
be beaten and sunken in the sea.' Cimon's adversaries had gotten up
their arms on deck and made ready to defend themselves; whereupon he,
after speaking the words aforesaid, took a grappling-iron and casting
it upon the poop of the Rhodians, who were making off at the top of
their speed, made it fast by main force to the prow of his own ship.
Then, bold as a lion, he leapt on board their ship, without waiting
for any to follow him, as if he held them all for nought, and Love
spurring him, he fell upon his enemies with marvellous might, cutlass
in hand, striking now this one and now that and hewing them down like
sheep.

The Rhodians, seeing this, cast down their arms and all as with one
voice confessed themselves prisoners; whereupon quoth Cimon to them,
'Young men, it was neither lust of rapine nor hate that I had against
you made me depart Cyprus to assail you, arms in hand, in mid sea.
That which moved me thereunto was the desire of a thing which to have
gotten is a very grave matter to me and to you a very light one to
yield me in peace; it is, to wit, Iphigenia, whom I loved over all
else and whom, availing not to have of her father on friendly and
peaceful wise, Love hath constrained me to win from you as an enemy
and by force of arms. Wherefor I mean to be to her that which your
friend Pasimondas should have been. Give her to me, then, and begone
and God's grace go with you.'

The Rhodians, more by force constrained than of freewill, surrendered
Iphigenia, weeping, to Cimon, who, seeing her in tears, said to her,
'Noble Lady, be not disconsolate; I am thy Cimon, who by long love
have far better deserved to have thee than Pasimondas by plighted
faith.' Thereupon he caused carry her aboard his own ship and
returning to his companions, let the Rhodians go, without touching
aught else of theirs. Then, glad beyond any man alive to have gotten
so dear a prey, after devoting some time to comforting the weeping
lady, he took counsel with his comrades not to return to Cyprus at
that present; wherefore, of one accord, they turned the ship's head
towards Crete, where well nigh every one, and especially Cimon, had
kinsfolk, old and new, and friends in plenty and where they doubted
not to be in safety with Iphigenia. But fortune the unstable, which
had cheerfully enough vouchsafed unto Cimon the acquisition of the
lady, suddenly changed the inexpressible joyance of the enamoured
youth into sad and bitter mourning; for it was not four full told
hours since he had left the Rhodians when the night (which Cimon
looked to be more delightsome than any he had ever known) came on and
with it a very troublous and tempestuous shift of weather, which
filled all the sky with clouds and the sea with ravening winds, by
reason whereof none could see what to do or whither to steer, nor
could any even keep the deck to do any office.

How sore concerned was Cimon for this it needeth not to ask; himseemed
the gods had vouchsafed him his desire but to make death the more
grievous to him, whereof, without that, he had before recked little.
His comrades lamented on like wise, but Iphigenia bewailed herself
over all, weeping sore and fearing every stroke of the waves; and in
her chagrin she bitterly cursed Cimon's love and blamed his
presumption, avouching that the tempest had arisen for none other
thing but that the gods chose not that he, who would fain against
their will have her to wife, should avail to enjoy his presumptuous
desire, but, seeing her first die, should after himself perish
miserably.

Amidst such lamentations and others yet more grievous, the wind waxing
hourly fiercer and the seamen knowing not what to do, they came,
without witting whither they went or availing to change their course,
near to the island of Rhodes, and unknowing that it was Rhodes, they
used their every endeavour to get to land thereon, an it were
possible, for the saving of their lives. In this fortune was
favourable to them and brought them into a little bight of the sea,
where the Rhodians whom Cimon had let go had a little before arrived
with their ship; nor did they perceive that they had struck the island
of Rhodes till the dawn broke and made the sky somewhat clearer, when
they found themselves maybe a bowshot distant from the ship left of
them the day before. At this Cimon was beyond measure chagrined and
fearing lest that should betide them which did in very deed ensue,
bade use every endeavour to issue thence and let fortune after carry
them whither it should please her, for that they could be nowhere in
worse case than there. Accordingly, they made the utmost efforts to
put to sea, but in vain; for the wind blew so mightily against them
that not only could they not avail to issue from the little harbour,
but whether they would or no, it drove them ashore.

No sooner were they come thither than they were recognized by the
Rhodian sailors, who had landed from their ship, and one of them ran
nimbly to a village hard by, whither the young Rhodian gentlemen had
betaken themselves, and told the latter that, as luck would have
it,[265] Cimon and Iphigenia were come thither aboard their ship,
driven, like themselves, by stress of weather. They, hearing this,
were greatly rejoiced and repairing in all haste to the sea-shore,
with a number of the villagers, took Cimon, together with Iphigenia
and all his company, who had now landed and taken counsel together to
flee into some neighbouring wood, and carried them to the village. The
news coming to Pasimondas, he made his complaint to the senate of the
island and according as he had ordered it with them, Lysimachus, in
whom the chief magistracy of the Rhodians was for that year vested,
coming thither from the city with a great company of men-at-arms,
haled Cimon and all his men to prison. On such wise did the wretched
and lovelorn Cimon lose his Iphigenia, scantwhile before won of him,
without having taken of her more than a kiss or two; whilst she
herself was received by many noble ladies of Rhodes and comforted as
well for the chagrin had of her seizure as for the fatigue suffered by
reason of the troubled sea; and with them she abode against the day
appointed for her nuptials.

[Footnote 265: _Per fortuna._ This may also be rendered "by tempest,"
_fortuna_ being a name for a squall or hurricane, which Boccaccio uses
elsewhere in the same sense.]

As for Cimon and his companions, their lives were granted them, in
consideration of the liberty given by them to the young Rhodians the
day before,--albeit Pasimondas used his utmost endeavour to procure
them to be put to death,--and they were condemned to perpetual prison,
wherein, as may well be believed, they abode woebegone and without
hope of any relief. However, whilst Pasimondas, as most he might,
hastened the preparations for his coming nuptials, fortune, as if
repenting her of the sudden injury done to Cimon, brought about a new
circumstance for his deliverance, the which was on this wise.
Pasimondas had a brother called Ormisdas, less in years, but not in
merit, than himself, who had been long in treaty for the hand of a
fair and noble damsel of the city, by name Cassandra, whom Lysimachus
ardently loved, and the match had sundry times been broken off by
divers untoward accidents. Now Pasimondas, being about to celebrate
his own nuptials with the utmost splendour, bethought himself that it
were excellently well done if he could procure Ormisdas likewise to
take wife on the same occasion, not to resort afresh to expense and
festival making. Accordingly, he took up again the parleys with
Cassandra's parents and brought them to a successful issue; wherefore
he and his brother agreed, in concert with them, that Ormisdas should
take Cassandra to wife on the same day whenas himself took Iphigenia.

Lysimachus hearing this, it was beyond measure displeasing to him, for
that he saw himself bereaved of the hope which he cherished, that, an
Ormisdas took her not, he should certainly have her. However, like a
wise man, he kept his chagrin hidden and fell to considering on what
wise he might avail to hinder this having effect, but could see no way
possible save the carrying her off. This seemed easy to him to compass
for the office which he held, but he accounted the deed far more
dishonourable than if he had not held the office in question.
Ultimately, however, after long deliberation, honour gave place to
love and he determined, come what might of it, to carry off Cassandra.
Then, bethinking himself of the company he must have and the course he
must hold to do this, he remembered him of Cimon, whom he had in
prison with his comrades, and concluded that he might have no better
or trustier companion than Cimon in this affair.

Accordingly, that same night he had him privily into his chamber and
proceeded to bespeak him on this wise: 'Cimon, like as the gods are
very excellent and bountiful givers of things to men, even so are they
most sagacious provers of their virtues, and those, whom they find
resolute and constant under all circumstances, they hold deserving, as
the most worthy, of the highest recompenses. They have been minded to
have more certain proof of thy worth than could be shown by thee
within the limits of thy father's house, whom I know to be abundantly
endowed with riches; wherefore, first, with the poignant instigations
of love they brought thee from a senseless animal to be a man, and
after with foul fortune and at this present with prison dour, they
would fain try if thy spirit change not from that which it was, whenas
thou wast scantwhile glad of the gotten prize. If that[266] be the
same as it was erst, they never yet vouchsafed thee aught so gladsome
as that which they are presently prepared to bestow on thee and which,
so thou mayst recover thy wonted powers and resume thy whilom spirit,
I purpose to discover to thee.

[Footnote 266: _i.e._ thy spirit.]

Pasimondas, rejoicing in thy misadventure and a diligent promoter of
thy death, bestirreth himself as most he may to celebrate his nuptials
with thine Iphigenia, so therein he may enjoy the prize which fortune
first blithely conceded thee and after, growing troubled, took from
thee of a sudden. How much this must grieve thee, an thou love as I
believe, I know by myself, to whom Ormisdas his brother prepareth in
one same day to do a like injury in the person of Cassandra, whom I
love over all else. To escape so great an unright and annoy of
fortune, I see no way left open of her to us, save the valour of our
souls and the might of our right hands, wherein it behoveth us take
our swords and make us a way to the carrying off of our two
mistresses, thee for the second and me for the first time. If, then,
it be dear to thee to have again--I will not say thy liberty, whereof
methinketh thou reckest little without thy lady, but--thy mistress,
the gods have put her in thy hands, an thou be willing to second me in
my emprize.'

All Cimon's lost spirit was requickened in him by these words and he
replied, without overmuch consideration, 'Lysimachus, thou canst have
no stouter or trustier comrade than myself in such an enterprise, an
that be to ensue thereof for me which thou avouchest; wherefore do
thou command me that which thou deemest should be done of me, and thou
shalt find thyself wonder-puissantly seconded.' Then said Lysimachus,
'On the third day from this the new-married wives will for the first
time enter their husbands' houses, whereinto thou with thy companions
armed and I with certain of my friends, in whom I put great trust,
will make our way towards nightfall and snatching up our mistresses
out of the midst of the guests, will carry them off to a ship, which I
have caused secretly equip, slaying whosoever shall presume to offer
opposition.' The devise pleased Cimon and he abode quiet in prison
until the appointed time.

The wedding-day being come, great and magnificent was the pomp of the
festival and every part of the two brothers' house was full of mirth
and merrymaking; whereupon Lysimachus, having made ready everything
needful, divided Cimon and his companions, together with his own
friends, all armed under their clothes, into three parties and having
first kindled them to his purpose with many words, secretly despatched
one party to the harbour, so none might hinder their going aboard the
ship, whenas need should be. Then, coming with the other twain, whenas
it seemed to him time, to Pasimondas his house, he left one party of
them at the door, so as none might shut them up therewithin or forbid
them the issue, and with Cimon and the rest went up by the stairs.
Coming to the saloon where the new-wedded brides were seated orderly
at meat with many other ladies, they rushed in upon them and
overthrowing the tables, took each his mistress and putting them in
the hands of their comrades, bade straightway carry them to the ship
that was in waiting. The brides fell a-weeping and shrieking, as did
likewise the other ladies and the servants, and the whole house was of
a sudden full of clamour and lamentation.

Cimon and Lysimachus and their companions, drawing their swords, made
for the stairs, without any opposition, all giving way to them, and as
they descended, Pasimondas presented himself before them, with a great
cudgel in his hand, being drawn thither by the outcry; but Cimon dealt
him a swashing blow on the head and cleaving it sheer in sunder, laid
him dead at his feet. The wretched Ormisdas, running to his brother's
aid, was on like wise slain by one of Cimon's strokes, and divers
others who sought to draw nigh them were in like manner wounded and
beaten off by the companions of the latter and Lysimachus, who,
leaving the house full of blood and clamour and weeping and woe, drew
together and made their way to the ship with their prizes, unhindered
of any. Here they embarked with their mistresses and all their
companions, the shore being now full of armed folk come to the rescue
of the ladies, and thrusting the oars into the water, made off,
rejoicing, about their business. Coming presently to Crete, they were
there joyfully received by many, both friends and kinsfolk, and
espousing their mistresses with great pomp, gave themselves up to the
glad enjoyment of their purchase. Loud and long were the clamours and
differences in Cyprus and in Rhodes by reason of their doings; but,
ultimately, their friends and kinsfolk, interposing in one and the
other place, found means so to adjust matters that, after some exile,
Cimon joyfully returned to Cyprus with Iphigenia, whilst Lysimachus on
like wise returned to Rhodes with Cassandra, and each lived long and
happily with his mistress in his own country."




THE SECOND STORY

[Day the Fifth]

     COSTANZA LOVETH MARTUCCIO GOMITO AND HEARING THAT HE IS
     DEAD, EMBARKETH FOR DESPAIR ALONE IN A BOAT, WHICH IS
     CARRIED BY THE WIND TO SUSA. FINDING HER LOVER ALIVE AT
     TUNIS, SHE DISCOVERETH HERSELF TO HIM AND HE, BEING GREAT IN
     FAVOUR WITH THE KING FOR COUNSELS GIVEN, ESPOUSETH HER AND
     RETURNETH RICH WITH HER TO LIPARI


The queen, seeing Pamfilo's story at an end, after she had much
commended it, enjoined Emilia to follow on, telling another, and she
accordingly began thus: "Every one must naturally delight in those
things wherein he seeth rewards ensue according to the affections;[267]
and for that love in the long run deserveth rather happiness than
affliction, I shall, intreating of the present theme, obey the queen
with much greater pleasure to myself than I did the king in that of
yesterday.

[Footnote 267: Syn. inclinations (_affezioni_). This is a somewhat
obscure passage, owing to the vagueness of the word _affezioni_ (syn.
_affetti_) in this position, and may be rendered, with about equal
probability, in more than one way.]

You must know, then, dainty dames, that near unto Sicily is an islet
called Lipari, wherein, no great while agone, was a very fair damsel
called Costanza, born of a very considerable family there. It chanced
that a young man of the same island, called Martuccio Gomito, who was
very agreeable and well bred and of approved worth[268] in his
craft,[269] fell in love with her; and she in like manner so burned
for him that she was never easy save whenas she saw him. Martuccio,
wishing to have her to wife, caused demand her of her father, who
answered that he was poor and that therefore he would not give her to
him. The young man, enraged to see himself rejected for poverty, in
concert with certain of his friends and kinsmen, equipped a light ship
and swore never to return to Lipari, except rich. Accordingly, he
departed thence and turning corsair, fell to cruising off the coast of
Barbary and plundering all who were weaker than himself; wherein
fortune was favourable enough to him, had he known how to set bounds
to his wishes; but, it sufficing him not to have waxed very rich, he
and his comrades, in a brief space of time, it befell that, whilst
they sought to grow overrich, he was, after a long defence, taken and
plundered with all his companions by certain ships of the Saracens,
who, after scuttling the vessel and sacking the greater part of the
crew, carried Martuccio to Tunis, where he was put in prison and long
kept in misery.

[Footnote 268: Or "eminent" (_valoroso_), _i.e._ in modern parlance,
"a man of merit and talent."]

[Footnote 269: _Valoroso nel suo mestiere._ It does not appear that
Martuccio was a craftsman and it is possible, therefore, that
Boccaccio intended the word _mestiere_ to be taken in the sense (to me
unknown) of "condition" or "estate," in which case the passage would
read, "a man of worth for (_i.e._ as far as comported with) his [mean]
estate"; and this seems a probable reading.]

The news was brought to Lipari, not by one or by two, but by many and
divers persons, that he and all on board the bark had been drowned;
whereupon the girl, who had been beyond measure woebegone for her
lover's departure, hearing that he was dead with the others, wept sore
and resolved in herself to live no longer; but, her heart suffering
her not to slay herself by violence, she determined to give a new
occasion[270] to her death.[271] Accordingly, she issued secretly
forth of her father's house one night and betaking herself to the
harbour, happened upon a fishing smack, a little aloof from the other
ships, which, for that its owners had but then landed therefrom, she
found furnished with mast and sail and oars. In this she hastily
embarked and rowed herself out to sea; then, being somewhat skilled in
the mariner's art, as the women of that island mostly are, she made
sail and casting the oars and rudder adrift, committed herself
altogether to the mercy of the waves, conceiving that it must needs
happen that the wind would either overturn a boat without lading or
steersman or drive it upon some rock and break it up, whereby she
could not, even if she would, escape, but must of necessity be
drowned. Accordingly, wrapping her head in a mantle, she laid herself,
weeping, in the bottom of the boat.

[Footnote 270: Lit. necessity (_necessitÃ _).]

[Footnote 271: _i.e._ to use a new (or strange) fashion of exposing
herself to an inevitable death (_nuova necessitÃ  dare alla sua
morte_).]

But it befell altogether otherwise than as she conceived, for that,
the wind being northerly and very light and there being well nigh no
sea, the boat rode it out in safety and brought her on the morrow,
about vespers, to a beach near a town called Susa, a good hundred
miles beyond Tunis. The girl, who, for aught that might happen, had
never lifted nor meant to lift her head, felt nothing of being ashore
more than at sea;[272] but, as chance would have it, there was on the
beach, whenas the bark struck upon it, a poor woman in act to take up
from the sun the nets of the fishermen her masters, who, seeing the
bark, marvelled how it should be left to strike full sail upon the
land. Thinking that the fishermen aboard were asleep, she went up to
the bark and seeing none therein but the damsel aforesaid, who slept
fast, called her many times and having at last aroused her and knowing
her by her habit for a Christian, asked her in Latin how she came
there in that bark all alone. The girl, hearing her speak Latin,
misdoubted her a shift of wind must have driven her back to Lipari and
starting suddenly to her feet, looked about her, but knew not the
country, and seeing herself on land, asked the good woman where she
was; to which she answered, 'Daughter mine, thou art near unto Susa in
Barbary.' The girl, hearing this, was woeful for that God had not
chosen to vouchsafe her the death she sought, and being in fear of
shame and knowing not what to do, she seated herself at the foot of
her bark and fell a-weeping.

[Footnote 272: _i.e._ knew not whether she was ashore or afloat, so
absorbed was she in her despair.]

The good woman, seeing this, took pity upon her and brought her, by
dint of entreaty, into a little hut of hers and there so humoured her
that she told her how she came thither; whereupon, seeing that she
was fasting, she set before her her own dry bread and somewhat of fish
and water and so besought her that she ate a little. Costanza after
asked her who she was that she spoke Latin thus; to which she answered
that she was from Trapani and was called Carapresa and served certain
Christian fishermen there. The girl, hearing the name of Carapresa,
albeit she was exceeding woebegone and knew not what reason moved her
thereunto, took it unto herself for a good augury to have heard this
name[273] and began to hope, without knowing what, and somewhat to
abate of her wish to die. Then, without discovering who or whence she
was, she earnestly besought the good woman to have pity, for the love
of God, on her youth and give her some counsel how she might escape
any affront being offered her.

[Footnote 273: Or "augured well from the hearing of the name."
_Carapresa_ signifies "a dear or precious prize, gain or capture."]

Carapresa, like a good woman as she was, hearing this, left her in her
hut, whilst she hastily gathered up her nets; then, returning to her,
she wrapped her from head to foot in her own mantle and carried her to
Susa, where she said to her, 'Costanza, I will bring thee into the
house of a very good Saracen lady, whom I serve oftentimes in her
occasions and who is old and pitiful. I will commend thee to her as
most I may and I am very certain that she will gladly receive thee and
use thee as a daughter; and do thou, abiding with her, study thine
utmost, in serving her, to gain her favour, against God send thee
better fortune.' And as she said, so she did. The lady, who was well
stricken in years, hearing the woman's story, looked the girl in the
face and fell a-weeping; then taking her by the hand, she kissed her
on the forehead and carried her into her house, where she and sundry
other women abode, without any man, and wrought all with their hands
at various crafts, doing divers works of silk and palm-fibre and
leather. Costanza soon learned to do some of these and falling to
working with the rest, became in such favour with the lady and the
others that it was a marvellous thing; nor was it long before, with
their teaching, she learnt their language.

What while she abode thus at Susa, being now mourned at home for lost
and dead, it befell that, one Mariabdela[274] being King of Tunis, a
certain youth of great family and much puissance in Granada, avouching
that that kingdom belonged to himself, levied a great multitude of
folk and came upon King Mariabdela, to oust him from the kingship.
This came to the ears of Martuccio Gomito in prison and he knowing the
Barbary language excellent well and hearing that the king was making
great efforts for his defence, said to one of those who had him and
his fellows in keeping, 'An I might have speech of the king, my heart
assureth me that I could give him a counsel, by which he should gain
this his war.' The keeper reported these words to his chief, and he
carried them incontinent to the king, who bade fetch Martuccio and
asked him what might be his counsel; whereto he made answer on this
wise, 'My lord, if, what time I have otherwhiles frequented these your
dominions, I have noted aright the order you keep in your battles,
meseemeth you wage them more with archers than with aught else;
wherefore, if a means could be found whereby your adversary's bowmen
should lack of arrows, whilst your own had abundance thereof,
methinketh your battle would be won.' 'Without doubt,' answered the
king, 'and this might be compassed, I should deem myself assured of
victory.' Whereupon, 'My lord,' quoth Martuccio, 'an you will, this
may very well be done, and you shall hear how. You must let make
strings for your archers' bows much thinner than those which are
everywhere commonly used and after let make arrows, the notches
whereof shall not serve but for these thin strings. This must be so
secretly done that your adversary should know nought thereof; else
would he find a remedy therefor; and the reason for which I counsel
you thus is this. After your enemy's archers and your own shall have
shot all their arrows, you know that, the battle lasting, it will
behove your foes to gather up the arrows shot by your men and the
latter in like manner to gather theirs; but the enemy will not be able
to make use of your arrows, by reason of the strait notches which will
not take their thick strings, whereas the contrary will betide your
men of the enemy's arrows, for that the thin strings will excellently
well take the wide-notched arrows; and so your men will have abundance
of ammunition, whilst the others will suffer default thereof.'

[Footnote 274: This name is apparently a distortion of the Arabic
_Amir Abdullah_.]

The king, who was a wise prince, was pleased with Martuccio's counsel
and punctually following it, found himself thereby to have won his
war. Wherefore Martuccio became in high favour with him and rose in
consequence to great and rich estate. The report of these things
spread over the land and it came presently to Costanza's ears that
Martuccio Gomito, whom she had long deemed dead, was alive, whereupon
the love of him, that was now grown cool in her heart, broke out of a
sudden into fresh flame and waxed greater than ever, whilst dead hope
revived in her. Therewithal she altogether discovered her every
adventure to the good lady, with whom she dwelt, and told her that she
would fain go to Tunis, so she might satisfy her eyes of that whereof
her ears had made them desireful, through the reports received. The
old lady greatly commended her purpose and taking ship with her,
carried her, as if she had been her mother, to Tunis, where they were
honourably entertained in the house of a kinswoman of hers. There she
despatched Carapresa, who had come with them, to see what she could
learn of Martuccio, and she, finding him alive and in great estate and
reporting this to the old gentlewoman, it pleased the latter to will
to be she who should signify unto Martuccio that his Costanza was come
thither to him; wherefore, betaking herself one day whereas he was,
she said to him, 'Martuccio, there is come to my house a servant of
thine from Lipari, who would fain speak with thee privily there;
wherefore, not to trust to others, I have myself, at his desire, come
to give thee notice thereof.' He thanked her and followed her to her
house, where when Costanza saw him, she was like to die of gladness
and unable to contain herself, ran straightway with open arms to
throw herself on his neck; then, embracing him, without availing to
say aught, she fell a-weeping tenderly, both for compassion of their
past ill fortunes and for present gladness.

Martuccio, seeing his mistress, abode awhile dumb for amazement, then
said sighing, 'O my Costanza, art thou then yet alive? It is long
since I heard that thou wast lost; nor in our country was aught known
of thee.' So saying, he embraced her, weeping, and kissed her
tenderly. Costanza then related to him all that had befallen her and
the honourable treatment which she had received from the gentlewoman
with whom she dwelt; and Martuccio, after much discourse, taking leave
of her, repaired to the king his master and told him all, to wit, his
own adventures and those of the damsel, adding that, with his leave,
he meant to take her to wife, according to our law. The king marvelled
at these things and sending for the damsel and hearing from her that
it was even as Martuccio had avouched, said to her, 'Then hast thou
right well earned him to husband.' Then, letting bring very great and
magnificent gifts, he gave part thereof to her and part to Martuccio,
granting them leave to do one with the other that which was most
pleasing unto each of them; whereupon Martuccio, having entreated the
gentlewoman who had harboured Costanza with the utmost honour and
thanked her for that which she had done to serve her and bestowed on
her such gifts as sorted with her quality, commended her to God and
took leave of her, he and his mistress, not without many tears from
the latter. Then, with the king's leave, they embarked with Carapresa
on board a little ship and returned with a fair wind to Lipari, where
so great was the rejoicing that it might never be told. There
Martuccio took Costanza to wife and held great and goodly nuptials;
after which they long in peace and repose had enjoyment of their
loves."




THE THIRD STORY

[Day the Fifth]

     PIETRO BOCCAMAZZA, FLEEING WITH AGNOLELLA, FALLETH AMONG
     THIEVES; THE GIRL ESCAPETH THROUGH A WOOD AND IS LED [BY
     FORTUNE] TO A CASTLE, WHILST PIETRO IS TAKEN BY THE THIEVES,
     BUT PRESENTLY, ESCAPING FROM THEIR HANDS, WINNETH, AFTER
     DIVERS ADVENTURES, TO THE CASTLE WHERE HIS MISTRESS IS AND
     ESPOUSING HER, RETURNETH WITH HER TO ROME


There was none among all the company but commended Emilia's story,
which the queen seeing to be finished, turned to Elisa and bade her
follow on. Accordingly, studious to obey, she began: "There occurreth
to my mind, charming ladies, an ill night passed by a pair of
indiscreet young lovers; but, for that many happy days ensued thereon,
it pleaseth me to tell the story, as one that conformeth to our
proposition.

There was, a little while agone, at Rome,--once the head, as it is
nowadays the tail of the world,[275]--a youth, called Pietro
Boccamazza, of a very worshipful family among those of the city, who
fell in love with a very fair and lovesome damsel called Agnolella,
the daughter of one Gigliuozzo Saullo, a plebeian, but very dear to
the Romans, and loving her, he contrived so to do that the girl began
to love him no less than he loved her; whereupon, constrained by
fervent love and himseeming he might no longer brook the cruel pain
that the desire he had of her gave him, he demanded her in marriage;
which no sooner did his kinsfolk know than they all repaired to him
and chid him sore for that which he would have done; and on the other
hand they gave Gigliuozzo to understand that he should make no account
of Pietro's words, for that, an he did this, they would never have him
for friend or kinsman. Pietro seeing that way barred whereby alone he
deemed he might avail to win to his desire, was like to die of
chagrin, and had Gigliuozzo consented, he would have taken his
daughter to wife, in despite of all his kindred. However, he
determined, an it liked the girl, to contrive to give effect to their
wishes, and having assured himself, by means of an intermediary, that
this was agreeable to her, he agreed with her that she should flee
with him from Rome.

[Footnote 275: Clement V. early in the fourteenth century removed the
Papal See to Avignon, where it continued to be during the reigns of
the five succeeding Popes, Rome being in the meantime abandoned by the
Papal Court, till Gregory XI, in the year 1376 again took up his
residence at the latter city. It is apparently to this circumstance
that Boccaccio alludes in the text.]

Accordingly, having taken order for this, Pietro arose very early one
morning and taking horse with the damsel, set out for Anagni, where he
had certain friends in whom he trusted greatly. They had no leisure to
make a wedding of it, for that they feared to be followed, but rode
on, devising of their love and now and again kissing one another. It
chanced that, when they came mayhap eight miles from Rome, the way not
being overwell known to Pietro, they took a path to the left, whereas
they should have kept to the right; and scarce had they ridden more
than two miles farther when they found themselves near a little
castle, wherefrom, as soon as they were seen, there issued suddenly a
dozen footmen. The girl, espying these, whenas they were already close
upon them, cried out, saying, 'Pietro, let us begone, for we are
attacked'; then, turning her rouncey's head, as best she knew, towards
a great wood hard by, she clapped her spurs fast to his flank and held
on to the saddlebow, whereupon the nag, feeling himself goaded, bore
her into the wood at a gallop.

Pietro, who went gazing more at her face than at the road, not having
become so quickly aware as she of the new comers, was overtaken and
seized by them, whilst he still looked, without yet perceiving them,
to see whence they should come. They made him alight from his hackney
and enquired who he was, which he having told, they proceeded to take
counsel together and said, 'This fellow is of the friends of our
enemies; what else should we do but take from him these clothes and
this nag and string him up to one of yonder oaks, to spite the
Orsini?' They all fell in with this counsel and bade Pietro put off
his clothes, which as he was in act to do, foreboding him by this of
the ill fate which awaited him, it chanced that an ambush of good
five-and-twenty footmen started suddenly out upon the others, crying,
'Kill! Kill!' The rogues, taken by surprise, let Pietro be and turned
to stand upon their defence, but, seeing themselves greatly
outnumbered by their assailants, betook themselves to flight, whilst
the others pursued them.

Pietro, seeing this, hurriedly caught up his gear and springing on his
hackney, addressed himself, as best he might, to flee by the way he
had seen his mistress take; but finding her not and seeing neither
road nor footpath in the wood neither perceiving any horse's hoof
marks, he was the woefullest man alive; and as soon as himseemed he
was safe and out of reach of those who had taken him, as well as of
the others by whom they had been assailed, he began to drive hither
and thither about the wood, weeping and calling; but none answered him
and he dared not turn back and knew not where he might come, an he
went forward, more by token that he was in fear of the wild beasts
that use to harbour in the woods, at once for himself and for his
mistress, whom he looked momently to see strangled of some bear or
some wolf. On this wise, then, did the unlucky Pietro range all day
about the wood, crying and calling, whiles going backward, when as he
thought to go forward, until, what with shouting and weeping and fear
and long fasting, he was so spent that he could no more and seeing the
night come and knowing not what other course to take, he dismounted
from his hackney and tied the latter to a great oak, into which he
climbed, so he might not be devoured of the wild beasts in the night.
A little after the moon rose and the night being very clear and
bright, he abode there on wake, sighing and weeping and cursing his
ill luck, for that he durst not go to sleep, lest he should fall,
albeit, had he had more commodity thereof, grief and the concern in
which he was for his mistress would not have suffered him to sleep.

Meanwhile, the damsel, fleeing, as we have before said, and knowing
not whither to betake herself, save whereas it seemed good to her
hackney to carry her, fared on so far into the wood that she could not
see where she had entered, and went wandering all day about that
desert place, no otherwise than as Pietro had done, now pausing [to
hearken] and now going on, weeping the while and calling and making
moan of her illhap. At last, seeing that Pietro came not and it being
now eventide, she happened on a little path, into which her hackney
turned, and following it, after she had ridden some two or more miles
she saw a little house afar off. Thither she made her way as
quickliest she might and found there a good man sore stricken in years
and a woman, his wife alike old, who, seeing her alone, said to her,
'Daughter, what dost thou alone at this hour in these parts?' The
damsel replied, weeping, that she had lost her company in the wood and
enquired how near she was to Anagni. 'Daughter mine,' answered the
good man, 'this is not the way to go to Anagni; it is more than a
dozen miles hence.' Quoth the girl, 'And how far is it hence to any
habitations where I may have a lodging for the night?' To which the
good man answered, 'There is none anywhere so near that thou mayst
come thither by daylight.' Then said the damsel, 'Since I can go no
otherwhere, will it please you harbour me here to-night for the love
of God?' 'Young lady,' replied the old man, 'thou art very welcome to
abide with us this night; algates, we must warn you that there are
many ill companies, both of friends and of foes that come and go about
these parts both by day and by night, who many a time do us sore annoy
and great mischief; and if, by ill chance, thou being here, there come
any of them and seeing thee, fair and young as thou art, should offer
to do thee affront and shame, we could not avail to succour thee
therefrom. We deem it well to apprise thee of this, so that, an it
betide, thou mayst not be able to complain of us.'

The girl, seeing that it was late, albeit the old man's words
affrighted her, said, 'An it please God, He will keep both you and me
from that annoy; and even if it befall me, it were a much less evil to
be maltreated of men than to be mangled of the wild beasts in the
woods.' So saying, she alighted from the rouncey and entered the poor
man's house, where she supped with him on such poor fare as they had
and after, all clad as she was, cast herself, together with them, on a
little bed of theirs. She gave not over sighing and bewailing her own
mishap and that of Pietro all night, knowing not if she might hope
other than ill of him; and when it drew near unto morning, she heard a
great trampling of folk approaching, whereupon she arose and betaking
herself to a great courtyard, that lay behind the little house, saw in
a corner a great heap of hay, in which she hid herself, so she might
not be so quickly found, if those folk should come thither. Hardly had
she made an end of hiding herself when these, who were a great company
of ill knaves, came to the door of the little house and causing open
to them, entered and found Agnolella's hackney yet all saddled and
bridled; whereupon they asked who was there and the good man, not
seeing the girl, answered, 'None is here save ourselves; but this
rouncey, from whomsoever it may have escaped, came hither yestereve
and we brought it into the house, lest the wolves should eat it.'
'Then,' said the captain of the troop, 'since it hath none other
master, it is fair prize for us.'

Thereupon they all dispersed about the little house and some went into
the courtyard, where, laying down their lances and targets, it chanced
that one of them, knowing not what else to do, cast his lance into the
hay and came very near to slay the hidden girl and she to discover
herself, for that the lance passed so close to her left breast that
the steel tore a part of her dress, wherefore she was like to utter a
great cry, fearing to be wounded; but, remembering where she was, she
abode still, all fear-stricken. Presently, the rogues, having dressed
the kids and other meat they had with them and eaten and drunken, went
off, some hither and some thither, about their affairs, and carried
with them the girl's hackney. When they had gone some distance, the
good man asked his wife, 'What befell of our young woman, who came
thither yestereve? I have seen nothing of her since we arose.' The
good wife replied that she knew not and went looking for her,
whereupon the girl, hearing that the rogues were gone, came forth of
the hay, to the no small contentment of her host, who, rejoiced to see
that she had not fallen into their hands, said to her, it now growing
day, 'Now that the day cometh, we will, an it please thee, accompany
thee to a castle five miles hence, where thou wilt be in safety; but
needs must thou go afoot, for yonder ill folk, that now departed
hence, have carried off thy rouncey.' The girl concerned herself
little about the nag, but besought them for God's sake to bring her to
the castle in question, whereupon they set out and came thither about
half tierce.

Now this castle belonged to one of the Orsini family, by name Lionello
di Campodifiore, and there by chance was his wife, a very pious and
good lady, who, seeing the girl, knew her forthright and received her
with joy and would fain know orderly how she came thither. Agnolella
told her all and the lady, who knew Pietro on like wise, as being a
friend of her husband's, was grieved for the ill chance that had
betided and hearing where he had been taken, doubted not but he was
dead; wherefore she said to Agnolella, 'Since thou knowest not what is
come of Pietro, thou shalt abide here till such time as I shall have a
commodity to send thee safe to Rome.'

Meanwhile Pietro abode, as woebegone as could be, in the oak, and
towards the season of the first sleep, he saw a good score of wolves
appear, which came all about his hackney, as soon as they saw him. The
horse, scenting them, tugged at his bridle, till he broke it, and
would have fled, but being surrounded and unable to escape, he
defended himself a great while with his teeth and his hoofs. At last,
however, he was brought down and strangled and quickly disembowelled
by the wolves, which took all their fill of his flesh and having
devoured him, made off, without leaving aught but the bones, whereat
Pietro, to whom it seemed he had in the rouncey a companion and a
support in his troubles, was sore dismayed and misdoubted he should
never avail to win forth of the wood. However, towards daybreak, being
perished with cold in the oak and looking still all about him, he
caught sight of a great fire before him, mayhap a mile off, wherefore,
as soon as it was grown broad day, he came down from the oak, not
without fear, and making for the fire, fared on till he came to the
place, where he found shepherds eating and making merry about it, by
whom he was received for compassion.

After he had eaten and warmed himself, he acquainted them with his
misadventure and telling them how he came thither alone, asked them if
there was in those parts a village or castle, to which he might betake
himself. The shepherds answered that some three miles thence there was
a castle belonging to Lionello di Campodifiore, whose lady was
presently there; whereat Pietro was much rejoiced and besought them
that one of them should accompany him to the castle, which two of them
readily did. There he found some who knew him and was in act to
enquire for a means of having search made about the forest for the
damsel, when he was bidden to the lady's presence and incontinent
repaired to her. Never was joy like unto his, when he saw Agnolella
with her, and he was all consumed with desire to embrace her, but
forbore of respect for the lady, and if he was glad, the girl's joy
was no less great. The gentle lady, having welcomed him and made much
of him and heard from him what had betided him, chid him amain of that
which he would have done against the will of his kinsfolk; but, seeing
that he was e'en resolved upon this and that it was agreeable to the
girl also, she said in herself, 'Why do I weary myself in vain? These
two love and know each other and both are friends of my husband. Their
desire is an honourable one and meseemeth it is pleasing to God, since
the one of them hath scaped the gibbet and the other the lance-thrust
and both the wild beasts of the wood; wherefore be it as they will.'
Then, turning to the lovers, she said to them, 'If you have it still
at heart to be man and wife, it is my pleasure also; be it so, and let
the nuptials be celebrated here at Lionello's expense. I will engage
after to make peace between you and your families.' Accordingly, they
were married then and there, to the great contentment of Pietro and
the yet greater satisfaction of Agnolella, and the gentle lady made
them honourable nuptials, in so far as might be in the mountains.
There, with the utmost delight, they enjoyed the first-fruits of their
love and a few days after, they took horse with the lady and returned,
under good escort, to Rome, where she found Pietro's kinsfolk sore
incensed at that which he had done, but contrived to make his peace
with them, and he lived with his Agnolella in all peace and pleasance
to a good old age."




THE FOURTH STORY

[Day the Fifth]

     RICCIARDO MANARDI, BEING FOUND BY MESSER LIZIO DA VALBONA
     WITH HIS DAUGHTER, ESPOUSETH HER AND ABIDETH IN PEACE WITH
     HER FATHER


Elisa holding her peace and hearkening to the praises bestowed by the
ladies her companions upon her story, the Queen charged Filostrato
tell one of his own, whereupon he began, laughing, "I have been so
often rated by so many of you ladies for having imposed on you matter
for woeful discourse and such as tended to make you weep, that
methinketh I am beholden, an I would in some measure requite you that
annoy, to relate somewhat whereby I may make you laugh a little; and I
mean therefore to tell you, in a very short story, of a love that,
after no worse hindrance than sundry sighs and a brief fright, mingled
with shame, came to a happy issue.

It is, then, noble ladies, no great while ago since there lived in
Romagna a gentleman of great worth and good breeding, called Messer
Lizio da Valbona, to whom, well nigh in his old age, it chanced there
was born of his wife, Madam Giacomina by name, a daughter, who grew up
fair and agreeable beyond any other of the country; and for that she
was the only child that remained to her father and mother, they loved
and tendered her exceeding dear and guarded her with marvellous
diligence, looking to make some great alliance by her. Now there was
a young man of the Manardi of Brettinoro, comely and lusty of his
person, by name Ricciardo, who much frequented Messer Lizio's house
and conversed amain with him and of whom the latter and his lady took
no more account than they would have taken of a son of theirs. Now,
this Ricciardo, looking once and again upon the young lady and seeing
her very fair and sprightly and commendable of manners and fashions,
fell desperately in love with her, but was very careful to keep his
love secret. The damsel presently became aware thereof and without
anywise seeking to shun the stroke, began on like wise to love him;
whereat Ricciardo was mightily rejoiced. He had many a time a mind to
speak to her, but kept silence of misdoubtance; however, one day,
taking courage and opportunity, he said to her, 'I prithee, Caterina,
cause me not die of love.' To which she straightway made answer,
'Would God thou wouldst not cause _me_ die!'

This answer added much courage and pleasure to Ricciardo and he said
to her, 'Never shall aught that may be agreeable to thee miscarry[276]
for me; but it resteth with thee to find a means of saving thy life
and mine.' 'Ricciardo,' answered she, 'thou seest how straitly I am
guarded; wherefore, for my part, I cannot see how thou mayst avail to
come at me; but, if thou canst see aught that I may do without shame
to myself, tell it me and I will do it.' Ricciardo, having bethought
himself of sundry things, answered promptly, 'My sweet Caterina, I can
see no way, except that thou lie or make shift to come upon the
gallery that adjoineth thy father's garden, where an I knew that thou
wouldst be anights, I would without fail contrive to come to thee, how
high soever it may be.' 'If thou have the heart to come thither,'
rejoined Caterina, 'methinketh I can well enough win to be there.'
Ricciardo assented and they kissed each other once only in haste and
went their ways.

[Footnote 276: Lit. stand (_stare_), _i.e._ abide undone.]

Next day, it being then near the end of May, the girl began to
complain before her mother that she had not been able to sleep that
night for the excessive heat. Quoth the lady, 'Of what heat dost thou
speak, daughter? Nay, it was nowise hot.' 'Mother mine,' answered
Caterina, 'you should say "To my seeming," and belike you would say
sooth; but you should consider how much hotter are young girls than
ladies in years.' 'Daughter mine,' rejoined the lady, 'that is true;
but I cannot make it cold and hot at my pleasure, as belike thou
wouldst have me do. We must put up with the weather, such as the
seasons make it; maybe this next night will be cooler and thou wilt
sleep better.' 'God grant it may be so!' cried Caterina. 'But it is
not usual for the nights to go cooling, as it groweth towards summer.'
'Then what wouldst thou have done?' asked the mother; and she
answered, 'An it please my father and you, I would fain have a little
bed made in the gallery, that is beside his chamber and over his
garden, and there sleep. There I should hear the nightingale sing and
having a cooler place to lie in, I should fare much better than in
your chamber.' Quoth the mother, 'Daughter, comfort thyself; I will
tell thy father, and as he will, so will we do.'

Messer Lizio hearing all this from his wife, said, for that he was an
old man and maybe therefore somewhat cross-grained, 'What nightingale
is this to whose song she would sleep? I will yet make her sleep to
the chirp of the crickets.' Caterina, coming to know this, more of
despite than for the heat, not only slept not that night, but suffered
not her mother to sleep, still complaining of the great heat.
Accordingly, next morning, the latter repaired to her husband and said
to him, 'Sir, you have little tenderness for yonder girl; what
mattereth it to you if she lie in the gallery? She could get no rest
all night for the heat. Besides, can you wonder at her having a mind
to hear the nightingale sing, seeing she is but a child? Young folk
are curious of things like themselves. Messer Lizio, hearing this,
said, 'Go to, make her a bed there, such as you think fit, and bind it
about with some curtain or other, and there let her lie and hear the
nightingale sing to her heart's content.'

The girl, learning this, straightway let make a bed in the gallery and
meaning to lie there that same night, watched till she saw Ricciardo
and made him a signal appointed between them, by which he understood
what was to be done. Messer Lizio, hearing the girl gone to bed,
locked a door that led from his chamber into the gallery and betook
himself likewise to sleep. As for Ricciardo, as soon as he heard all
quiet on every hand, he mounted a wall, with the aid of a ladder, and
thence, laying hold of certain toothings of another wall, he made his
way, with great toil and danger, if he had fallen, up to the gallery,
where he was quietly received by the girl with the utmost joy. Then,
after many kisses, they went to bed together and took delight and
pleasure one of another well nigh all that night, making the
nightingale sing many a time. The nights being short and the delight
great and it being now, though they thought it not, near day, they
fell asleep without any covering, so overheated were they what with
the weather and what with their sport, Caterina having her right arm
entwined about Ricciardo's neck and holding him with the left hand by
that thing which you ladies think most shame to name among men.

As they slept on this wise, without awaking, the day came on and
Messer Lizio arose and remembering him that his daughter lay in the
gallery, opened the door softly, saying in himself, 'Let us see how
the nightingale hath made Caterina sleep this night.' Then, going in,
he softly lifted up the serge, wherewith the bed was curtained about,
and saw his daughter and Ricciardo lying asleep, naked and uncovered,
embraced as it hath before been set out; whereupon, having recognized
Ricciardo, he went out again and repairing to his wife's chamber,
called to her, saying, 'Quick, wife, get thee up and come see, for
that thy daughter hath been so curious of the nightingale that she
hath e'en taken it and hath it in hand.' 'How can that be?' quoth she;
and he answered, 'Thou shalt see it, an thou come quickly.'
Accordingly, she made haste to dress herself and quietly followed her
husband to the bed, where, the curtain being drawn, Madam Giacomina
might plainly see how her daughter had taken and held the
nightingale, which she had so longed to hear sing; whereat the lady,
holding herself sore deceived of Ricciardo, would have cried out and
railed at him; but Messer Lizio said to her, 'Wife, as thou holdest my
love dear, look thou say not a word, for, verily, since she hath
gotten it, it shall be hers. Ricciardo is young and rich and gently
born; he cannot make us other than a good son-in-law. An he would part
from me on good terms, needs must he first marry her, so it will be
found that he hath put the nightingale in his own cage and not in that
of another.'

The lady was comforted to see that her husband was not angered at the
matter and considering that her daughter had passed a good night and
rested well and had caught the nightingale, to boot, she held her
tongue. Nor had they abidden long after these words when Ricciardo
awoke and seeing that it was broad day, gave himself over for lost and
called Caterina, saying, 'Alack, my soul, how shall we do, for the day
is come and hath caught me here?' Whereupon Messer Lizio came forward
and lifting the curtain, answered, 'We shall do well.' When Ricciardo
saw him, himseemed the heart was torn out of his body and sitting up
in bed, he said, 'My lord, I crave your pardon for God's sake. I
acknowledged to have deserved death, as a disloyal and wicked man;
wherefore do you with me as best pleaseth you; but, I prithee, an it
may be, have mercy on my life and let me not die.' 'Ricciardo,'
answered Messer Lizio, 'the love that I bore thee and the faith I had
in thee merited not this return; yet, since thus it is and youth hath
carried thee away into such a fault, do thou, to save thyself from
death and me from shame, take Caterina to thy lawful wife, so that,
like as this night she hath been thine, she may e'en be thine so long
as she shall live. On this wise thou mayst gain my pardon and thine
own safety; but, an thou choose not to do this, commend thy soul to
God.'

Whilst these words were saying, Caterina let go the nightingale and
covering herself, fell to weeping sore and beseeching her father to
pardon Ricciardo, whilst on the other hand she entreated her lover to
do as Messer Lizio wished, so they might long pass such nights
together in security. But there needed not overmany prayers, for that,
on the one hand, shame of the fault committed and desire to make
amends for it, and on the other, the fear of death and the wish to
escape,--to say nothing of his ardent love and longing to possess the
thing beloved,--made Ricciardo freely and without hesitation avouch
himself ready to do that which pleased Messer Lizio; whereupon the
latter borrowed of Madam Giacomina one of her rings and there, without
budging, Ricciardo in their presence took Caterina to his wife. This
done, Messer Lizio and his lady departed, saying, 'Now rest
yourselves, for belike you have more need thereof than of rising.'
They being gone, the young folk clipped each other anew and not having
run more than half a dozen courses overnight, they ran other twain ere
they arose and so made an end of the first day's tilting. Then they
arose and Ricciardo having had more orderly conference with Messer
Lizio, a few days after, as it beseemed, he married the damsel over
again, in the presence of their friends and kinsfolk, and brought her
with great pomp to his own house. There he held goodly and honourable
nuptials and after went long nightingale-fowling with her to his
heart's content, in peace and solace, both by night and by day."




THE FIFTH STORY

[Day the Fifth]

     GUIDOTTO DA CREMONA LEAVETH TO GIACOMINO DA PAVIA A DAUGHTER
     OF HIS AND DIETH. GIANNOLE DI SEVERINO AND MINGHINO DI
     MINGOLE FALL IN LOVE WITH THE GIRL AT FAENZA AND COME TO
     BLOWS ON HER ACCOUNT. ULTIMATELY SHE IS PROVED TO BE
     GIANNOLE'S SISTER AND IS GIVEN TO MINGHINO TO WIFE


All the ladies, hearkening to the story of the nightingale, had
laughed so much that, though Filostrato had made an end of telling,
they could not yet give over laughing. But, after they had laughed
awhile, the queen said to Filostrato, "Assuredly, if thou afflictedest
us ladies yesterday, thou hast so tickled us to-day that none of us
can deservedly complain of thee." Then, addressing herself to Neifile,
she charged her tell, and she blithely began to speak thus: "Since
Filostrato, discoursing, hath entered into Romagna, it pleaseth me on
like wise to go ranging awhile therein with mine own story.

I say, then, that there dwelt once in the city of Fano two Lombards,
whereof the one was called Guidotto da Cremona and the other Giacomino
da Pavia, both men advanced in years, who had in their youth been well
nigh always soldiers and engaged in deeds of arms. Guidotto, being at
the point of death and having nor son nor other kinsmen nor friend in
whom he trusted more than in Giacomino, left him a little daughter he
had, of maybe ten years of age, and all that he possessed in the
world, and after having bespoken him at length of his affairs, he
died. In those days it befell that the city of Faenza, which had been
long in war and ill case, was restored to somewhat better estate and
permission to sojourn there was freely conceded to all who had a mind
to return thither; wherefore Giacomino, who had abidden there
otherwhile and had a liking for the place, returned thither with all
his good and carried with him the girl left him by Guidotto, whom he
loved and entreated as his own child.

The latter grew up and became as fair a damsel as any in the city, ay,
and as virtuous and well bred as she was fair; wherefore she began to
be courted of many, but especially two very agreeable young men of
equal worth and condition vowed her a very great love, insomuch that
for jealousy they came to hold each other in hate out of measure. They
were called, the one Giannole di Severino and the other Minghino di
Mingole; nor was there either of them but would gladly have taken the
young lady, who was now fifteen years old, to wife, had it been
suffered of his kinsfolk; wherefore, seeing her denied to them on
honourable wise, each cast about to get her for himself as best he
might. Now Giacomino had in his house an old serving-wench and a
serving-man, Crivello by name, a very merry and obliging person, with
whom Giannole clapped up a great acquaintance and to whom, whenas
himseemed time, he discovered his passion, praying him to be
favourable to him in his endeavour to obtain his desire and promising
him great things an he did this; whereto quoth Crivello, 'Look you, I
can do nought for thee in this matter other than that, when next
Giacomino goeth abroad to supper, I will bring thee whereas she may
be; for that, an I offered to say a word to her in thy favour, she
would never stop to listen to me. If this like thee, I promise it to
thee and will do it; and do thou after, an thou know how, that which
thou deemest shall best serve thy purpose.' Giannole answered that he
desired nothing more and they abode on this understanding. Meanwhile
Minghino, on his part, had suborned the maidservant and so wrought
with her that she had several times carried messages to the girl and
had well night inflamed her with love of him; besides which she had
promised him to bring him in company with her, so soon as Giacomino
should chance to go abroad of an evening for whatever cause.

Not long after this it chanced that, by Crivello's contrivance,
Giacomino went to sup with a friend of his, whereupon Crivello gave
Giannole to know thereof and appointed with him that, whenas he made a
certain signal, he should come and would find the door open. The maid,
on her side, knowing nothing of all this, let Minghino know that
Giacomino was to sup abroad and bade him abide near the house, so
that, whenas he saw a signal which she should make he might come and
enter therein. The evening come, the two lovers, knowing nothing of
each other's designs, but each misdoubting of his rival, came, with
sundry companions armed, to enter into possession. Minghino, with his
troop took up his quarters in the house of a friend of his, a
neighbour of the young lady's; whilst Giannole and his friends
stationed themselves at a little distance from the house. Meanwhile,
Crivello and the maid, Giacomino being gone, studied each to send the
other away. Quoth he to her, 'Why dost thou not get thee to bed? Why
goest thou still wandering about the house?' 'And thou,' retorted she,
'why goest thou not for thy master? What awaitest thou here, now that
thou hast supped?' And so neither could make other avoid the place;
but Crivello, seeing the hour come that he had appointed with Giannole
said in himself, 'What reck I of her? An she abide not quiet, she is
like to smart for it.'

Accordingly, giving the appointed signal, he went to open the door,
whereupon Giannole, coming up in haste with two companions, entered
and finding the young lady in the saloon, laid hands on her to carry
her off. The girl began to struggle and make a great outcry, as
likewise did the maid, which Minghino hearing, he ran thither with his
companions and seeing the young lady being presently dragged out at
the door, they pulled out their swords and cried all, 'Ho, traitors,
ye are dead men! The thing shall not go thus. What is this violence?'
So saying, they fell to hewing at them, whilst the neighbors, issuing
forth at the clamour with lights and arms, began to blame Giannole's
behaviour and to second Minghino; wherefore, after long contention,
the latter rescued the young lady from his rival and restored her to
Giacomino's house. But, before the fray was over, up came the
town-captain's officers and arrested many of them; and amongst the
rest Minghino and Giannole and Crivello were taken and carried off to
prison. After matters were grown quiet again, Giacomino returned home
and was sore chagrined at that which had happened; but, enquiring how
it had come about and finding that the girl was nowise at fault, he
was somewhat appeased and determined in himself to marry her as
quickliest he might, so the like should not again betide.

Next morning, the kinsfolk of the two young men, hearing the truth of
the case and knowing the ill that might ensue thereof for the
imprisoned youths, should Giacomino choose to do that which he
reasonably might, repaired to him and prayed him with soft words to
have regard, not so much to the affront which he had suffered from the
little sense of the young men as to the love and goodwill which they
believed he bore to themselves who thus besought him, submitting
themselves and the young men who had done the mischief to any amends
it should please him take. Giacomino, who had in his time seen many
things and was a man of sense, answered briefly, 'Gentlemen, were I in
mine own country, as I am in yours, I hold myself so much your friend
that neither in this nor in otherwhat would I do aught save insomuch
as it should please you; besides, I am the more bounden to comply with
your wishes in this matter, inasmuch as you have therein offended
against yourselves, for that the girl in question is not, as belike
many suppose, of Cremona nor of Pavia; nay, she is a Faentine,[277]
albeit neither I nor she nor he of whom I had her might ever learn
whose daughter she was; wherefore, concerning that whereof you pray
me, so much shall be done by me as you yourselves shall enjoin me.'

[Footnote 277: _i.e._ a native of Faenza (_Faentina_).]

The gentlemen, hearing this, marvelled and returning thanks to
Giacomino for his gracious answer, prayed him that it would please him
tell them how she came to his hands and how he knew her to be a
Faentine; whereto quoth he, 'Guidotto da Cremona, who was my friend
and comrade, told me, on his deathbed, that, when this city was taken
by the Emperor Frederick and everything given up to pillage, he
entered with his companions into a house and found it full of booty,
but deserted by its inhabitants, save only this girl, who was then
some two years old or thereabouts and who, seeing him mount the
stairs, called him "father"; whereupon, taking compassion upon her, he
carried her off with him to Fano, together with all that was in the
house, and dying there, left her to me with what he had, charging me
marry her in due time and give her to her dowry that which had been
hers. Since she hath come to marriageable age, I have not yet found an
occasion of marrying her to my liking, though I would gladly do it,
rather than that another mischance like that of yesternight should
betide me on her account.'

Now among the others there was a certain Guiglielmino da Medicina,
who had been with Guidotto in that affair[278] and knew very well
whose house it was that he had plundered, and he, seeing the person in
question[279] there among the rest, accosted him, saying,
'Bernabuccio, hearest thou what Giacomino saith?' 'Ay do I,' answered
Bernabuccio, 'and I was presently in thought thereof, more by token
that I mind me to have lost a little daughter of the age whereof
Giacomino speaketh in those very troubles.' Quoth Guiglielmino, 'This
is she for certain, for that I was once in company with Guidotto, when
I heard him tell where he had done the plundering and knew it to be
thy house that he had sacked; wherefore do thou bethink thee if thou
mayst credibly recognize her by any token and let make search
therefor; for thou wilt assuredly find that she is thy daughter.'

[Footnote 278: _A questo fatto_, _i.e._ at the storm of Faenza.]

[Footnote 279: _i.e._ the owner of the plundered house.]

Accordingly, Bernabuccio bethought himself and remembered that she
should have a little cross-shaped scar over her left ear, proceeding
from a tumour, which he had caused cut for her no great while before
that occurrence; whereupon, without further delay, he accosted
Giacomino, who was still there, and besought him to carry him to his
house and let him see the damsel. To this he readily consented and
carrying him thither, let bring the girl before him. When Bernabuccio
set eyes on her, himseemed he saw the very face of her mother, who was
yet a handsome lady; nevertheless, not contenting himself with this,
he told Giacomino that he would fain of his favour have leave to raise
her hair a little above her left ear, to which the other consented.
Accordingly, going up to the girl, who stood shamefast, he lifted up
her hair with his right hand and found the cross; whereupon, knowing
her to be indeed his daughter, he fell to weeping tenderly and
embracing her, notwithstanding her resistance; then, turning to
Giacomino, 'Brother mine,' quoth he, 'this is my daughter; it was my
house Guidotto plundered and this girl was, in the sudden alarm,
forgotten there of my wife and her mother; and until now we believed
that she had perished with the house, which was burned me that same
day.'

The girl, hearing this, and seeing him to be a man in years, gave
credence to his words and submitting herself to his embraces, as moved
by some occult instinct, fell a-weeping tenderly with him. Bernabuccio
presently sent for her mother and other her kinswomen and for her
sisters and brothers and presented her to them all, recounting the
matter to them; then, after a thousand embraces, he carried her home
to his house with the utmost rejoicing, to the great satisfaction of
Giacomino. The town-captain, who was a man of worth, learning this and
knowing that Giannole, whom he had in prison, was Bernabuccio's son
and therefore the lady's own brother, determined indulgently to
overpass the offence committed by him and released with him Minghino
and Crivello and the others who were implicated in the affair.
Moreover, he interceded with Bernabuccio and Giacomino concerning
these matters and making peace between the two young men, gave the
girl, whose name was Agnesa, to Minghino to wife, to the great
contentment of all their kinsfolk; whereupon Minghino, mightily
rejoiced, made a great and goodly wedding and carrying her home, lived
with her many years after in peace and weal."




THE SIXTH STORY

[Day the Fifth]

     GIANNI DI PROCIDA BEING FOUND WITH A YOUNG LADY, WHOM HE
     LOVED AND WHO HAD BEEN GIVEN TO KING FREDERICK OF SICILY, IS
     BOUND WITH HER TO A STAKE TO BE BURNT; BUT, BEING RECOGNIZED
     BY RUGGIERI DELL' ORIA, ESCAPETH AND BECOMETH HER HUSBAND


Neifile's story, which had much pleased the ladies, being ended, the
queen bade Pampinea address herself to tell another, and she
accordingly, raising her bright face, began: "Exceeding great,
charming ladies, is the might of Love and exposeth lovers to sore
travails, ay, and to excessive and unforeseen perils, as may be
gathered from many a thing that hath been related both to-day and
otherwhiles; nevertheless, it pleaseth me yet again to demonstrate it
to you with a story of an enamoured youth.

Ischia is an island very near Naples, and therein, among others, was
once a very fair and sprightly damsel, by name Restituta, who was the
daughter of a gentleman of the island called Marino Bolgaro and whom a
youth named Gianni, a native of a little island near Ischia, called
Procida, loved more than his life, as she on like wise loved him. Not
only did he come by day from Procida to see her, but oftentimes
anights, not finding a boat, he had swum from Procida to Ischia, at
the least to look upon the walls of her house, an he might no
otherwise. During the continuance of this so ardent love, it befell
that the girl, being all alone one summer day on the sea-shore,
chanced, as she went from rock to rock, loosening shell-fish from the
stones with a knife, upon a place hidden among the cliffs, where, at
once for shade and for the commodity of a spring of very cool water
that was there, certain young men of Sicily, coming from Naples, had
taken up their quarters with a pinnace they had. They, seeing that she
was alone and very handsome and was yet unaware of them, took counsel
together to seize her and carry her off and put their resolve into
execution. Accordingly, they took her, for all she made a great
outcry, and carrying her aboard the pinnace, made the best of their
way to Calabria, where they fell to disputing of whose she should be.
Brief, each would fain have her; wherefore, being unable to agree
among themselves and fearing to come to worse and to mar their affairs
for her, they took counsel together to present her to Frederick, King
of Sicily, who was then a young man and delighted in such toys.
Accordingly, coming to Palermo, they made gift of the damsel to the
king, who, seeing her to be fair, held her dear; but, for that he was
presently somewhat infirm of his person, he commanded that, against he
should be stronger, she should be lodged in a very goodly pavilion,
belonging to a garden of his he called La Cuba, and there tended; and
so it was done.

Great was the outcry in Ischia for the ravishment of the damsel and
what most chagrined them was that they could not learn who they were
that had carried her off; but Gianni, whom the thing concerned more
than any other, not looking to get any news of this in Ischia and
learning in what direction the ravishers had gone, equipped another
pinnace and embarking therein, as quickliest as he might, scoured all
the coast from La Minerva to La Scalea in Calabria, enquiring
everywhere for news of the girl. Being told at La Scalea that she had
been carried off to Palermo by some Sicilian sailors, he betook
himself thither, as quickliest he might, and there, after much search,
finding that she had been presented to the king and was by him kept
under ward at La Cuba, he was sore chagrined and lost well nigh all
hope, not only of ever having her again, but even of seeing her.
Nevertheless, detained by love, having sent away his pinnace and
seeing that he was known of none there, he abode behind and passing
often by La Cuba, he chanced one day to catch sight of her at a window
and she saw him, to the great contentment of them both.

Gianni, seeing the place lonely, approached as most he might and
bespeaking her, was instructed by her how he must do, an he would
thereafterward have further speech of her. He then took leave of her,
having first particularly examined the ordinance of the place in every
part, and waited till a good part of the night was past, when he
returned thither and clambering up in places where a woodpecker had
scarce found a foothold, he made his way into the garden. There he
found a long pole and setting it against the window which his mistress
had shown him, climbed up thereby lightly enough. The damsel,
herseeming she had already lost her honour, for the preservation
whereof she had in times past been somewhat coy to him, thinking that
she could give herself to none more worthily than to him and doubting
not to be able to induce him to carry her off, had resolved in herself
to comply with him in every his desire; wherefore she had left the
window open, so he might enter forthright. Accordingly, Gianni,
finding it open, softly made his way into the chamber and laid himself
beside the girl, who slept not and who, before they came to otherwhat,
discovered to him all her intent, instantly beseeching him to take her
thence and carry her away. Gianni answered that nothing could be so
pleasing to him as this and promised that he would without fail, as
soon as he should have taken his leave of her, put the matter in train
on such wise that he might carry her away with him, the first time he
returned thither. Then, embracing each other with exceeding pleasure,
they took that delight beyond which Love can afford no greater, and
after reiterating it again and again, they fell asleep, without
perceiving it, in each other's arms.

Meanwhile, the king, who had at first sight been greatly taken with
the damsel, calling her to mind and feeling himself well of body,
determined, albeit it was nigh upon day, to go and abide with her
awhile. Accordingly, he betook himself privily to La Cuba with certain
of his servants and entering the pavilion, caused softly open the
chamber wherein he knew the girl slept. Then, with a great lighted
flambeau before him, he entered therein and looking upon the bed, saw
her and Gianni lying asleep and naked in each other's arms; whereas he
was of a sudden furiously incensed and flamed up into such a passion
of wrath that it lacked of little but he had, without saying a word,
slain them both then and there with a dagger he had by his side.
However, esteeming it a very base thing of any man, much more a king,
to slay two naked folk in their sleep, he contained himself and
determined to put them to death in public and by fire; wherefore,
turning to one only companion he had with him, he said to him, 'How
deemest thou of this vile woman, on whom I had set my hope?' And after
he asked him if he knew the young man who had dared enter his house to
do him such an affront and such an outrage; but he answered that he
remembered not ever to have seen him. The king then departed the
chamber, full of rage, and commanded that the two lovers should be
taken and bound, naked as they were, and that, as soon as it was broad
day, they should be carried to Palermo and there bound to a stake,
back to back, in the public place, where they should be kept till the
hour of tierce, so they might be seen of all, and after burnt, even as
they had deserved; and this said, he returned to his palace at
Palermo, exceeding wroth.

The king gone, there fell many upon the two lovers and not only
awakened them, but forthright without any pity took them and bound
them; which when they saw, it may lightly be conceived if they were
woeful and feared for their lives and wept and made moan. According to
the king's commandment, they were carried to Palermo and bound to a
stake in the public place, whilst the faggots and the fire were made
ready before their eyes, to burn them at the hour appointed. Thither
straightway flocked all the townsfolk, both men and women, to see the
two lovers; the men all pressed to look upon the damsel and like as
they praised her for fair and well made in every part of her body,
even so, on the other hand, the women, who all ran to gaze upon the
young man, supremely commended him for handsome and well shapen. But
the wretched lovers, both sore ashamed, stood with bowed heads and
bewailed their sorry fortune, hourly expecting the cruel death by
fire.

Whilst they were thus kept against the appointed hour, the default of
them committed, being bruited about everywhere, came to the ears of
Ruggieri dell' Oria, a man of inestimable worth and then the king's
admiral, whereupon he repaired to the place where they were bound and
considering first the girl, commended her amain for beauty, then,
turning to look upon the young man, knew him without much difficulty
and drawing nearer to him, asked him if he were not Gianni di Procida.
The youth, raising his eyes and recognizing the admiral, answered, 'My
lord, I was indeed he of whom you ask; but I am about to be no more.'
The admiral then asked him what had brought him to that pass, and he
answered, 'Love and the king's anger.' The admiral caused him tell his
story more at large and having heard everything from him as it had
happened, was about to depart, when Gianni called him back and said to
him, 'For God's sake, my lord, an it may be, get me one favour of him
who maketh me to abide thus.' 'What is that?' asked Ruggieri; and
Gianni said, 'I see I must die, and that speedily, and I ask,
therefore, by way of favour,--as I am bound with my back to this
damsel, whom I have loved more than my life, even as she hath loved
me, and she with her back to me,--that we may be turned about with our
faces one to the other, so that, dying, I may look upon her face and
get me gone, comforted.' 'With all my heart,' answered Ruggieri,
laughing; 'I will do on such wise that thou shalt yet see her till
thou grow weary of her sight.'

Then, taking leave of him, he charged those who were appointed to
carry the sentence into execution that they should proceed no farther
therein, without other commandment of the king, and straightway betook
himself to the latter, to whom, albeit he saw him sore incensed, he
spared not to speak his mind, saying, 'King, in what have the two
young folk offended against thee, whom thou hast commanded to be
burned yonder in the public place?' The king told him and Ruggieri
went on, 'The offence committed by them deserveth it indeed, but not
from thee; for, like as defaults merit punishment, even so do good
offices merit recompense, let alone grace and clemency. Knowest thou
who these are thou wouldst have burnt?' The king answered no, and
Ruggieri continued, 'Then I will have thee know them, so thou mayst
see how discreetly[280] thou sufferest thyself to be carried away by
the transports of passion. The young man is the son of Landolfo di
Procida, own brother to Messer Gian di Procida,[281] by whose means
thou art king and lord of this island, and the damsel is the daughter
of Marino Bolgaro, to whose influence thou owest it that thine
officers have not been driven forth of Ischia. Moreover, they are
lovers who have long loved one another and constrained of love, rather
than of will to do despite to thine authority, have done this sin, if
that can be called sin which young folk do for love. Wherefore, then,
wilt thou put them to death, whenas thou shouldst rather honour them
with the greatest favours and boons at thy commandment?'

[Footnote 280: Iron., meaning "with how little discretion."]

[Footnote 281: Gianni (Giovanni) di Procida was a Sicilian noble, to
whose efforts in stirring up the island to revolt against Charles of
Anjou was mainly due the popular rising known as the Sicilian Vespers
(A.D. 1283) which expelled the French usurper from Sicily and
transferred the crown to the house of Arragon. The Frederick (A.D.
1296-1337) named in the text was the fourth prince of the latter
dynasty.]

The king, hearing this and certifying himself that Ruggieri spoke
sooth, not only forbore from proceeding to do worse, but repented him
of that which he had done, wherefore he commanded incontinent that the
two lovers should be loosed from the stake and brought before him;
which was forthright done. Therewith, having fully acquainted himself
with their case, he concluded that it behoved him requite them the
injury he had done them with gifts and honour; wherefore he let clothe
them anew on sumptuous wise and finding them of one accord, caused
Gianni to take the damsel to wife. Then, making them magnificent
presents, he sent them back, rejoicing, to their own country, where
they were received with the utmost joyance and delight."




THE SEVENTH STORY

[Day the Fifth]

     TEODORO, BEING ENAMOURED OF VIOLANTE, DAUGHTER OF MESSER
     AMERIGO HIS LORD, GETTETH HER WITH CHILD AND IS CONDEMNED TO
     BE HANGED; BUT, BEING RECOGNIZED AND DELIVERED BY HIS
     FATHER, AS THEY ARE LEADING HIM TO THE GALLOWS, SCOURGING
     HIM THE WHILE, HE TAKETH VIOLANTE TO WIFE


The ladies, who abode all fearful in suspense to know if the lovers
should be burnt, hearing of their escape, praised God and were glad;
whereupon the queen, seeing that Pampinea had made an end of her
story, imposed on Lauretta the charge of following on, who blithely
proceeded to say: "Fairest ladies, in the days when good King
William[282] ruled over Sicily, there was in that island a gentleman
hight Messer Amerigo Abate of Trapani, who, among other worldly goods,
was very well furnished with children; wherefore, having occasion for
servants and there coming thither from the Levant certain galleys of
Genoese corsairs, who had, in their cruises off the coast of Armenia,
taken many boys, he bought some of these latter, deeming them Turks,
and amongst them one, Teodoro by name, of nobler mien and better
bearing than the rest, who seemed all mere shepherds. Teodoro,
although entreated as a slave, was brought up in the house with Messer
Amerigo's children and conforming more to his own nature than to the
accidents of fortune, approved himself so accomplished and well-bred
and so commended himself to Messer Amerigo that he set him free and
still believing him to be a Turk, caused baptize him and call him
Pietro and made him chief over all his affairs, trusting greatly in
him.

[Footnote 282: William II. (A.D. 1166-1189), the last (legitimate)
king of the Norman dynasty in Sicily, called the Good, to distinguish
him from his father, William the Bad.]

As Messer Amerigo's children grew up, there grew up with them a
daughter of his, called Violante, a fair and dainty damsel, who, her
father tarrying overmuch to marry her, became by chance enamoured of
Pietro and loving him and holding his manners and fashions in great
esteem, was yet ashamed to discover this to him. But Love spared her
that pains, for that Pietro, having once and again looked upon her by
stealth, had become so passionately enamoured of her that he never
knew ease save whenas he saw her; but he was sore afraid lest any
should become aware thereof, himseeming that in this he did other than
well. The young lady, who took pleasure in looking upon him, soon
perceived this and to give him more assurance, showed herself
exceeding well pleased therewith, as indeed she was. On this wise they
abode a great while, daring not to say aught to one another, much as
each desired it; but, whilst both, alike enamoured, languished
enkindled in the flames of love, fortune, as if it had determined of
will aforethought that this should be, furnished them with an occasion
of doing away the timorousness that baulked them.

Messer Amerigo had, about a mile from Trapani, a very goodly
place,[283] to which his lady was wont ofttimes to resort by way of
pastime with her daughter and other women and ladies. Thither
accordingly they betook themselves one day of great heat, carrying
Pietro with them, and there abiding, it befell, as whiles we see it
happen in summer time, that the sky became of a sudden overcast with
dark clouds, wherefore the lady set out with her company to return to
Trapani, so they might not be there overtaken of the foul weather, and
fared on as fast as they might. But Pietro and Violante, being young,
outwent her mother and the rest by a great way, urged belike, no less
by love than by fear of the weather, and they being already so far in
advance that they were hardly to be seen, it chanced that, of a
sudden, after many thunderclaps, a very heavy and thick shower of hail
began to fall, wherefrom the lady and her company fled into the house
of a husbandman.

[Footnote 283: Apparently a pleasure-garden, without a house attached
in which they might have taken shelter from the rain.]

Pietro and the young lady, having no readier shelter, took refuge in a
little old hut, well nigh all in ruins, wherein none dwelt, and there
huddled together under a small piece of roof, that yet remained whole.
The scantness of the cover constrained them to press close one to
other, and this touching was the means of somewhat emboldening their
minds to discover the amorous desires that consumed them both; and
Pietro first began to say, 'Would God this hail might never give over,
so but I might abide as I am!' 'Indeed,' answered the girl, 'that were
dear to me also.' From these words they came to taking each other by
the hands and pressing them and from that to clipping and after to
kissing, it hailing still the while; and in short, not to recount
every particular, the weather mended not before they had known the
utmost delights of love and had taken order to have their pleasure
secretly one of the other. The storm ended, they fared on to the gate
of the city, which was near at hand, and there awaiting the lady,
returned home with her.

Thereafter, with very discreet and secret ordinance, they foregathered
again and again in the same place, to the great contentment of them
both, and the work went on so briskly that the young lady became with
child, which was sore unwelcome both to the one and the other;
wherefore she used many arts to rid herself, contrary to the course of
nature, of her burden, but could nowise avail to accomplish it.
Therewithal, Pietro, fearing for his life, bethought himself to flee
and told her, to which she answered, 'An thou depart, I will without
fail kill myself.' Whereupon quoth Pietro, who loved her exceedingly,
'Lady mine, how wilt thou have me abide here? Thy pregnancy will
discover our default and it will lightly be pardoned unto thee; but I,
poor wretch, it will be must needs bear the penalty of thy sin and
mine own.' 'Pietro,' replied she, 'my sin must indeed be discovered;
but be assured that thine will never be known, an thou tell not
thyself.' Then said he, 'Since thou promisest me this, I will remain;
but look thou keep thy promise to me.'

After awhile, the young lady, who had as most she might, concealed her
being with child, seeing that, for the waxing of her body, she might
no longer dissemble it, one day discovered her case to her mother,
beseeching her with many tears to save her; whereupon the lady, beyond
measure woeful, gave her hard words galore and would know of her how
the thing had come about. Violante, in order that no harm might come
to Pietro, told her a story of her own devising, disguising the truth
in other forms. The lady believed it and to conceal her daughter's
default, sent her away to a country house of theirs. There, the time
of her delivery coming and the girl crying out, as women use to do,
what while her mother never dreamed that Messer Amerigo, who was well
nigh never wont to do so, should come thither, it chanced that he
passed, on his return from hawking, by the chamber where his daughter
lay and marvelling at the outcry she made, suddenly entered the
chamber and demanded what was to do. The lady, seeing her husband come
unawares, started up all woebegone and told him that which had
befallen the girl. But he, less easy of belief than his wife had been,
declared that it could not be true that she knew not by whom she was
with child and would altogether know who he was, adding that, by
confessing it, she might regain his favour; else must she make ready
to die without mercy.

The lady did her utmost to persuade her husband to abide content with
that which she had said; but to no purpose. He flew out into a passion
and running, with his naked sword in his hand, at his daughter, who,
what while her mother held her father in parley, had given birth to a
male child, said, 'Either do thou discover by whom the child was
begotten, or thou shalt die without delay.' The girl, fearing death,
broke her promise to Pietro and discovered all that had passed between
him and her; which when the gentleman heard, he fell into a fury of
anger and hardly withheld himself from slaying her.

However, after he had said to her that which his rage dictated to him,
he took horse again and returning to Trapani, recounted the affront
that Pietro had done him to a certain Messer Currado, who was captain
there for the king. The latter caused forthright seize Pietro, who was
off his guard, and put him to the torture, whereupon he confessed all
and being a few days after sentenced by the captain to be flogged
through the city and after strung up by the neck, Messer Amerigo
(whose wrath had not been done away by the having brought Pietro to
death,) in order that one and the same hour should rid the earth of
the two lovers and their child, put poison in a hanap with wine and
delivering it, together with a naked poniard, to a serving-man of his,
said to him, 'Carry these two things to Violante and bid her, on my
part, forthright take which she will of these two deaths, poison or
steel; else will I have her burned alive, even as she hath deserved,
in the presence of as many townsfolk as be here. This done, thou shalt
take the child, a few days agone born of her, and dash its head
against the wall and after cast it to the dogs to eat.' This barbarous
sentence passed by the cruel father upon his daughter and his
grandchild, the servant, who was more disposed to ill than to good,
went off upon his errand.

Meanwhile, Pietro, as he was carried to the gallows by the officers,
being scourged of them the while, passed, according as it pleased
those who led the company, before a hostelry wherein were three
noblemen of Armenia, who had been sent by the king of that country
ambassadors to Rome, to treat with the Pope of certain matters of
great moment, concerning a crusade that was about to be undertaken,
and who had lighted down there to take some days' rest and
refreshment. They had been much honoured by the noblemen of Trapani
and especially by Messer Amerigo, and hearing those pass who led
Pietro, they came to a window to see. Now Pietro was all naked to the
waist, with his hands bounden behind his back, and one of the three
ambassadors, a man of great age and authority, named Fineo, espied on
his breast a great vermeil spot, not painted, but naturally imprinted
on his skin, after the fashion of what women here call _roses_. Seeing
this, there suddenly recurred to his memory a son of his who had been
carried off by corsairs fifteen years agone upon the coast of Lazistan
and of whom he had never since been able to learn any news; and
considering the age of the poor wretch who was scourged, he bethought
himself that, if his son were alive, he must be of such an age as
Pietro appeared to him. Wherefore he began to suspect by that token
that it must be he and bethought himself that, were he indeed his son,
he should still remember him of his name and that of his father and of
the Armenian tongue. Accordingly, as he drew near, he called out,
saying, 'Ho, Teodoro!' Pietro, hearing this, straightway lifted up his
head and Fineo, speaking in Armenian, said to him, 'What countryman
art thou and whose son?' The sergeants who had him in charge halted
with him, of respect for the nobleman, so that Pietro answered,
saying, 'I was of Armenia and son to one Fineo and was brought hither,
as a little child, by I know not what folk.'

Fineo, hearing this, knew him for certain to be the son whom he had
lost, wherefore he came down, weeping, with his companions, and ran to
embrace him among all the sergeants; then, casting over his shoulders
a mantle of the richest silk, which he had on his own back, he
besought the officer who was escorting him to execution to be pleased
to wait there till such time as commandment should come to him to
carry the prisoner back; to which he answered that he would well. Now
Fineo had already learned the reason for which Pietro was being led to
death, report having noised it abroad everywhere; wherefore he
straightway betook himself, with his companions and their retinue, to
Messer Currado and bespoke him thus: 'Sir, he whom you have doomed to
die, as a slave, is a free man and my son and is ready to take to
wife her whom it is said he hath bereft of her maidenhead; wherefore
may it please you to defer the execution till such time as it may be
learned if she will have him to husband, so, in case she be willing,
you may not be found to have done contrary to the law.' Messer
Currado, hearing that the condemned man was Fineo's son, marvelled and
confessing that which the latter said to be true, was somewhat ashamed
of the unright of fortune and straightway caused carry Pietro home;
then, sending for Messer Amerigo, he acquainted him with these things.

Messer Amerigo, who by this believed his daughter and grandson to be
dead, was the woefullest man in the world for that which he had done,
seeing that all might very well have been set right, so but Violante
were yet alive. Nevertheless, he despatched a runner whereas his
daughter was, to the intent that, in case his commandment had not been
done, it should not be carried into effect. The messenger found the
servant sent by Messer Amerigo rating the lady, before whom he had
laid the poniard and the poison, for that she made not her election as
speedily [as he desired], and would have constrained her to take the
one or the other. But, hearing his lord's commandment, he let her be
and returning to Messer Amerigo, told him how the case stood, to the
great satisfaction of the latter, who, betaking himself whereas Fineo
was, excused himself, well nigh with tears, as best he knew, of that
which had passed, craving pardon therefor and evouching that, an
Teodoro would have his daughter to wife, he was exceeding well pleased
to give her to him. Fineo gladly received his excuses and answered,
'It is my intent that my son shall take your daughter to wife; and if
he will not, let the sentence passed upon him take its course.'

Accordingly, being thus agreed, they both repaired whereas Teodoro
abode yet all fearful of death, albeit he was rejoiced to have found
his father again, and questioned him of his mind concerning this
thing. When he heard that, an he would, he might have Violante to
wife, such was his joy that himseemed he had won from hell to heaven
at one bound, and he answered that this would be to him the utmost of
favours, so but it pleased both of them. Thereupon they sent to know
the mind of the young lady, who, whereas she abode in expectation of
death, the woefullest woman alive, hearing that which had betided and
was like to betide Teodoro, after much parley, began to lend some
faith to their words and taking a little comfort, answered that, were
she to ensue her own wishes in the matter, no greater happiness could
betide her than to be the wife of Teodoro; algates, she would do that
which her father should command her.

Accordingly, all parties being of accord, the two lovers were married
with the utmost magnificence, to the exceeding satisfaction of all the
townsfolk; and the young lady, heartening herself and letting rear her
little son, became ere long fairer than ever. Then, being risen from
childbed, she went out to meet Fineo, whose return was expected from
Rome, and paid him reverence as to a father; whereupon he, exceeding
well pleased to have so fair a daughter-in-law, caused celebrate their
nuptials with the utmost pomp and rejoicing and receiving her as a
daughter, ever after held her such. And after some days, taking ship
with his son and her and his little grandson, he carried them with him
into Lazistan, where the two lovers abode in peace and happiness, so
long as life endured unto them."




THE EIGHTH STORY

[Day the Fifth]

     NASTAGIO DEGLI ONESTI, FALLING IN LOVE WITH A LADY OF THE
     TRAVERSARI FAMILY, SPENDETH HIS SUBSTANCE WITHOUT BEING
     BELOVED IN RETURN, AND BETAKING HIMSELF, AT THE INSTANCE OF
     HIS KINSFOLK, TO CHIASSI, HE THERE SEETH A HORSEMAN GIVE
     CHASE TO A DAMSEL AND SLAY HER AND CAUSE HER BE DEVOURED OF
     TWO DOGS. THEREWITHAL HE BIDDETH HIS KINSFOLK AND THE LADY
     WHOM HE LOVETH TO A DINNER, WHERE HIS MISTRESS SEETH THE
     SAME DAMSEL TORN IN PIECES AND FEARING A LIKE FATE, TAKETH
     NASTAGIO TO HUSBAND


No sooner was Lauretta silent than Filomena, by the queen's
commandment, began thus: "Lovesome ladies, even as pity is in us
commended, so also is cruelty rigorously avenged by Divine justice;
the which that I may prove to you and so engage you altogether to
purge yourselves therefrom, it pleaseth me tell you a story no less
pitiful than delectable.

In Ravenna, a very ancient city of Romagna, there were aforetime many
noblemen and gentlemen, and amongst the rest a young man called
Nastagio degli Onesti, who had, by the death of his father and an
uncle of his, been left rich beyond all estimation and who, as it
happeneth often with young men, being without a wife, fell in love
with a daughter of Messer Paolo Traversari, a young lady of much
greater family than his own, hoping by his fashions to bring her to
love him in return. But these, though great and goodly and
commendable, not only profited him nothing; nay, it seemed they did
him harm, so cruel and obdurate and intractable did the beloved damsel
show herself to him, being grown belike, whether for her singular
beauty or the nobility of her birth, so proud and disdainful that
neither he nor aught that pleased him pleased her. This was so
grievous to Nastagio to bear that many a time, for chagrin, being
weary of complaining, he had it in his thought to kill himself, but
held his hand therefrom; and again and again he took it to heart to
let her be altogether or have her, an he might, in hatred, even as she
had him. But in vain did he take such a resolve, for that, the more
hope failed him, the more it seemed his love redoubled. Accordingly,
he persisted both in loving and in spending without stint or measure,
till it seemed to certain of his friends and kinsfolk that he was like
to consume both himself and his substance; wherefore they besought him
again and again and counselled him depart Ravenna and go sojourn
awhile in some other place, for that, so doing, he would abate both
his passion and his expenditure. Nastagio long made light of this
counsel, but, at last, being importuned of them and able no longer to
say no, he promised to do as they would have him and let make great
preparations, as he would go into France or Spain or some other far
place. Then, taking horse in company with many of his friends, he rode
out of Ravenna and betook himself to a place called Chiassi, some
three miles from the city, where, sending for tents and pavilions, he
told those who had accompanied him thither that he meant to abide and
that they might return to Ravenna. Accordingly, having encamped there,
he proceeded to lead the goodliest and most magnificent life that was
aye, inviting now these, now those others, to supper and to dinner, as
he was used.

It chanced one day, he being come thus well nigh to the beginning of
May and the weather being very fair, that, having entered into thought
of his cruel mistress, he bade all his servants leave him to himself,
so he might muse more at his leisure, and wandered on, step by step,
lost in melancholy thought, till he came [unwillingly] into the
pine-wood. The fifth hour of the day was well nigh past and he had
gone a good half mile into the wood, remembering him neither of eating
nor of aught else, when himseemed of a sudden he heard a terrible
great wailing and loud cries uttered by a woman; whereupon, his dulcet
meditation being broken, he raised his head to see what was to do and
marvelled to find himself among the pines; then, looking before him,
he saw a very fair damsel come running, naked through a thicket all
thronged with underwood and briers, towards the place where he was,
weeping and crying sore for mercy and all dishevelled and torn by the
bushes and the brambles. At her heels ran two huge and fierce
mastiffs, which followed hard upon her and ofttimes bit her cruelly,
whenas they overtook her; and after them he saw come riding upon a
black courser a knight arrayed in sad-coloured armour, with a very
wrathful aspect and a tuck in his hand, threatening her with death in
foul and fearsome words.

This sight filled Nastagio's mind at once with terror and amazement
and after stirred him to compassion of the ill-fortuned lady,
wherefrom arose a desire to deliver her, an but he might, from such
anguish and death. Finding himself without arms, he ran to take the
branch of a tree for a club, armed wherewith, he advanced to meet the
dogs and the knight. When the latter saw this, he cried out to him
from afar off, saying, 'Nastagio, meddle not; suffer the dogs and
myself to do that which this wicked woman hath merited.' As he spoke,
the dogs, laying fast hold of the damsel by the flanks, brought her to
a stand and the knight, coming up, lighted down from his horse;
whereupon Nastagio drew near unto him and said, 'I know not who thou
mayst be, that knowest me so well; but this much I say to see that it
is a great felony for an armed knight to seek to slay a naked woman
and to set the dogs on her, as she were a wild beast; certes, I will
defend her as most I may.'

'Nastagio,' answered the knight, 'I was of one same city with thyself
and thou wast yet a little child when I, who hight Messer Guido degli
Anastagi, was yet more passionately enamoured of this woman than thou
art presently of yonder one of the Traversari and my ill fortune for
her hard-heartedness and barbarity came to such a pass that one day I
slew myself in despair with this tuck thou seest in my hand and was
doomed to eternal punishment. Nor was it long ere she, who was beyond
measure rejoiced at my death, died also and for the sin of her cruelty
and of the delight had of her in my torments (whereof she repented her
not, as one who thought not to have sinned therein, but rather to have
merited reward,) was and is on like wise condemned to the pains of
hell. Wherein no sooner was she descended than it was decreed unto her
and to me, for penance thereof,[284] that she should flee before me
and that I, who once loved her so dear, should pursue her, not as a
beloved mistress, but as a mortal enemy, and that, as often as I
overtook her, I should slay her with this tuck, wherewith I slew
myself, and ripping open her loins, tear from her body, as thou shalt
presently see, that hard and cold heart, wherein nor love nor pity
might ever avail to enter, together with the other entrails, and give
them to the dogs to eat. Nor is it a great while after ere, as God's
justice and puissance will it, she riseth up again, as she had not
been dead, and beginneth anew her woeful flight, whilst the dogs and I
again pursue her. And every Friday it betideth that I come up with her
here at this hour and wreak on her the slaughter that thou shalt see;
and think not that we rest the other days; nay, I overtake her in
other places, wherein she thought and wrought cruelly against me.
Thus, being as thou seest, from her lover grown her foe, it behoveth
me pursue her on this wise as many years as she was cruel to me
months. Wherefore leave me to carry the justice of God into effect and
seek not to oppose that which thou mayst not avail to hinder.'

[Footnote 284: _i.e._ of her sin.]

Nastagio, hearing these words, drew back, grown all adread, with not
an hair on his body but stood on end, and looking upon the wretched
damsel, began fearfully to await that which the knight should do. The
latter, having made an end of his discourse, ran, tuck in hand, as he
were a ravening dog, at the damsel, who, fallen on her knees and held
fast by the two mastiffs, cried him mercy, and smiting her with all
his might amiddleward the breast, pierced her through and through. No
sooner had she received this stroke than she fell grovelling on the
ground, still weeping and crying out; whereupon the knight, clapping
his hand to his hunting-knife, ripped open her loins and tearing forth
her heart and all that was thereabout, cast them to the two mastiffs,
who devoured them incontinent, as being sore anhungred. Nor was it
long ere, as if none of these things had been, the damsel of a sudden
rose to her feet and began to flee towards the sea, with the dogs
after her, still rending her; and in a little while they had gone so
far that Nastagio could see them no more. The latter, seeing these
things, abode a great while between pity and fear, and presently it
occurred to his mind that this might much avail him, seeing that it
befell every Friday; wherefore, marking the place, he returned to his
servants and after, whenas it seemed to him fit, he sent for sundry
of his kinsmen and friends and said to them, 'You have long urged me
leave loving this mine enemy and put an end to my expenditure, and I
am ready to do it, provided you will obtain me a favour; the which is
this, that on the coming Friday you make shift to have Messer Paolo
Traversari and his wife and daughter and all their kinswomen and what
other ladies soever it shall please you here to dinner with me. That
for which I wish this, you shall see then.' This seemed to them a
little thing enough to do, wherefore, returning to Ravenna, they in
due time invited those whom Nastagio would have to dine with him, and
albeit it was no easy matter to bring thither the young lady whom he
loved, natheless she went with the other ladies. Meanwhile, Nastagio
let make ready a magnificent banquet and caused set the tables under
the pines round about the place where he had witnessed the slaughter
of the cruel lady.

The time come, he seated the gentlemen and the ladies at table and so
ordered it that his mistress should be placed right over against the
spot where the thing should befall. Accordingly, hardly was the last
dish come when the despairful outcry of the hunted damsel began to be
heard of all, whereat each of the company marvelled and enquired what
was to do, but none could say; whereupon all started to their feet and
looking what this might be, they saw the woeful damsel and the knight
and the dogs; nor was it long ere they were all there among them.
Great was the clamor against both dogs and knight, and many rushed
forward to succour the damsel; but the knight, bespeaking them as he
had bespoken Nastagio, not only made them draw back, but filled them
all with terror and amazement. Then did he as he had done before,
whereat all the ladies that were there (and there were many present
who had been kinswomen both to the woeful damsel and to the knight and
who remembered them both of his love and of his death) wept as
piteously as if they had seen this done to themselves.

The thing carried to its end and the damsel and the knight gone, the
adventure set those who had seen it upon many and various discourses;
but of those who were the most affrighted was the cruel damsel beloved
of Nastagio, who had distinctly seen and heard the whole matter and
understood that these things concerned her more than any other who was
there, remembering her of the cruelty she had still used towards
Nastagio; wherefore herseemed she fled already before her enraged
lover and had the mastiffs at her heels. Such was the terror awakened
in her thereby that,--so this might not betide her,--no sooner did she
find an opportunity (which was afforded her that same evening) than,
turning her hatred into love, she despatched to Nastagio a trusty
chamberwoman of hers, who besought him that it should please him to go
to her, for that she was ready to do all that should be his pleasure.
He answered that this was exceeding agreeable to him, but that, so it
pleased her, he desired to have his pleasure of her with honour, to
wit, by taking her to wife. The damsel, who knew that it rested with
none other than herself that she had not been his wife, made answer to
him that it liked her well; then, playing the messenger herself, she
told her father and mother that she was content to be Nastagio's
wife, whereat they were mightily rejoiced, and he, espousing her on
the ensuing Sunday and celebrating his nuptials, lived with her long
and happily. Nor was this affright the cause of that good only; nay,
all the ladies of Ravenna became so fearful by reason thereof, that
ever after they were much more amenable than they had before been to
the desires of the men."




THE NINTH STORY

[Day the Fifth]

     FEDERIGO DEGLI ALBERIGHI LOVETH AND IS NOT LOVED. HE WASTETH
     HIS SUBSTANCE IN PRODIGAL HOSPITALITY TILL THERE IS LEFT HIM
     BUT ONE SOLE FALCON, WHICH, HAVING NOUGHT ELSE, HE GIVETH
     HIS MISTRESS TO EAT, ON HER COMING TO HIS HOUSE; AND SHE,
     LEARNING THIS, CHANGETH HER MIND AND TAKING HIM TO HUSBAND,
     MAKETH HIM RICH AGAIN


Filomena having ceased speaking, the queen, seeing that none remained
to tell save only herself and Dioneo, whose privilege entitled him to
speak last, said, with blithe aspect, "It pertaineth now to me to tell
and I, dearest ladies, will willingly do it, relating a story like in
part to the foregoing, to the intent that not only may you know how
much the love of you[285] can avail in gentle hearts, but that you may
learn to be yourselves, whenas it behoveth, bestowers of your
guerdons, without always suffering fortune to be your guide, which
most times, as it chanceth, giveth not discreetly, but out of all
measure.

[Footnote 285: Syn. your charms (_la vostra vaghezza_).]

You must know, then, that Coppo di Borghese Domenichi, who was of our
days and maybe is yet a man of great worship and authority in our city
and illustrious and worthy of eternal renown, much more for his
fashions and his merit than for the nobility of his blood, being grown
full of years, delighted oftentimes to discourse with his neighbours
and others of things past, the which he knew how to do better and more
orderly and with more memory and elegance of speech than any other
man. Amongst other fine things of his, he was used to tell that there
was once in Florence a young man called Federigo, son of Messer
Filippo Alberighi and renowned for deeds of arms and courtesy over
every other bachelor in Tuscany, who, as betideth most gentlemen,
became enamoured of a gentlewoman named Madam Giovanna, in her day
held one of the fairest and sprightliest ladies that were in Florence;
and to win her love, he held jousts and tourneyings and made
entertainments and gave gifts and spent his substance without any
stint; but she, being no less virtuous than fair, recked nought of
these things done for her nor of him who did them. Federigo spending
thus far beyond his means and gaining nought, his wealth, as lightly
happeneth, in course of time came to an end and he abode poor, nor
was aught left him but a poor little farm, on whose returns he lived
very meagrely, and to boot a falcon he had, one of the best in the
world. Wherefore, being more in love than ever and himseeming he might
no longer make such a figure in the city as he would fain do, he took
up his abode at Campi, where his farm was, and there bore his poverty
with patience, hawking whenas he might and asking of no one.

Federigo being thus come to extremity, it befell one day that Madam
Giovanna's husband fell sick and seeing himself nigh upon death, made
his will, wherein, being very rich, he left a son of his, now well
grown, his heir, after which, having much loved Madam Giovanna, he
substituted her to his heir, in case his son should die without lawful
issue, and died. Madam Giovanna, being thus left a widow, betook
herself that summer, as is the usance of our ladies, into the country
with her son to an estate of hers very near that of Federigo;
wherefore it befell that the lad made acquaintance with the latter and
began to take delight in hawks and hounds, and having many a time seen
his falcon flown and being strangely taken therewith, longed sore to
have it, but dared not ask it of him, seeing it so dear to him. The
thing standing thus, it came to pass that the lad fell sick, whereat
his mother was sore concerned, as one who had none but him and loved
him with all her might, and abode about him all day, comforting him
without cease; and many a time she asked him if there were aught he
desired, beseeching him tell it her, for an it might be gotten, she
would contrive that he should have it. The lad, having heard these
offers many times repeated, said, 'Mother mine, an you could procure
me to have Federigo's falcon, methinketh I should soon be whole.'

The lady hearing this, bethought herself awhile and began to consider
how she should do. She knew that Federigo had long loved her and had
never gotten of her so much as a glance of the eye; wherefore quoth
she in herself, 'How shall I send or go to him to seek of him this
falcon, which is, by all I hear, the best that ever flew and which, to
boot, maintaineth him in the world? And how can I be so graceless as
to offer to take this from a gentleman who hath none other pleasure
left?' Perplexed with this thought and knowing not what to say, for
all she was very certain of getting the bird, if she asked for it, she
made no reply to her son, but abode silent. However, at last, the love
of her son so got the better of her that she resolved in herself to
satisfy him, come what might, and not to send, but to go herself for
the falcon and fetch it to him. Accordingly she said to him, 'My son,
take comfort and bethink thyself to grow well again, for I promise
thee that the first thing I do to-morrow morning I will go for it and
fetch it to thee.' The boy was rejoiced at this and showed some
amendment that same day.

Next morning, the lady, taking another lady to bear her company,
repaired, by way of diversion, to Federigo's little house and enquired
for the latter, who, for that it was no weather for hawking nor had
been for some days past, was then in a garden he had, overlooking the
doing of certain little matters of his, and hearing that Madam
Giovanna asked for him at the door, ran thither, rejoicing and
marvelling exceedingly. She, seeing him come, rose and going with
womanly graciousness to meet him, answered his respectful salutation
with 'Give you good day, Federigo!' then went on to say, 'I am come to
make thee amends for that which thou hast suffered through me, in
loving me more than should have behooved thee; and the amends in
question is this that I purpose to dine with thee this morning
familiarly, I and this lady my companion.' 'Madam,' answered Federigo
humbly, 'I remember me not to have ever received any ill at your
hands, but on the contrary so much good that, if ever I was worth
aught, it came about through your worth and the love I bore you; and
assuredly, albeit you have come to a poor host, this your gracious
visit is far more precious to me than it would be an it were given me
to spend over again as much as that which I have spent aforetime.' So
saying, he shamefastly received her into his house and thence brought
her into his garden, where, having none else to bear her company, he
said to her, 'Madam, since there is none else here, this good woman,
wife of yonder husbandman, will bear you company, whilst I go see the
table laid.'

Never till that moment, extreme as was his poverty, had he been so
dolorously sensible of the straits to which he had brought himself for
the lack of those riches he had spent on such disorderly wise. But
that morning, finding he had nothing wherewithal he might honourably
entertain the lady, for love of whom he had aforetime entertained folk
without number, he was made perforce aware of his default and ran
hither and thither, perplexed beyond measure, like a man beside
himself, inwardly cursing his ill fortune, but found neither money nor
aught he might pawn. It was now growing late and he having a great
desire to entertain the gentle lady with somewhat, yet choosing not to
have recourse to his own labourer, much less any one else, his eye
fell on his good falcon, which he saw on his perch in his little
saloon; whereupon, having no other resource, he took the bird and
finding him fat, deemed him a dish worthy of such a lady. Accordingly,
without more ado, he wrung the hawk's neck and hastily caused a little
maid of his pluck it and truss it and after put it on the spit and
roast it diligently. Then, the table laid and covered with very white
cloths, whereof he had yet some store, he returned with a blithe
countenance to the lady in the garden and told her that dinner was
ready, such as it was in his power to provide. Accordingly, the lady
and her friend, arising, betook themselves to table and in company
with Federigo, who served them with the utmost diligence, ate the good
falcon, unknowing what they did.

Presently, after they had risen from table and had abidden with him
awhile in cheerful discourse, the lady, thinking it time to tell that
wherefor she was come, turned to Federigo and courteously bespoke him,
saying, 'Federigo, I doubt not a jot but that, when thou hearest that
which is the especial occasion of my coming hither, thou wilt marvel
at my presumption, remembering thee of thy past life and of my virtue,
which latter belike thou reputedst cruelty and hardness of heart;
but, if thou hadst or hadst had children, by whom thou mightest know
how potent is the love one beareth them, meseemeth certain that thou
wouldst in part hold me excused. But, although thou hast none, I, who
have one child, cannot therefore escape the common laws to which other
mothers are subject and whose enforcements it behoveth me ensue, need
must I, against my will and contrary to all right and seemliness, ask
of thee a boon, which I know is supremely dear to thee (and that with
good reason, for that thy sorry fortune hath left thee none other
delight, none other diversion, none other solace), to wit, thy falcon,
whereof my boy is so sore enamoured that, an I carry it not to him, I
fear me his present disorder will be so aggravated that there may
presently ensue thereof somewhat whereby I shall lose him. Wherefore I
conjure thee,--not by the love thou bearest me and whereto thou art
nowise beholden, but by thine own nobility, which in doing courtesy
hath approved itself greater than in any other,--that it please thee
give it to me, so by the gift I may say I have kept my son alive and
thus made him for ever thy debtor.'

Federigo, hearing what the lady asked and knowing that he could not
oblige her, for that he had given her the falcon to eat, fell
a-weeping in her presence, ere he could answer a word. The lady at
first believed that his tears arose from grief at having to part from
his good falcon and was like to say that she would not have it.
However, she contained herself and awaited what Federigo should reply,
who, after weeping awhile, made answer thus: 'Madam, since it pleased
God that I should set my love on you, I have in many things reputed
fortune contrary to me and have complained of her; but all the ill
turns she hath done me have been a light matter in comparison with
that which she doth me at this present and for which I can never more
be reconciled to her, considering that you are come hither to my poor
house, whereas you deigned not to come what while I was rich, and seek
of me a little boon, the which she hath so wrought that I cannot grant
you; and why this cannot be I will tell you briefly. When I heard that
you, of your favour, were minded to dine with me, I deemed it a light
thing and a seemly, having regard to your worth and the nobility of
your station, to honour you, as far as in me lay, with some choicer
victual than that which is commonly set before other folk; wherefore,
remembering me of the falcon which you ask of me and of his
excellence, I judged him a dish worthy of you. This very morning,
then, you have had him roasted upon the trencher, and indeed I had
accounted him excellently well bestowed; but now, seeing that you
would fain have had him on other wise, it is so great a grief to me
that I cannot oblige you therein that methinketh I shall never forgive
myself therefor.' So saying, in witness of this, he let cast before
her the falcon's feathers and feet and beak.

The lady, seeing and hearing this, first blamed him for having, to
give a woman to eat, slain such a falcon, and after inwardly much
commended the greatness of his soul, which poverty had not availed nor
might anywise avail to abate. Then, being put out of all hope of
having the falcon and fallen therefore in doubt of her son's recovery,
she took her leave and returned, all disconsolate, to the latter,
who, before many days had passed, whether for chagrin that he could
not have the bird or for that his disorder was e'en fated to bring him
to that pass, departed this life, to the inexpressible grief of his
mother. After she had abidden awhile full of tears and affliction,
being left very rich and yet young, she was more than once urged by
her brothers to marry again, and albeit she would fain not have done
so, yet, finding herself importuned and calling to mind Federigo's
worth and his last magnificence, to wit, the having slain such a
falcon for her entertainment, she said to them, 'I would gladly, an it
liked you, abide as I am; but, since it is your pleasure that I take a
[second] husband, certes I will never take any other, an I have not
Federigo degli Alberighi.' Whereupon her brothers, making mock of her,
said 'Silly woman that thou art, what is this thou sayest? How canst
thou choose him, seeing he hath nothing in the world?' 'Brothers
mine,' answered she, 'I know very well that it is as you say; but I
would liefer have a man that lacketh of riches than riches that lack
of a man.' Her brethren, hearing her mind and knowing Federigo for a
man of great merit, poor though he was, gave her, with all her wealth,
to him, even as she would; and he, seeing himself married to a lady of
such worth and one whom he had loved so dear and exceeding rich, to
boot, became a better husband of his substance and ended his days with
her in joy and solace."




THE TENTH STORY

[Day the Fifth]

     PIETRO DI VINCIOLO GOETH TO SUP ABROAD, WHEREUPON HIS WIFE
     LETTETH FETCH HER A YOUTH TO KEEP HER COMPANY, AND HER
     HUSBAND RETURNING, UNLOOKED FOR, SHE HIDETH HER GALLANT
     UNDER A HEN-COOP. PIETRO TELLETH HER HOW THERE HAD BEEN
     FOUND IN THE HOUSE OF ONE ARCOLANO, WITH WHOM HE WAS TO HAVE
     SUPPED, A YOUNG MAN BROUGHT IN BY HIS WIFE, AND SHE BLAMETH
     THE LATTER. PRESENTLY, AN ASS, BY MISCHANCE, SETTETH FOOT ON
     THE FINGERS OF HIM WHO IS UNDER THE COOP AND HE ROARETH OUT,
     WHEREUPON PIETRO RUNNETH THITHER AND ESPYING HIM,
     DISCOVERETH HIS WIFE'S UNFAITH, BUT ULTIMATELY COMETH TO AN
     ACCORD WITH HER FOR HIS OWN LEWD ENDS


The queen's story come to an end and all having praised God for that
He had rewarded Federigo according to his desert, Dioneo, who never
waited for commandment, began on this wise: "I know not whether to say
if it be a casual vice, grown up in mankind through perversity of
manners and usances, or a defect inherent in our nature, that we laugh
rather at things ill than at good works, especially when they concern
us not. Wherefore, seeing that the pains I have otherwhiles taken and
am now about to take aim at none other end than to rid you of
melancholy and afford you occasion for laughter and merriment,--albeit
the matter of my present story may be in part not altogether seemly,
nevertheless, lovesome lasses, for that it may afford diversion, I
will e'en tell it you, and do you, hearkening thereunto, as you are
wont to do, whenas you enter into gardens, where, putting out your
dainty hands, you cull the roses and leave the thorns be. On this wise
must you do with my story, leaving the naughty man of whom I shall
tell you to his infamy and ill-luck go with him, what while you laugh
merrily at the amorous devices of his wife, having compassion, whenas
need is, of the mischances of others.

There was, then, in Perugia, no great while agone, a rich man called
Pietro di Vinciolo, who, belike more to beguile others and to abate
the general suspect in which he was had of all the Perugians, than for
any desire of his own, took him a wife, and fortune in this was so far
conformable to his inclination that the wife he took was a thickset,
red-haired, hot-complexioned wench, who would liefer have had two
husbands than one, whereas she happened upon one who had a mind far
more disposed to otherwhat than to her. Becoming, in process of time,
aware of this and seeing herself fair and fresh and feeling herself
buxom and lusty, she began by being sore incensed thereat and came
once and again to unseemly words thereof with her husband, with whom
she was well nigh always at variance. Then, seeing that this might
result rather in her own exhaustion than in the amendment of her
husband's depravity, she said in herself, 'Yonder caitiff forsaketh me
to go of his ribaldries on pattens through the dry, and I will study
to carry others on shipboard through the wet. I took him to husband
and brought him a fine great dowry, knowing him to be a man and
supposing him desireful of that whereunto men are and should be fain;
and had I not believed that he would play the part of a man, I had
never taken him. He knew that I was a woman; why, then, did he take me
to wife, if women were not to his mind? This is not to be suffered.
Were I minded to renounce the world, I should have made myself a nun;
but, if, choosing to live in the world, as I do, I look for delight or
pleasure from yonder fellow, I may belike grow old, expecting in vain,
and whenas I shall be old, I shall in vain repent and bemoan myself of
having wasted my youth, which latter he himself is a very good teacher
and demonstrator how I should solace, showing me by example how I
should delect myself with that wherein he delighteth, more by token
that this were commendable in me, whereas in him it is exceeding
blameworthy, seeing that I should offend against the laws alone,
whereas he offendeth against both law and nature.'

Accordingly, the good lady, having thus bethought herself and belike
more than once, to give effect privily to these considerations,
clapped up an acquaintance with an old woman who showed like Saint
Verdiana, that giveth the serpents to eat, and still went to every
pardoning, beads in hand, nor ever talked of aught but the lives of
the Holy Fathers or of the wounds of St. Francis and was of well nigh
all reputed a saint, and whenas it seemed to her time, frankly
discovered to her her intent. 'Daughter mine,' replied the beldam,
'God who knoweth all knoweth that thou wilt do exceeding well, and if
for nought else, yet shouldst thou do it, thou and every other young
woman, not to lose the time of your youth, for that to whoso hath
understanding, there is no grief like that of having lost one's time.
And what a devil are we women good for, once we are old, save to keep
the ashes about the fire-pot? If none else knoweth it and can bear
witness thereof, that do and can I; for, now that I am old, I
recognize without avail, but not without very sore and bitter remorse
of mind, the time that I let slip, and albeit I lost it not altogether
(for that I would not have thee deem me a ninny), still I did not what
I might have done; whereof whenas I remember me, seeing myself
fashioned as thou seest me at this present, so that thou wouldst find
none to give me fire to my tinder,[286] God knoweth what chagrin I
feel. With men it is not so; they are born apt for a thousand things,
not for this alone, and most part of them are of much more account old
than young; but women are born into the world for nothing but to do
this and bear children, and it is for this that they are prized; the
which, if from nought else, thou mayst apprehend from this, that we
women are still ready for the sport; more by token that one woman
would tire out many men at the game, whereas many men cannot tire one
woman; and for that we are born unto this, I tell thee again that thou
wilt do exceeding well to return thy husband a loaf for his bannock,
so thy soul may have no cause to reproach thy flesh in thine old age.
Each one hath of this world just so much as he taketh to himself
thereof, and especially is this the case with women, whom it behoveth,
much more than men, make use of their time, whilst they have it; for
thou mayst see how, when we grow old, nor husband nor other will look
at us; nay, they send us off to the kitchen to tell tales to the cat
and count the pots and pans; and what is worse, they tag rhymes on us
and say,

     "Tidbits for wenches young;
     Gags[287] for the old wife's tongue."

[Footnote 286: _i.e._ she was grown so repulsively ugly in her old
age, that no one cared to do her even so trifling a service as giving
her a spark in tinder to light her fire withal.]

[Footnote 287: Or chokebits (_stranguglioni_).]

And many another thing to the like purpose. And that I may hold thee
no longer in parley, I tell thee in fine that thou couldst not have
discovered thy mind to any one in the world who can be more useful to
thee than I, for that there is no man so high and mighty but I dare
tell him what behoveth, nor any so dour or churlish but I know how to
supple him aright and bring him to what I will. Wherefore do thou but
show me who pleaseth thee and after leave me do; but one thing I
commend to thee, daughter mine, and that is, that thou be mindful of
me, for that I am a poor body and would have thee henceforth a sharer
in all my pardonings and in all the paternosters I shall say, so God
may make them light and candles for thy dead.'[288]

[Footnote 288: _i.e._ that they may serve to purchase remission from
purgatory for the souls of her dead relatives, instead of the burning
of candles and tapers, which is held by the Roman Catholic Church to
have that effect.]

With this she made an end of her discourse, and the young lady came to
an understanding with her that, whenas she chanced to spy a certain
young spark who passed often through that quarter and whose every
feature she set out to her, she should know what she had to do; then,
giving her a piece of salt meat, she dismissed her with God's
blessing; nor had many days passed ere the old woman brought her him
of whom she had bespoken her privily into her chamber, and a little
while after, another and another, according as they chanced to take
the lady's fancy, who stinted not to indulge herself in this as often
as occasion offered, though still fearful of her husband. It chanced
one evening that, her husband being to sup abroad with a friend of
his, Ercolano by name, she charged the old woman bring her a youth,
who was one of the goodliest and most agreeable of all Perugia, which
she promptly did; but hardly had the lady seated herself at table to
sup with her gallant, when, behold, Pietro called out at the door to
have it opened to him. She, hearing this, gave herself up for lost,
but yet desiring, an she might, to conceal the youth and not having
the presence of mind to send him away or hide him elsewhere, made him
take refuge under a hen-coop, that was in a shed adjoining the chamber
where they were at supper, and cast over him the sacking of a
pallet-bed that she had that day let empty.

This done, she made haste to open to her husband, to whom quoth she,
as soon as he entered the house, 'You have very soon despatched this
supper of yours!' 'We have not so much as tasted it,' replied he; and
she said, 'How was that?' Quoth he, 'I will tell thee. Scarce were we
seated at table, Ercolano and his wife and I, when we heard some one
sneeze hard by, whereof we took no note the first time nor the second;
but, he who sneezed sneezing yet a third time and a fourth and a fifth
and many other times, it made us all marvel; whereupon Ercolano, who
was somewhat vexed with his wife for that she had kept us a great
while standing at the door, without opening to us, said, as if in a
rage, "What meaneth this? Who is it sneezeth thus?" And rising from
table, made for a stair that stood near at hand and under which, hard
by the stairfoot, was a closure of planks, wherein to bestow all
manner things, as we see those do every day who set their houses in
order. Himseeming it was from this that came the noise of sneezing, he
opened a little door that was therein and no sooner had he done this
than there issued forth thereof the frightfullest stench of sulphur
that might be. Somewhat of this smell had already reached us and we
complaining thereof, the lady had said, "It is because I was but now
in act to bleach my veils with sulphur and after set the pan, over
which I had spread them to catch the fumes, under the stair, so that
it yet smoketh thereof."

As soon as the smoke was somewhat spent, Ercolano looked into the
cupboard and there espied him who had sneezed and who was yet in act
to sneeze, for that the fumes of the sulphur constrained him thereto,
and indeed they had by this time so straitened his breast that, had he
abidden a while longer, he had never sneezed nor done aught else
again. Ercolano, seeing him, cried out, "Now, wife, I see why, whenas
we came hither awhile ago, we were kept so long at the door, without
its being opened to us; but may I never again have aught that shall
please me, an I pay thee not for this!" The lady, hearing this and
seeing that her sin was discovered, stayed not to make any excuse, but
started up from table and made off I know not whither. Ercolano,
without remarking his wife's flight, again and again bade him who
sneezed come forth; but the latter, who was now at the last gasp,
offered not to stir, for all that he could say; whereupon, taking him
by one foot, he haled him forth of his hiding-place and ran for a
knife to kill him; but I, fearing the police on mine own account,
arose and suffered him not to slay him or do him any hurt; nay, crying
out and defending him, I gave the alarm to certain of the neighbours,
who ran thither and taking the now half-dead youth, carried him forth
the house I know not whither. Wherefore, our supper being disturbed by
these things, I have not only not despatched it, nay, I have, as I
said, not even tasted it.'

The lady, hearing this, knew that there were other women as wise as
herself, albeit illhap bytimes betided some of them thereof, and would
fain have defended Ercolano's wife with words; but herseeming that, by
blaming others' defaults, she might make freer way for her own, she
began to say, 'Here be fine doings! A holy and virtuous lady indeed
she must be! She, to whom, as I am an honest woman, I would have
confessed myself, so spiritually minded meseemed she was! And the
worst of it is that she, being presently an old woman, setteth a
mighty fine example to the young. Accursed by the hour she came into
the world and she also, who suffereth herself to live, perfidious and
vile woman that she must be, the general reproach and shame of all the
ladies of this city, who, casting to the winds her honour and the
faith plighted to her husband and the world's esteem, is not ashamed
to dishonour him, and herself with him, for another man, him who is
such a man and so worshipful a citizen and who used her so well! So
God save me, there should be no mercy had of such women as she; they
should be put to death; they should be cast alive into the fire and
burned to ashes.' Then, bethinking her of her gallant, whom she had
hard by under the coop, she began to exhort Pietro to betake himself
to bed, for that it was time; but he, having more mind to eat than to
sleep, enquired if there was aught for supper. 'Supper, quotha!'
answered the lady. 'Truly, we are much used to get supper, whenas thou
art abroad! A fine thing, indeed! Dost thou take me for Ercolano's
wife? Alack, why dost thou not go to sleep for to-night? How far
better thou wilt do!' Now it chanced that, certain husbandmen of
Pietro's being come that evening with sundry matters from the farm and
having put up their asses, without watering them, in a little stable
adjoining the shed, one of the latter, being sore athirst, slipped his
head out of the halter and making his way out of the stable, went
smelling to everything, so haply he might find some water, and going
thus, he came presently full on the hen-coop, under which was the
young man. The latter having, for that it behoved him abide on all
fours, put out the fingers of one hand on the ground beyond the coop,
such was his luck, or rather let us say, his ill luck, that the ass
set his hoof on them, whereupon the youth, feeling an exceeding great
pain, set up a terrible outcry. Pietro, hearing this, marvelled and
perceived that the noise came from within the house; wherefore he went
out into the shed and hearing the other still clamouring, for that the
ass had not lifted up his hoof from his fingers, but still trod hard
upon them, said, 'Who is there?' Then, running to the hen-coop, he
raised it and espied the young man, who, beside the pain he suffered
from his fingers that were crushed by the ass's hoof, was all
a-trembling for fear lest Pietro should do him a mischief.

The latter, knowing him for one whom he had long pursued for his lewd
ends, asked him what he did there, whereto he answered him nothing,
but prayed him for the love of God do him no harm. Quoth Pietro,
'Arise and fear not that I will do thee any hurt; but tell me how thou
comest here and for what purpose.' The youth told him all, whereupon
Pietro, no less rejoiced to have found him than his wife was woeful,
taking him by the hand, carried him into the chamber, where the lady
awaited him with the greatest affright in the world, and seating
himself overagainst her, said, 'But now thou cursedst Ercolano's wife
and avouchedst that she should be burnt and that she was the disgrace
of all you women; why didst thou not speak of thyself? Or, an thou
choosedst not to speak of thyself, how could thy conscience suffer
thee to speak thus of her, knowing thyself to have done even as did
she? Certes, none other thing moved thee thereunto save that you women
are all made thus and look to cover your own doings with others'
defaults; would fire might come from heaven to burn you all up,
perverse generation that you are!'

The lady, seeing that, in the first heat of the discovery, he had done
her no harm other than in words and herseeming she saw that he was all
agog with joy for that he held so goodly a stripling by the hand, took
heart and said, 'Of this much, indeed, I am mighty well assured, that
thou wouldst have fire come from heaven to burn us women all up,
being, as thou art, as fain to us as a dog to cudgels; but, by Christ
His cross, thou shalt not get thy wish. However, I would fain have a
little discourse with thee, so I may know of what thou complainest.
Certes, it were a fine thing an thou shouldst seek to even me with
Ercolano's wife, who is a beat-breast, a smell-sin,[289] and hath of
her husband what she will and is of him held dear as a wife should be,
the which is not the case with me. For, grant that I am well clad and
shod of thee, thou knowest but too well how I fare for the rest and
how long it is since thou hast lain with me; and I had liefer go
barefoot and rags to my back and be well used of thee abed than have
all these things, being used as I am of thee. For understand plainly,
Pietro; I am a woman like other women and have a mind unto that which
other women desire; so that, an I procure me thereof, not having it
from thee, thou hast no call to missay of me therefor; at the least, I
do thee this much honour that I have not to do with horseboys and
scald-heads.'

[Footnote 289: _i.e._ a hypocritical sham devotee, covering a lewd
life with an appearance of sanctity.]

Pietro perceived that words were not like to fail her for all that
night; wherefore, as one who recked little of her, 'Wife,' said he,
'no more for the present; I will content thee aright of this matter;
but thou wilt do us a great courtesy to let us have somewhat to sup
withal, for that meseemeth this lad, like myself, hath not yet
supped.' 'Certes, no,' answered the lady, 'he hath not yet supped; for
we were sitting down to table, when thou camest in thine ill hour.'
'Go, then,' rejoined Pietro, 'contrive that we may sup, and after I
will order this matter on such wise that thou shalt have no cause to
complain.' The lady, finding that her husband was satisfied, arose and
caused straightway reset the table; then, letting bring the supper she
had prepared, she supped merrily in company with her caitiff of a
husband and the young man. After supper, what Pietro devised for the
satisfaction of all three hath escaped my mind; but this much I know
that on the following morning the youth was escorted back to the
public place, not altogether certain which he had the more been that
night, wife or husband. Wherefore, dear my ladies, this will I say to
you, 'Whoso doth it to you, do you it to him'; and if you cannot
presently, keep it in mind till such time as you can, so he may get as
good as he giveth."



Dioneo having made an end of his story, which had been less laughed at
by the ladies [than usual], more for shamefastness than for the little
delight they took therein, the queen, seeing the end of her sovranty
come, rose to her feet and putting off the laurel crown, set it
blithely on Elisa's head, saying, "With you, madam, henceforth it
resteth to command." Elisa, accepting the honour, did even as it had
been done before her, in that, having first, to the satisfaction of
the company, taken order with the seneschal for that whereof there was
need for the time of her governance, she said, "We have many a time
heard how, by dint of smart sayings and ready repartees and prompt
advisements, many have availed with an apt retort[290] to take the
edge off other folks' teeth or to fend off imminent perils; and, for
that the matter is goodly and may be useful,[291] I will that
to-morrow, with God's aid, it be discoursed within these terms, to
wit, OF WHOSO, BEING ASSAILED WITH SOME JIBING SPEECH, HATH VINDICATED
HIMSELF OR HATH WITH SOME READY REPLY OR ADVISEMENT ESCAPED LOSS,
PERIL OR SHAME."

[Footnote 290: Lit. a due or deserved bite (_debito morso_). I mention
this to show the connection with teeth.]

[Footnote 291: An ellipsis of a kind common in Boccaccio and indeed in
all the old Italian writers, meaning "it may be useful to enlarge upon
the subject in question."]

This was much commended of all, whereupon the queen, rising to her
feet, dismissed them all until supper time. The honourable company,
seeing her risen, stood up all and each, according to the wonted
fashion, applied himself to that which was most agreeable to him. But,
the crickets having now given over singing, the queen let call every
one and they betook themselves to supper, which being despatched with
merry cheer, they all gave themselves to singing and making music, and
Emilia having, at the queen's commandment, set up a dance, Dioneo was
bidden sing a song, whereupon he straightway struck up with "Mistress
Aldruda, come lift up your fud-a, for I bring you, I bring you, good
tidings." Whereat all the ladies fell a-laughing and especially the
queen, who bade him leave that and sing another. Quoth Dioneo, "Madam,
had I a tabret, I would sing 'Come truss your coats, I prithee,
Mistress Burdock,' or 'Under the olive the grass is'; or will you have
me say 'The waves of the sea do great evil to me'? But I have no
tabret, so look which you will of these others. Will it please you
have 'Come forth unto us, so it may be cut down, like a May in the
midst of the meadows'?" "Nay," answered the queen; "give us another."
"Then," said Dioneo, "shall I sing, 'Mistress Simona, embarrel,
embarrel! It is not the month of October'?" Quoth the queen, laughing,
"Ill luck to thee, sing us a goodly one, an thou wilt, for we will
none of these." "Nay, madam," rejoined Dioneo, "fash not yourself; but
which then like you better? I know more than a thousand. Will you have
'This my shell an I prick it not well,' or 'Fair and softly, husband
mine' or 'I'll buy me a cock, a cock of an hundred pounds
sterling'?"[292] Therewithal the queen, somewhat provoked, though all
the other ladies laughed, said, "Dioneo, leave jesting and sing us a
goodly one; else shalt thou prove how I can be angry." Hearing this,
he gave over his quips and cranks and forthright fell a-singing after
this fashion:

[Footnote 292: The songs proposed by Dioneo are all apparently of a
light, if not a wanton, character and "not fit to be sung before
ladies."]

         O Love, the amorous light
     That beameth from yon fair one's lovely eyes
     Hath made me thine and hers in servant-guise.

     The splendour of her lovely eyes, it wrought
       That first thy flames were kindled in my breast,
         Passing thereto through mine;
     Yea, and thy virtue first unto my thought
       Her visage fair it was made manifest,
         Which picturing, I twine
         And lay before her shrine
     All virtues, that to her I sacrifice,
     Become the new occasion of my sighs.

     Thus, dear my lord, thy vassal am I grown
       And of thy might obediently await
         Grace for my lowliness;
     Yet wot I not if wholly there be known
       The high desire that in my breast thou'st set
         And my sheer faith, no less,
         Of her who doth possess
     My heart so that from none beneath the skies,
     Save her alone, peace would I take or prize.

     Wherefore I pray thee, sweet my lord and sire,
       Discover it to her and cause her taste
         Some scantling of thy heat
     To-me-ward,--for thou seest that in the fire,
       Loving, I languish and for torment waste
         By inches at her feet,--
         And eke in season meet
     Commend me to her favour on such wise
     As I would plead for thee, should need arise.[293]

[Footnote 293: This singularly naÃ¯ve give-and-take fashion of asking a
favour of a God recalls the old Scotch epitaph cited by Mr. George
Macdonald:

     Here lie I Martin Elginbrodde:
     Hae mercy o' my soul, Lord God;
     As I wad do, were I Lord God
     And ye were Martin Elginbrodde.]

Dioneo, by his silence, showing that his song was ended, the queen let
sing many others, having natheless much commended his. Then, somedele
of the night being spent and the queen feeling the heat of the day to
be now overcome of the coolness of the night, she bade each at his
pleasure betake himself to rest against the ensuing day.


HERE ENDETH THE FIFTH DAY
OF THE DECAMERON




_Day the Sixth_

     HERE BEGINNETH THE SIXTH DAY OF THE DECAMERON WHEREIN UNDER
     THE GOVERNANCE OF ELISA IS DISCOURSED OF WHOSO BEING
     ASSAILED WITH SOME JIBING SPEECH HATH VINDICATED HIMSELF OR
     HATH WITH SOME READY REPLY OR ADVISEMENT ESCAPED LOSS, PERIL
     OR SHAME


The moon, being now in the middest heaven, had lost its radiance and
every part of our world was bright with the new coming light, when,
the queen arising and letting call her company, they all with slow
step fared forth and rambled over the dewy grass to a little distance
from the fair hill, holding various discourse of one thing and another
and debating of the more or less goodliness of the stories told, what
while they renewed their laughter at the various adventures related
therein, till such time as the sun mounting high and beginning to wax
hot, it seemed well to them all to turn homeward. Wherefore, reversing
their steps, they returned to the palace and there, by the queen's
commandment, the tables being already laid and everything strewn with
sweet-scented herbs and fair flowers, they addressed themselves to
eat, ere the heat should grow greater. This being joyously
accomplished, ere they did otherwhat, they sang divers goodly and
pleasant canzonets, after which some went to sleep, whilst some sat
down to play at chess and other some at tables and Dioneo fell to
singing, in concert with Lauretta, of Troilus and Cressida. Then, the
hour come for their reassembling after the wonted fashion,[294] they
all, being summoned on the part of the queen, seated themselves, as
of their usance, about the fountain; but, as she was about to call for
the first story, there befell a thing that had not yet befallen there,
to wit, that a great clamour was heard by her and by all, made by the
wenches and serving-men in the kitchen.

[Footnote 294: Lit. for their returning to consistory (_del dovere a
concistoro tornare_).]

The seneschal, being called and questioned who it was that cried thus
and what might be the occasion of the turmoil, answered that the
clamour was between Licisca and Tindaro, but that he knew not the
cause thereof, being but then come thither to make them bide quiet,
whenas he had been summoned on her part. The queen bade him
incontinent fetch thither the two offenders and they being come,
enquired what was the cause of their clamour; whereto Tindaro offering
to reply, Licisca, who was well in years and somewhat overmasterful,
being heated with the outcry she had made, turned to him with an angry
air and said, "Mark this brute of a man who dareth to speak before me,
whereas I am! Let me speak." Then, turning again to the queen,
"Madam," quoth she, "this fellow would teach me, forsooth, to know
Sicofante's wife and neither more nor less than as if I had not been
familiar with her, would fain give me to believe that, the first night
her husband lay with her, Squire Maul[295] made his entry into Black
Hill[296] by force and with effusion of blood; and I say that it is
not true; nay, he entered there in peace and to the great contentment
of those within. Marry, this fellow is simple enough to believe
wenches to be such ninnies that they stand to lose their time, abiding
the commodity of their fathers and brothers, who six times out of
seven tarry three or four years more than they should to marry them.
Well would they fare, forsooth, were they to wait so long! By Christ
His faith (and I should know what I say, when I swear thus) I have not
a single gossip who went a maid to her husband; and as for the wives,
I know full well how many and what tricks they play their husbands;
and this blockhead would teach me to know women, as if I had been born
yesterday."

[Footnote 295: _Messer Mazza_, _i.e._ veretrum.]

[Footnote 296: _Monte Nero_, _i.e._ vas muliebre.]

What while Licisca spoke, the ladies kept up such a laughing that you
might have drawn all their teeth; and the queen imposed silence upon
her a good half dozen times, but to no purpose; she stinted not till
she had said her say. When she had at last made an end of her talk,
the queen turned to Dioneo and said, laughing, "Dioneo, this is a
matter for thy jurisdiction; wherefore, when we shall have made an end
of our stories, thou shalt proceed to give final judgment thereon."
Whereto he answered promptly, "Madam, the judgment is already given,
without hearing more of the matter; and I say that Licisca is in the
right and opine that it is even as she saith and that Tindaro is an
ass." Licisca, hearing this, fell a-laughing and turning to Tindaro,
said, "I told thee so; begone and God go with thee; thinkest thou thou
knowest better than I, thou whose eyes are not yet dry?[297] Gramercy,
I have not lived here below for nothing, no, not I!" And had not the
queen with an angry air imposed silence on her and sent her and
Tindaro away, bidding her make no more words or clamour, an she would
not be flogged, they had had nought to do all that day but attend to
her. When they were gone, the queen called on Filomena to make a
beginning with the day's stories and she blithely began thus:

[Footnote 297: _i.e._ who are yet a child, in modern parlance, "Thou
whose lips are yet wet with thy mother's milk."]




THE FIRST STORY

[Day the Sixth]

     A GENTLEMAN ENGAGETH TO MADAM ORETTA TO CARRY HER
     A-HORSEBACK WITH A STORY, BUT, TELLING IT DISORDERLY, IS
     PRAYED BY HER TO SET HER DOWN AGAIN


"Young ladies, like as stars, in the clear nights, are the ornaments
of the heavens and the flowers and the leaf-clad shrubs, in the
Spring, of the green fields and the hillsides, even so are
praiseworthy manners and goodly discourse adorned by sprightly
sallies, the which, for that they are brief, beseem women yet better
than men, inasmuch as much speaking is more forbidden to the former
than to the latter. Yet, true it is, whatever the cause, whether it be
the meanness of our[298] understanding or some particular grudge borne
by heaven to our times, that there be nowadays few or no women left
who know how to say a witty word in due season or who, an it be said
to them, know how to apprehend it as it behoveth; the which is a
general reproach to our whole sex. However, for that enough hath been
said aforetime on the subject by Pampinea,[299] I purpose to say no
more thereof; but, to give you to understand how much goodliness there
is in witty sayings, when spoken in due season, it pleaseth me to
recount to you the courteous fashion in which a lady imposed silence
upon a gentleman.

[Footnote 298: _i.e._ women's.]

[Footnote 299: See ante, p. 43, Introduction to the last story of the
First Day.]

As many of you ladies may either know by sight or have heard tell,
there was not long since in our city a noble and well-bred and
well-spoken gentlewoman, whose worth merited not that her name be left
unsaid. She was called, then, Madam Oretta and was the wife of Messer
Geri Spina. She chanced to be, as we are, in the country, going from
place to place, by way of diversion, with a company of ladies and
gentlemen, whom she had that day entertained to dinner at her house,
and the way being belike somewhat long from the place whence they set
out to that whither they were all purposed to go afoot, one of the
gentlemen said to her, 'Madam Oretta, an you will, I will carry you
a-horseback great part of the way we have to go with one of the finest
stories in the world.' 'Nay, sir,' answered the lady, 'I pray you
instantly thereof; indeed, it will be most agreeable to me.' Master
cavalier, who maybe fared no better, sword at side than tale on
tongue, hearing this, began a story of his, which of itself was in
truth very goodly; but he, now thrice or four or even half a dozen
times repeating one same word, anon turning back and whiles saying, 'I
said not aright,' and often erring in the names and putting one for
another, marred it cruelly, more by token that he delivered himself
exceedingly ill, having regard to the quality of the persons and the
nature of the incidents of his tale. By reason whereof, Madam Oretta,
hearkening to him, was many a time taken with a sweat and failing of
the heart, as she were sick and near her end, and at last, being
unable to brook the thing any more and seeing the gentleman engaged in
an imbroglio from which he was not like to extricate himself, she said
to him pleasantly, 'Sir, this horse of yours hath too hard a trot;
wherefore I pray you be pleased to set me down.' The gentleman, who,
as it chanced, understood a hint better than he told a story, took the
jest in good part and turning it off with a laugh, fell to discoursing
of other matters and left unfinished the story that he had begun and
conducted so ill."




THE SECOND STORY

[Day the Sixth]

     CISTI THE BAKER WITH A WORD OF HIS FASHION MAKETH MESSER
     GERI SPINA SENSIBLE OF AN INDISCREET REQUEST OF HIS


Madam Oretta's saying was greatly commended of all, ladies and men,
and the queen bidding Pampinea follow on, she began thus: "Fair
ladies, I know not of mine own motion to resolve me which is the more
at fault, whether nature in fitting to a noble soul a mean body or
fortune in imposing a mean condition upon a body endowed with a noble
soul, as in one our townsman Cisti and in many another we may have
seen it happen; which Cisti being gifted with a very lofty spirit,
fortune made him a baker. And for this, certes, I should curse both
nature and fortune like, did I not know the one to be most discreet
and the other to have a thousand eyes, albeit fools picture her blind;
and I imagine, therefore, that, being exceeding well-advised, they do
that which is oftentimes done of human beings, who, uncertain of
future events, bury their most precious things, against their
occasions, in the meanest places of their houses, as being the least
suspect, and thence bring them forth in their greatest needs, the mean
place having the while kept them more surely than would the goodly
chamber. And so, meseemeth, do the governors of the world hide
oftentimes their most precious things under the shadow of crafts and
conditions reputed most mean, to the end that, bringing them forth
therefrom in time of need, their lustre may show the brighter. Which
how Cisti the baker made manifest, though in but a trifling matter,
restoring to Messer Geri Spina (whom the story but now told of Madam
Oretta, who was his wife, hath recalled to my memory) the eyes of the
understanding, it pleaseth me to show you in a very short story.

I must tell you, then, that Pope Boniface, with whom Messer Geri
Spina was in very great favour, having despatched to Florence certain
of his gentlemen on an embassy concerning sundry important matters of
his, they lighted down at the house of Messer Geri and he treating the
pope's affairs in company with them, it chanced, whatever might have
been the occasion thereof, that he and they passed well nigh every
morning afoot before Santa Maria Ughi, where Cisti the baker had his
bakehouse and plied his craft in person. Now, albeit fortune had
appointed Cisti a humble enough condition, she had so far at the least
been kind to him therein that he was grown very rich and without ever
choosing to abandon it for any other, lived very splendidly, having,
amongst his other good things, the best wines, white and red, that
were to be found in Florence or in the neighbouring country. Seeing
Messer Geri and the pope's ambassadors pass every morning before his
door and the heat being great, he bethought himself that it were a
great courtesy to give them to drink of his good white wine; but,
having regard to his own condition and that of Messer Geri, he deemed
it not a seemly thing to presume to invite them, but determined to
bear himself on such wise as should lead Messer Geri to invite
himself.

Accordingly, having still on his body a very white doublet and an
apron fresh from the wash, which bespoke him rather a miller than a
baker, he let set before his door, every morning, towards the time
when he looked for Messer Geri and the ambassadors to pass, a new
tinned pail of fair water and a small pitcher of new Bolognese ware,
full of his good white wine, together with two beakers, which seemed
of silver, so bright they were, and seated himself there, against they
should pass, when, after clearing his throat once or twice, he fell to
drinking of that his wine with such a relish that he had made a dead
man's mouth water for it. Messer Geri, having seen him do thus one and
two mornings, said on the third, 'How now, Cisti? Is it good?'
Whereupon he started to his feet and said, 'Ay is it, Sir; but how
good I cannot give you to understand, except you taste thereof.'
Messer Geri, in whom either the nature of the weather or belike the
relish with which he saw Cisti drink had begotten a thirst, turned to
the ambassadors and said, smiling, 'Gentlemen, we shall do well to
taste this honest man's wine; belike it is such that we shall not
repent thereof.' Accordingly, he made with them towards Cisti, who let
bring a goodly settle out of his bakehouse and praying them sit, said
to their serving-men, who pressed forward to rinse the beakers, 'Stand
back, friends, and leave this office to me, for that I know no less
well how to skink than to wield the baking-peel; and look you not to
taste a drop thereof.' So saying, he with his own hands washed out
four new and goodly beakers and letting bring a little pitcher of his
good wine, busied himself with giving Messer Geri and his companions
to drink, to whom the wine seemed the best they had drunken that great
while; wherefore they commended it greatly, and well nigh every
morning, whilst the ambassadors abode there, Messer Geri went thither
to drink in company with them.

After awhile, their business being despatched and they about to
depart, Messer Geri made them a magnificent banquet, whereto he bade
a number of the most worshipful citizens and amongst the rest, Cisti,
who would, however, on no condition go thither; whereupon Messer Geri
bade one of his serving-men go fetch a flask of the baker's wine and
give each guest a half beaker thereof with the first course. The
servant, despiteful most like for that he had never availed to drink
of the wine, took a great flagon, which when Cisti saw, 'My son,' said
he, 'Messer Geri sent thee not to me.' The man avouched again and
again that he had, but, getting none other answer, returned to Messer
Geri and reported it to him. Quoth he, 'Go back to him and tell him
that I do indeed send thee to him; and if he still make thee the same
answer, ask him to whom I send thee, [an it be not to him.]'
Accordingly, the servant went back to the baker and said to him,
'Cisti, for certain Messer Geri sendeth me to thee and none other.'
'For certain, my son,' answered the baker, 'he doth it not.' 'Then,'
said the man, 'to whom doth he send me?' 'To the Arno,' replied Cisti;
which answer when the servant reported to Messer Geri, the eyes of his
understanding were of a sudden opened and he said to the man, 'Let me
see what flask thou carriedst thither.'

When he saw the great flagon aforesaid, he said, 'Cisti saith sooth,'
and giving the man a sharp reproof, made him take a sortable flask,
which when Cisti saw, 'Now,' quoth he, 'I know full well that he
sendeth thee to me,' and cheerfully filled it unto him. Then, that
same day, he let fill a little cask with the like wine and causing
carry it softly to Messer Geri's house, went presently thither and
finding him there, said to him, 'Sir. I would not have you think that
the great flagon of this morning frightened me; nay, but, meseeming
that which I have of these past days shown you with my little pitchers
had escaped your mind, to wit, that this is no household wine,[300] I
wished to recall it to you. But, now, for that I purpose no longer to
be your steward thereof, I have sent it all to you; henceforward do
with it as it pleaseth you.' Messer Geri set great store by Cisti's
present and rendering him such thanks as he deemed sortable, ever
after held him for a man of great worth and for friend."

[Footnote 300: Lit. Family wine (_vin da famiglia_), _i.e._ no wine
for servants' or general drinking, but a choice vintage, to be
reserved for special occasions.]




THE THIRD STORY

[Day the Sixth]

     MADAM NONNA DE' PULCI, WITH A READY RETORT TO A NOT
     ALTOGETHER SEEMLY PLEASANTRY, IMPOSETH SILENCE ON THE BISHOP
     OF FLORENCE


Pampinea having made an end of her story and both Cisti's reply and
his liberality having been much commended of all, it pleased the queen
that the next story should be told be Lauretta, who blithely began as
follows, "Jocund ladies, first Pampinea and now Filomena have spoken
truly enough touching our little worth and the excellence of pithy
sayings, whereto that there may be no need now to return, I would
fain remind you, over and above that which hath been said on the
subject, that the nature of smart sayings is such that they should
bite upon the hearer, not as the dog, but as the sheep biteth; for
that, an a trait bit like a dog, it were not a trait, but an affront.
The right mean in this was excellently well hit both by Madam Oretta's
speech and Cisti's reply. It is true that, if a smart thing be said by
way of retort, and the answerer biteth like a dog, having been bitten
on like wise, meseemeth he is not to be blamed as he would have been,
had this not been the case; wherefore it behoveth us look how and with
whom, no less than when and where, we bandy jests; to which
considerations, a prelate of ours, taking too little heed, received at
least as sharp a bite as he thought to give, as I shall show you in a
little story.

Messer Antonio d'Orso, a learned and worthy prelate, being Bishop of
Florence, there came thither a Catalan gentleman, called Messer Dego
della Ratta, marshal for King Robert, who, being a man of a very fine
person and a great amorist, took a liking to one among other
Florentine ladies, a very fair lady and granddaughter to a brother of
the said bishop, and hearing that her husband, albeit a man of good
family, was very sordid and miserly, agreed with him to give him five
hundred gold florins, so he would suffer him lie a night with his
wife. Accordingly, he let gild so many silver poplins,[301] a coin
which was then current, and having lain with the lady, though against
her will, gave them to the husband. The thing after coming to be known
everywhere, the sordid wretch of a husband reaped both loss and scorn,
but the bishop, like a discreet man as he was, affected to know
nothing of the matter. Wherefore, he and the marshal consorting much
together, it chanced, as they rode side by side with each other, one
St. John's Day, viewing the ladies on either side of the way where the
mantle is run for,[302] the prelate espied a young lady,--of whom this
present pestilence hath bereft us and whom all you ladies must have
known, Madam Nonna de' Pulci by name, cousin to Messer Alessio
Rinucci, a fresh and fair young woman, both well-spoken and
high-spirited, then not long before married in Porta San Piero,--and
pointed her out to the marshal; then, being near her, he laid his hand
on the latter's shoulder and said to her, 'Nonna, how deemest thou of
this gallant? Thinkest thou thou couldst make a conquest of him?' It
seemed to the lady that those words somewhat trenched upon her honour
and were like to sully it in the eyes of those (and there were many
there) who heard them; wherefore, not thinking to purge away the soil,
but to return blow for blow, she promptly answered, 'Maybe, sir, he
would not make a conquest of me; but, in any case, I should want good
money.' The marshal and the bishop, hearing this, felt themselves
alike touched to the quick by her speech, the one as the author of
the cheat put upon the bishop's brother's granddaughter and the other
as having suffered the affront in the person of his kinswoman, and
made off, shamefast and silent, without looking at one another or
saying aught more to her that day. Thus, then, the young lady having
been bitten, it was not forbidden her to bite her biter with a
retort."

[Footnote 301: A silver coin of about the size and value of our silver
penny, which, when gilded, would pass muster well enough for a gold
florin, unless closely examined.]

[Footnote 302: _Il palio_, a race anciently run at Florence on St.
John's Day, as that of the Barberi at Rome during the Carnival.]




THE FOURTH STORY

[Day the Sixth]

     CHICHIBIO, COOK TO CURRADO GIANFIGLIAZZI, WITH A READY WORD
     SPOKEN TO SAVE HIMSELF, TURNETH HIS MASTER'S ANGER INTO
     LAUGHTER AND ESCAPETH THE PUNISHMENT THREATENED HIM BY THE
     LATTER


Lauretta being silent and Nonna having been mightily commended of all,
the queen charged Neifile to follow on, and she said, "Although,
lovesome ladies, a ready wit doth often furnish folk with words both
prompt and useful and goodly, according to the circumstances, yet
fortune whiles cometh to the help of the fearful and putteth of a
sudden into their mouths such answers as might never of malice
aforethought be found of the speaker, as I purpose to show you by my
story.

Currado Gianfigliazzi, as each of you ladies may have both heard and
seen, hath still been a noble citizen of our city, liberal and
magnificent, and leading a knightly life, hath ever, letting be for
the present his weightier doings, taken delight in hawks and hounds.
Having one day with a falcon of his brought down a crane and finding
it young and fat, he sent it to a good cook he had, a Venetian hight
Chichibio, bidding him roast it for supper and dress it well.
Chichibio, who looked the new-caught gull he was, trussed the crane
and setting it to the fire, proceeded to cook it diligently. When it
was all but done and gave out a very savoury smell, it chanced that a
wench of the neighbourhood, Brunetta by name, of whom Chichibio was
sore enamoured, entered the kitchen and smelling the crane and seeing
it, instantly besought him to give her a thigh thereof. He answered
her, singing, and said, 'Thou shalt not have it from me, Mistress
Brunetta, thou shalt not have it from me.' Whereat she, being vexed,
said to him, 'By God His faith, an thou give it me not, thou shalt
never have of me aught that shall pleasure thee.' In brief, many were
the words between them and at last, Chichibio, not to anger his
mistress, cut off one of the thighs of the crane and gave it her.

The bird being after set before Messer Currado and certain stranger
guests of his, lacking a thigh, and the former marvelling thereat, he
let call Chichibio and asked him what was come of the other thigh;
whereto the liar of a Venetian answered without hesitation, 'Sir,
cranes have but one thigh and one leg.' 'What a devil?' cried Currado
in a rage. 'They have but one thigh and one leg? Have I never seen a
crane before?' 'Sir,' replied Chichibio, 'it is as I tell you, and
whenas it pleaseth you, I will cause you see it in the quick.'
Currado, out of regard for the strangers he had with him, chose not to
make more words of the matter, but said, 'Since thou sayst thou wilt
cause me see it in the quick, a thing I never yet saw or heard tell
of, I desire to see it to-morrow morning, in which case I shall be
content; but I swear to thee, by Christ His body, that, an it be
otherwise, I will have thee served on such wise that thou shalt still
have cause to remember my name to thy sorrow so long as thou livest.'
There was an end of the talk for that night; but, next morning, as
soon as it was day, Currado, whose anger was nothing abated for sleep,
arose, still full of wrath, and bade bring the horses; then, mounting
Chichibio upon a rouncey, he carried him off towards a watercourse, on
whose banks cranes were still to be seen at break of day, saying, 'We
shall soon see who lied yestereve, thou or I.'

Chichibio, seeing that his master's wrath yet endured and that needs
must be made good his lie and knowing not how he should avail
thereunto, rode after Currado in the greatest fright that might be,
and fain would he have fled, so but he might. But, seeing no way of
escape, he looked now before him and now behind and now on either side
and took all he saw for cranes standing on two feet. Presently, coming
near to the river, he chanced to catch sight, before any other, of a
round dozen of cranes on the bank, all perched on one leg, as they use
to do, when they sleep; whereupon he straightway showed them to
Currado, saying, 'Now, sir, if you look at those that stand yonder,
you may very well see that I told you the truth yesternight, to wit,
that cranes have but one thigh and one leg.' Currado, seeing them,
answered, 'Wait and I will show thee that they have two,' and going
somewhat nearer to them, he cried out, 'Ho! Ho!' At this the cranes,
putting down the other leg, all, after some steps, took to flight;
whereupon Currado said to him, 'How sayst thou now, malapert knave
that thou art? Deemest thou they have two legs?' Chichibio, all
confounded and knowing not whether he stood on his head or his
heels,[303] answered, 'Ay, sir; but you did not cry, "Ho! Ho!" to
yesternight's crane; had you cried thus, it would have put out the
other thigh and the other leg, even as did those yonder.' This reply
so tickled Currado that all his wrath was changed into mirth and
laughter and he said, 'Chichibio, thou art in the right; indeed, I
should have done it.' Thus, then, with his prompt and comical answer
did Chichibio avert ill luck and made his peace with his master."

[Footnote 303: Lit. knowing not whence himself came.]




THE FIFTH STORY

[Day the Sixth]

     MESSER FORESE DA RABATTA AND MASTER GIOTTO THE PAINTER
     COMING FROM MUGELLO, EACH JESTINGLY RALLIETH THE OTHER ON
     HIS SCURVY FAVOUR


Neifile being silent and the ladies having taken much pleasure in
Chichibio's reply, Pamfilo, by the queen's desire, spoke thus:
"Dearest ladies, it chanceth often that, like as fortune whiles hideth
very great treasures of worth and virtue under mean conditions, as
hath been a little before shown by Pampinea, even so, under the
sorriest of human forms are marvellous wits found to have been lodged
by nature; and this very plainly appeared in two townsmen of ours, of
whom I purpose briefly to entertain you. For that the one, who was
called Messer Forese da Rabatta, though little of person and
misshapen, with a flat camoys face, that had been an eyesore on the
shoulders of the foulest cadger in Florence, was yet of such
excellence in the interpretation of the laws, that he was of many men
of worth reputed a very treasury of civil right; whilst the other,
whose name was Giotto, had so excellent a genius that there was
nothing of all which Nature, mother and mover of all things,
presenteth unto us by the ceaseless revolution of the heavens, but he
with pencil and pen and brush depicted it and that so closely that not
like, nay, but rather the thing itself it seemed, insomuch that men's
visual sense is found to have been oftentimes deceived in things of
his fashion, taking that for real which was but depictured. Wherefore,
he having brought back to the light this art, which had for many an
age lain buried under the errors of certain folk who painted more to
divert the eyes of the ignorant than to please the understanding of
the judicious, he may deservedly be styled one of the chief glories of
Florence, the more so that he bore the honours he had gained with the
utmost humility and although, while he lived, chief over all else in
his art, he still refused to be called master, which title, though
rejected by him, shone so much the more gloriously in him as it was
with greater eagerness greedily usurped by those who knew less than
he, or by his disciples. Yet, great as was his skill, he was not
therefore anywise goodlier of person or better favoured than Messer
Forese. But, to come to my story:

I must tell you that Messer Forese and Giotto had each his country
house at Mugello and the former, having gone to visit his estates, at
that season of the summer when the Courts hold holiday, and returning
thence on a sorry cart-horse, chanced to fall in with the aforesaid
Giotto, who had been on the same errand and was then on his way back
to Florence nowise better equipped than himself in horse and
accoutrements. Accordingly, they joined company and fared on softly,
like old men as they were. Presently, it chanced, as we often see it
happen in summer time, that a sudden shower overtook them, from which,
as quickliest they might, they took shelter in the house of a
husbandman, a friend and acquaintance of both of them. After awhile,
the rain showing no sign of giving over and they wishing to reach
Florence by daylight, they borrowed of their host two old homespun
cloaks and two hats, rusty with age, for that there were no better to
be had, and set out again upon their way.

When they had gone awhile and were all drenched and bemired with the
splashing that their hackneys kept up with their hoofs--things which
use not to add worship to any one's looks,--the weather began to clear
a little and the two wayfarers, who had long fared on in silence, fell
to conversing together. Messer Forese, as he rode, hearkening to
Giotto, who was a very fine talker, fell to considering his companion
from head to foot and seeing him everywise so ill accoutred and in
such scurvy case, burst out laughing and without taking any thought to
his own plight, said to him, 'How sayst thou, Giotto? An there
encountered us here a stranger who had never seen thee, thinkest thou
he would believe thee to be, as thou art, the finest painter in the
world?' 'Ay, sir,' answered Giotto forthright, 'methinketh he might
e'en believe it whenas, looking upon you, he should believe that you
knew your A B C.' Messer Forese, hearing this, was sensible of his
error and saw himself paid with money such as the wares he had
sold."[304]

[Footnote 304: Or, as we should say, "in his own coin."]




THE SIXTH STORY

[Day the Sixth]

     MICHELE SCALZA PROVETH TO CERTAIN YOUNG MEN THAT THE CADGERS
     OF FLORENCE ARE THE BEST GENTLEMEN OF THE WORLD OR THE
     MAREMMA AND WINNETH A SUPPER


The ladies yet laughed at Giotto's prompt retort, when the queen
charged Fiammetta follow on and she proceeded to speak thus: "Young
ladies, the mention by Pamfilo of the cadgers of Florence, whom
peradventure you know not as doth he, hath brought to my mind a story,
wherein, without deviating from our appointed theme, it is
demonstrated how great is their nobility; and it pleaseth me,
therefore, to relate it.

It is no great while since there was in our city a young man called
Michele Scalza, who was the merriest and most agreeable man in the
world and he had still the rarest stories in hand, wherefore the young
Florentines were exceeding glad to have his company whenas they made a
party of pleasure amongst themselves. It chanced one day, he being
with certain folk at Monte Ughi, that the question was started among
them of who were the best and oldest gentlemen of Florence. Some said
the Uberti, others the Lamberti, and one this family and another that,
according as it occurred to his mind; which Scalza hearing, he fell
a-laughing and said, 'Go to, addlepates that you are! You know not
what you say. The best gentlemen and the oldest, not only of Florence,
but of all the world or the Maremma,[305] are the Cadgers,[306] a
matter upon which all the phisopholers and every one who knoweth them,
as I do, are of accord; and lest you should understand it of others, I
speak of the Cadgers your neighbors of Santa Maria Maggiore.'

[Footnote 305: A commentator notes that the adjunction to the world of
the Maremma (cf. Elijer Goff, "The Irish Question has for some
centuries been enjoyed by _the universe and other parts_") produces a
risible effect and gives the reader to understand that Scalza broaches
the question only by way of a joke. The same may be said of the
jesting inversion of the word philosophers (phisopholers, Fisofoli) in
the next line.]

[Footnote 306: _Baronci_, the Florentine name for what we should call
professional beggars, "mumpers, chanters and Abrahammen," called
_Bari_ and _Barocci_ in other parts of Italy. This story has been a
prodigious stumbling-block to former translators, not one of whom
appears to have had the slightest idea of Boccaccio's meaning.]

When the young men, who looked for him to say otherwhat, heard this,
they all made mock of him and said, 'Thou gullest us, as if we knew
not the Cadgers, even as thou dost.' 'By the Evangels,' replied
Scalza, 'I gull you not; nay, I speak the truth, and if there be any
here who will lay a supper thereon, to be given to the winner and half
a dozen companions of his choosing, I will willingly hold the wager;
and I will do yet more for you, for I will abide by the judgment of
whomsoever you will.' Quoth one of them, called Neri Mannini, 'I am
ready to try to win the supper in question'; whereupon, having agreed
together to take Piero di Fiorentino, in whose house they were, to
judge, they betook themselves to him, followed by all the rest, who
looked to see Scalza lose and to make merry over his discomfiture, and
recounted to him all that had passed. Piero, who was a discreet young
man, having first heard Neri's argument, turned to Scalza and said to
him, 'And thou, how canst thou prove this that thou affirmest?' 'How,
sayest thou?' answered Scalza. 'Nay, I will prove it by such reasoning
that not only thou, but he who denieth it, shall acknowledge that I
speak sooth. You know that, the ancienter men are, the nobler they
are; and so was it said but now among these. Now the Cadgers are more
ancient than any one else, so that they are nobler; and showing you
how they are the most ancient, I shall undoubtedly have won the wager.
You must know, then, that the Cadgers were made by God the Lord in the
days when He first began to learn to draw; but the rest of mankind
were made after He knew how to draw. And to assure yourselves that in
this I say sooth, do but consider the Cadgers in comparison with other
folk; whereas you see all the rest of mankind with faces well composed
and duly proportioned, you may see the Cadgers, this with a visnomy
very long and strait and with a face out of all measure broad; one
hath too long and another too short a nose and a third hath a chin
jutting out and turned upward and huge jawbones that show as they were
those of an ass, whilst some there be who have one eye bigger than the
other and other some who have one set lower than the other, like the
faces that children used to make, whenas they first begin to learn to
draw. Wherefore, as I have already said, it is abundantly apparent
that God the Lord made them, what time He was learning to draw; so
that they are more ancient and consequently nobler than the rest of
mankind.' At this, both Piero, who was the judge, and Neri, who had
wagered the supper, and all the rest, hearing Scalza's comical
argument and remembering themselves,[307] fell all a-laughing and
affirmed that he was in the right and had won the supper, for that the
Cadgers were assuredly the noblest and most ancient gentlemen that
were to be found not in Florence alone, but in the world or the
Maremma. Wherefore it was very justly said of Pamfilo, seeking to show
the foulness of Messer Forese's visnomy, that it would have showed
notably ugly on one of the Cadgers."

[Footnote 307: _i.e._ of the comical fashion of the Cadgers.]




THE SEVENTH STORY

[Day the Sixth]

     MADAM FILIPPA, BEING FOUND BY HER HUSBAND WITH A LOVER OF
     HERS AND BROUGHT TO JUSTICE, DELIVERETH HERSELF WITH A
     PROMPT AND PLEASANT ANSWER AND CAUSETH MODIFY THE STATUTE


Fiammetta was now silent and all laughed yet at the novel argument
used by Scalza for the ennoblement over all of the Cadgers, when the
queen enjoined Filostrato to tell and he accordingly began to say, "It
is everywise a fine thing, noble ladies, to know how to speak well,
but I hold it yet goodlier to know how to do it whereas necessity
requireth it, even as a gentlewoman, of whom I purpose to entertain
you, knew well how to do on such wise that not only did she afford her
hearers matter for mirth and laughter, but did herself loose from the
toils of an ignominious death, as you shall presently hear.

There was, then, aforetime, in the city of Prato, a statute in truth
no less blameworthy than cruel, which, without making any distinction,
ordained that any woman found by her husband in adultery with any her
lover should be burnt, even as she who should be discovered to have
sold her favours for money. What while this statute was in force, it
befell that a noble and beautiful lady, by name Madam Filippa, who was
of a singularly amorous complexion, was one night found by Rinaldo de'
Pugliesi her husband, in her own chamber in the arms of Lazzerino de'
Guazzagliotri, a noble and handsome youth of that city, whom she loved
even as herself. Rinaldo, seeing this, was sore enraged and scarce
contained himself from falling upon them and slaying them; and but
that he feared for himself, an he should ensue the promptings of his
anger, he had certainly done it. However, he forbore from this, but
could not refrain from seeking of the law of Prato that which it was
not permitted him to accomplish with his own hand, to wit, the death
of his wife. Having, therefore, very sufficient evidence to prove the
lady's default, no sooner was the day come than, without taking other
counsel, he lodged an accusation against her and caused summon her
before the provost.

Madam Filippa, being great of heart, as women commonly are who are
verily in love, resolved, although counselled to the contrary by many
of her friends and kinsfolk, to appear, choosing rather, confessing
the truth, to die with an undaunted spirit, than, meanly fleeing, to
live an outlaw in exile and confess herself unworthy of such a lover
as he in whose arms she had been the foregoing night. Wherefore,
presenting herself before the provost, attended by a great company of
men and ladies and exhorted of all to deny the charge, she demanded,
with a firm voice and an assured air, what he would with her. The
magistrate, looking upon her and seeing her very fair and commendable
of carriage and according as her words testified, of a lofty spirit,
began to have compassion of her, fearing lest she should confess
somewhat wherefore it should behoove him, for his own honour's sake,
condemn her to die. However, having no choice but to question her of
that which was laid to her charge, he said to her, 'Madam, as you see,
here is Rinaldo your husband, who complaineth of you, avouching
himself to have found you in adultery with another man and demanding
that I should punish you therefor by putting you to death, according
to the tenor of a statute which here obtaineth; but this I cannot do,
except you confess it; wherefore look well what you answer and tell me
if that be true whereof your husband impeacheth you.'

The lady, no wise dismayed, replied very cheerfully, 'Sir, true it is
that Rinaldo is my husband and that he found me last night in the arms
of Lazzarino, wherein, for the great and perfect love I bear him, I
have many a time been; nor am I anywise minded to deny this. But, as I
am assured you know, laws should be common to all and made with the
consent of those whom they concern; and this is not the case with this
statute, which is binding only upon us unhappy women, who might far
better than men avail to satisfy many; more by token that, when it was
made, not only did no woman yield consent thereunto, but none of us
was even cited to do so; wherefore it may justly be styled naught.
However, an you choose, to the prejudice of my body and of your own
soul, to be the executor of this unrighteous law, it resteth with you
to do so; but, ere you proceed to adjudge aught, I pray you do me one
slight favour, to wit, that you question my husband if at all times
and as often as it pleased him, without ever saying him nay, I have or
not vouchsafed him entire commodity of myself.'

Rinaldo, without waiting to be questioned of the provost, straightway
made answer that undoubtedly the lady had, at his every request,
accorded him his every pleasure of herself; whereupon, 'Then, my lord
provost,' straightway rejoined she, 'if he have still taken of me that
which was needful and pleasing to him, what, I ask you, was or am I to
do with that which remaineth over and above his requirements? Should I
cast it to the dogs? Was it not far better to gratify withal a
gentleman who loveth me more than himself, than to leave it waste or
spoil?' Now well nigh all the people of Prato had flocked thither to
the trial of such a matter and of so fair and famous a lady, and
hearing so comical a question, they all, after much laughter, cried
out as with one voice that she was in the right of it and that she
said well. Moreover, ere they departed thence, at the instance of the
provost, they modified the cruel statute and left it to apply to those
women only who should for money make default to their husbands.
Thereupon Rinaldo, having taken nought but shame by so fond an
emprise, departed the court, and the lady returned in triumph to her
own house, joyful and free and in a manner raised up out of the fire."




THE EIGHTH STORY

[Day the Sixth]

     FRESCO EXHORTETH HIS NIECE NOT TO MIRROR HERSELF IN THE
     GLASS, IF, AS SHE SAITH, IT IRKETH HER TO SEE DISAGREEABLE
     FOLK


The story told by Filostrato at first touched the hearts of the
listening ladies with some little shamefastness and they gave token
thereof by a modest redness that appeared upon their faces; but, after
looking one at another, they hearkened thereto, tittering the while
and scarce able to abstain from laughing. As soon as he was come to
the end thereof, the queen turned to Emilia and bade her follow on,
whereupon, sighing no otherwise than as she had been aroused from a
dream, she began, "Lovesome lasses, for that long thought hath held me
far from here, I shall, to obey our queen content myself with
[relating] a story belike much slighter than that which I might have
bethought myself to tell, had my mind been present here, recounting to
you the silly default of a damsel, corrected by an uncle of hers with
a jocular retort, had she been woman enough to have apprehended it.

A certain Fresco da Celatico, then, had a niece familiarly called
Ciesca,[308] who, having a comely face and person (though none of
those angelical beauties that we have often seen aforetime), set so
much store by herself and accounted herself so noble that she had
gotten a habit of carping at both men and women and everything she
saw, without anywise taking thought to herself, who was so much more
fashous, froward and humoursome than any other of her sex that nothing
could be done to her liking. Beside all this, she was so prideful
that, had she been of the blood royal of France, it had been
overweening; and when she went abroad, she gave herself so many airs
that she did nought but make wry faces, as if there came to her a
stench from whomsoever she saw or met. But, letting be many other
vexatious and tiresome fashions of hers, it chanced one day that she
came back to the house, where Fresco was, and seating herself near
him, all full of airs and grimaces, did nothing but puff and blow;
whereupon quoth he, 'What meaneth this, Ciesca, that, to-day being a
holiday, thou comest home so early?' To which she answered, all like
to die away with affectation, 'It is true I have come back soon, for
that I believe there were never in this city so many disagreeable and
tiresome people, both men and women, as there are to-day; there
passeth none about the streets but is hateful to me as ill-chance, and
I do not believe there is a woman in the world to whom it is more
irksome to see disagreeable folk than it is to me; wherefore I have
returned thus early, not to see them.' 'My lass,' rejoined Fresco, to
whom his niece's airs and graces were mighty displeasing, 'if
disagreeable folk be so distasteful to thee as thou sayest, never
mirror thyself in the glass, so thou wouldst live merry.' But she,
emptier than a reed, albeit herseemed she was a match for Solomon in
wit, apprehended Fresco's true speech no better than a block; nay, she
said that she chose to mirror herself in the glass like other women;
and so she abode in her folly and therein abideth yet."

[Footnote 308: An abbreviation of Francesca.]




THE NINTH STORY

[Day the Sixth]

     GUIDO CAVALCANTI WITH A PITHY SPEECH COURTEOUSLY FLOUTETH
     CERTAIN FLORENTINE GENTLEMEN WHO HAD TAKEN HIM BY SURPRISE


The queen, seeing Emilia delivered of her story and that it rested
with none other than herself to tell, saving him who was privileged to
speak last, began thus, "Although, sprightly ladies, you have this day
taken out of my mouth at the least two stories, whereof I had purposed
to relate one, I have yet one left to tell, the end whereof compriseth
a saying of such a fashion that none, peradventure, of such
pertinence, hath yet been cited to us.

You must know, then, that there were in our city, of times past, many
goodly and commendable usances, whereof none is left there nowadays,
thanks to the avarice that hath waxed therein with wealth and hath
banished them all. Among these there was a custom to the effect that
the gentlemen of the various quarters of Florence assembled together
in divers places about the town and formed themselves into companies
of a certain number, having a care to admit thereinto such only as
might aptly bear the expense, whereof to-day the one and to-morrow the
other, and so all in turn, hold open house, each his day, for the
whole company. At these banquets they often entertained both stranger
gentlemen, whenas there came any thither, and those of the city; and
on like wise, once at the least in the year, they clad themselves
alike and rode in procession through the city on the most notable days
and whiles they held passes of arms, especially on the chief holidays
or whenas some glad news of victory or the like came to the city.

Amongst these companies was one of Messer Betto Brunelleschi,
whereinto the latter and his companions had studied amain to draw
Guido, son of Messer Cavalcante de' Cavalcanti, and not without cause;
for that, besides being one of the best logicians in the world and an
excellent natural philosopher (of which things, indeed, they recked
little), he was very sprightly and well-bred and a mighty well-spoken
man and knew better than any other to do everything that he would and
that pertained unto a gentleman, more by token that he was very rich
and knew wonder-well how to entertain whomsoever he deemed deserving
of honour. But Messer Betto had never been able to win and to have
him, and he and his companions believed that this betided for that
Guido, being whiles engaged in abstract speculations, became much
distraught from mankind; and for that he inclined somewhat to the
opinion of the Epicureans, it was reported among the common folk that
these his speculations consisted only in seeking if it might be
discovered that God was not.

It chanced one day that Guido set out from Orto San Michele and came
by way of the Corso degli Ademari, the which was oftentimes his road,
to San Giovanni, round about which there were at that present divers
great marble tombs (which are nowadays at Santa Reparata) and many
others. As he was between the columns of porphyry there and the tombs
in question and the door of the church, which was shut, Messer Betto
and his company, coming a-horseback along the Piazza di Santa
Reparata, espied him among the tombs and said, 'Let us go plague him.'
Accordingly, spurring their horses, they charged all down upon him in
sport and coming upon him ere he was aware of them, said to him,
'Guido, thou refusest to be of our company; but, harkye, whenas thou
shalt have found that God is not, what wilt thou have accomplished?'
Guido, seeing himself hemmed in by them, answered promptly,
'Gentlemen, you may say what you will to me in your own house'; then,
laying his hand on one of the great tombs aforesaid and being very
nimble of body, he took a spring and alighting on the other side, made
off, having thus rid himself of them.

The gentlemen abode looking one upon another and fell a-saying that he
was a crack-brain and that this that he had answered them amounted to
nought seeing that there where they were they had no more to do than
all the other citizens, nor Guido himself less than any of themselves.
But Messer Betto turned to them and said, 'It is you who are the
crackbrains, if you have not apprehended him. He hath courteously and
in a few words given us the sharpest rebuke in the world; for that, an
you consider aright, these tombs are the houses of the dead, seeing
they are laid and abide therein, and these, saith he, are our house,
meaning thus to show us that we and other foolish and unlettered men
are, compared with him and other men of learning, worse than dead
folk; wherefore, being here, we are in our own house.' Thereupon each
understood what Guido had meant to say and was abashed nor ever
plagued him more, but held Messer Betto thenceforward a gentleman of a
subtle wit and an understanding."




THE TENTH STORY

[Day the Sixth]

     FRA CIPOLLA PROMISETH CERTAIN COUNTRY FOLK TO SHOW THEM ONE
     OF THE ANGEL GABRIEL'S FEATHERS AND FINDING COALS IN PLACE
     THEREOF, AVOUCHETH THESE LATTER TO BE OF THOSE WHICH ROASTED
     ST. LAWRENCE


Each of the company being now quit of his[309] story, Dioneo perceived
that it rested with him to tell; whereupon, without awaiting more
formal commandment, he began on this wise, silence having first been
imposed on those who commended Guido's pregnant retort: "Charming
ladies, albeit I am privileged to speak of that which most liketh me,
I purpose not to-day to depart from the matter whereof you have all
very aptly spoken; but, ensuing in your footsteps, I mean to show you
how cunningly a friar of the order of St. Anthony, by name Fra
Cipolla, contrived with a sudden shift to extricate himself from a
snare[310] which had been set for him by two young men; nor should it
irk you if, for the complete telling of the story, I enlarge somewhat
in speaking, an you consider the sun, which is yet amiddleward in the
sky.

[Footnote 309: "Or her."]

[Footnote 310: Lit. to avoid or elude a scorn (_fuggire uno scorno_).]

Certaldo, as you may have heard, is a burgh of Val d' Elsa situate in
our country, which, small though it be, was once inhabited by
gentlemen and men of substance; and thither, for that he found good
pasture there, one of the friars of the order of St. Anthony was long
used to resort once a year, to get in the alms bestowed by simpletons
upon him and his brethren. His name was Fra Cipolla and he was gladly
seen there, no less belike, for his name's sake[311] than for other
reasons, seeing that these parts produce onions that are famous
throughout all Tuscany. This Fra Cipolla was little of person,
red-haired and merry of countenance, the jolliest rascal in the world,
and to boot, for all he was no scholar, he was so fine a talker and so
ready of wit that those who knew him not would not only have esteemed
him a great rhetorician, but had avouched him to be Tully himself or
may be Quintilian; and he was gossip or friend or well-wisher[312] to
well nigh every one in the country.

[Footnote 311: _Cipolla_ means onion.]

[Footnote 312: The term "well-wisher" (_benivogliente_), when
understood in relation to a woman, is generally equivalent (at least
with the older Italian writers) to "lover." See ante, passim.]

One August among others he betook himself thither according to his
wont, and on a Sunday morning, all the goodmen and goodwives of the
villages around being come to hear mass at the parish church, he came
forward, whenas it seemed to him time, and said, 'Gentlemen and
ladies, it is, as you know, your usance to send every year to the poor
of our lord Baron St. Anthony of your corn and of your oats, this
little and that much, according to his means and his devoutness, to
the intent that the blessed St. Anthony may keep watch over your
beeves and asses and swine and sheep; and besides this, you use to
pay, especially such of you as are inscribed into our company, that
small due which is payable once a year. To collect these I have been
sent by my superior, to wit, my lord abbot; wherefore, with the
blessing of God, you shall, after none, whenas you hear the bells
ring, come hither without the church, where I will make preachment to
you after the wonted fashion and you shall kiss the cross; moreover,
for that I know you all to be great devotees of our lord St. Anthony,
I will, as an especial favour show you a very holy and goodly relic,
which I myself brought aforetime from the holy lands beyond seas; and
that is one of the Angel Gabriel's feathers, which remained in the
Virgin Mary's chamber, whenas he came to announce to her in Nazareth.'
This said, he broke off and went on with his mass.

Now, when he said this, there were in the church, among many others,
two roguish young fellows, hight one Giovanni del Bragioniera and the
other Biagio Pizzini, who, after laughing with one another awhile over
Fra Cipolla's relic, took counsel together, for all they were great
friends and cronies of his, to play him some trick in the matter of
the feather in question. Accordingly, having learned that he was to
dine that morning with a friend of his in the burgh, they went down
into the street as soon as they knew him to be at table, and betook
themselves to the inn where he had alighted, purposing that Biagio
should hold his servant in parley, whilst Giovanni should search his
baggage for the feather aforesaid, whatever it might be, and carry it
off, to see what he should say to the people of the matter.

Fra Cipolla had a servant, whom some called Guccio[313] Balena,[314]
others Guccio Imbratta[315] and yet others Guccia Porco[316] and who
was such a scurvy knave that Lipo Topo[317] never wrought his like,
inasmuch as his master used oftentimes to jest of him with his cronies
and say, 'My servant hath in him nine defaults, such that, were one of
them in Solomon or Aristotle or Seneca, it would suffice to mar all
their worth, all their wit and all their sanctity. Consider, then,
what a man he must be, who hath all nine of them and in whom there is
neither worth nor wit nor sanctity.' Being questioned whiles what were
these nine defaults and having put them into doggerel rhyme, he would
answer, 'I will tell you. He's a liar, a sloven, a slugabed;
disobedient, neglectful, ill bred; o'erweening, foul-spoken, a
dunderhead; beside which he hath divers other peccadilloes, whereof it
booteth not to speak. But what is most laughable of all his fashions
is that, wherever he goeth, he is still for taking a wife and hiring a
house; for, having a big black greasy beard, him-seemeth he is so
exceeding handsome and agreeable that he conceiteth himself all the
women who see him fall in love with him, and if you let him alone, he
would run after them all till he lost his girdle.[318] Sooth to say,
he is of great assistance to me, for that none can ever seek to speak
with me so secretly but he must needs hear his share; and if it chance
that I be questioned of aught, he is so fearful lest I should not know
how to answer, that he straightway answereth for me both Ay and No, as
he judgeth sortable.'

[Footnote 313: Diminutive of contempt of Arrigo, contracted from
Arriguccio, _i.e._ mean little Arrigo.]

[Footnote 314: _i.e._ Whale.]

[Footnote 315: _i.e._ Dirt.]

[Footnote 316: _i.e._ Hog.]

[Footnote 317: A painter of Boccaccio's time, of whom little or
nothing seems to be known.]

[Footnote 318: _Perpendo lo coreggia._ The exact meaning of this
passage is not clear. The commentators make sundry random shots at it,
but, as usual, only succeed in making confusion worse confounded. It
may perhaps be rendered, "till his wind failed him."]

Now Fra Cipolla, in leaving him at the inn, had bidden him look well
that none touched his gear, and more particularly his saddle-bags, for
that therein were the sacred things. But Guccio, who was fonder of the
kitchen than the nightingale of the green boughs, especially if he
scented some serving-wench there, and who had seen in that of the inn
a gross fat cookmaid, undersized and ill-made, with a pair of paps
that showed like two manure-baskets and a face like a cadger's, all
sweaty, greasy and smoky, leaving Fra Cipolla's chamber and all his
gear to care for themselves, swooped down upon the kitchen, even as
the vulture swoopeth upon carrion, and seating himself by the fire,
for all it was August, entered into discourse with the wench in
question, whose name was Nuta, telling her that he was by rights a
gentleman and had more than nine millions of florins, beside that
which he had to give others, which was rather more than less, and that
he could do and say God only knew what. Moreover, without regard to
his bonnet, whereon was grease enough to have seasoned the caldron of
Altopascio,[319] and his doublet all torn and pieced and enamelled
with filth about the collar and under the armpits, with more spots and
patches of divers colours than ever had Turkey or India stuffs, and
his shoes all broken and hose unsewn, he told her, as he had been the
Sieur de ChÃ¢tillon,[320] that he meant to clothe her and trick her out
anew and deliver her from the wretchedness of abiding with
others,[321] and bring her to hope of better fortune, if without any
great wealth in possession, and many other things, which, for all he
delivered them very earnestly, all turned to wind and came to nought,
as did most of his enterprises.

[Footnote 319: Said by the commentators to have been an abbey, where
they made cheese-soup for all comers twice a week; hence "the caldron
of Altopascio" became a proverb; but _quÃ¦re_ is not the name
Altopascio (high feeding) a fancy one?]

[Footnote 320: It does not appear to which member of this great house
Boccaccio here alludes, but the ChÃ¢tillons were always rich and
magnificent gentlemen, from Gaucher de ChÃ¢tillon, who followed Philip
Augustus to the third crusade, to the great Admiral de Coligny.]

[Footnote 321: Sic (_star con altrui_); but "being in the service of
or dependent upon others" seems to be the probable meaning.]

The two young men, accordingly, found Guccio busy about Nuta, whereat
they were well pleased, for that it spared them half their pains, and
entering Fra Cipolla's chamber, which they found open, the first thing
that came under their examination was the saddle-bags wherein was the
feather. In these they found, enveloped in a great taffetas wrapper,
a little casket and opening this latter, discovered therein a parrot's
tail-feather, which they concluded must be that which the friar had
promised to show the people of Certaldo. And certes he might lightly
cause it to be believed in those days, for that the refinements of
Egypt had not yet made their way save into a small part of Tuscany, as
they have since done in very great abundance, to the undoing of all
Italy; and wherever they may have been some little known, in those
parts they were well nigh altogether unknown of the inhabitants; nay
the rude honesty of the ancients yet enduring there, not only had they
never set eyes on a parrot, but were far from having ever heard tell
of such a bird. The young men, then, rejoiced at finding the feather,
laid hands on it and not to leave the casket empty, filled it with
some coals they saw in a corner of the room and shut it again. Then,
putting all things in order as they had found them, they made off in
high glee with the feather, without having been seen, and began to
await what Fra Cipolli should say, when he found the coals in place
thereof.

The simple men and women who were in the church, hearing that they
were to see the Angel Gabriel's feather after none, returned home, as
soon as mass was over, and neighbor telling it to neighbor and gossip
to gossip, no sooner had they all dined than so many men and women
flocked to the burgh that it would scarce hold them, all looking
eagerly to see the aforesaid feather. Fra Cipolla, having well dined
and after slept awhile, arose a little after none and hearing of the
great multitude of country folk come to see the feather, sent to bid
Guccio Imbratta come thither with the bells and bring his saddle-bags.
Guccio, tearing himself with difficulty away from the kitchen and
Nuta, betook himself with the things required to the appointed place,
whither coming, out of breath, for that the water he had drunken had
made his belly swell amain, he repaired, by his master's commandment,
to the church door and fell to ringing the bells lustily.

When all the people were assembled there, Fra Cipolla, without
observing that aught of his had been meddled with, began his
preachment and said many words anent his affairs; after which,
thinking to come to the showing of the Angel Gabriel's feather, he
first recited the Confiteor with the utmost solemnity and let kindle a
pair of flambeaux; then, pulling off his bonnet, he delicately
unfolded the taffetas wrapper and brought out the casket. Having first
pronounced certain ejaculations in praise and commendation of the
Angel Gabriel and of his relic, he opened the casket and seeing it
full of coals, suspected not Guccio Balena of having played him this
trick, for that he knew him not to be man enough; nor did he curse him
for having kept ill watch lest others should do it, but silently
cursed himself for having committed to him the care of his gear,
knowing him, as he did, to be negligent, disobedient, careless and
forgetful.

Nevertheless, without changing colour, he raised his eyes and hands to
heaven and said, so as to be heard of all, 'O God, praised be still
thy puissance!' Then, shutting the casket and turning to the people,
'Gentlemen and ladies,' quoth he, 'you must know that, whilst I was
yet very young, I was dispatched by my superior to those parts where
the sun riseth and it was expressly commanded me that I should seek
till I found the Privileges of Porcellana, which, though they cost
nothing to seal, are much more useful to others than to us. On this
errand I set out from Venice and passed through Borgo de' Greci,[322]
whence, riding through the kingdom of Algarve and Baldacca,[323] I
came to Parione,[324] and from there, not without thirst, I came after
awhile into Sardinia. But what booteth it to set out to you in detail
all the lands explored by me? Passing the straits of San Giorgio,[325]
I came into Truffia[326] and Buffia,[327] countries much inhabited and
with great populations, and thence into the land of Menzogna,[328]
where I found great plenty of our brethren and of friars of other
religious orders, who all went about those parts, shunning unease for
the love of God, recking little of others' travail, whenas they saw
their own advantage to ensue, and spending none other money than such
as was uncoined.[329] Thence I passed into the land of the Abruzzi,
where the men and women go in clogs over the mountains, clothing the
swine in their own guts;[330] and a little farther I found folk who
carried bread on sticks and wine in bags. From this I came to the
Mountains of the Bachi, where all the waters run down hill; and in
brief, I made my way so far inward that I won at last even to India
Pastinaca,[331] where I swear to you, by the habit I wear on my back,
that I saw hedge-bills[332] fly, a thing incredible to whoso hath not
seen it. But of this Maso del Saggio will confirm me, whom I found
there a great merchant, cracking walnuts and selling the shells by
retail.

[Footnote 322: Apparently the Neapolitan town of that name.]

[Footnote 323: The name of a famous tavern in Florence (_Florio_).]

[Footnote 324: _QuÃ¦re_ a place in Florence? One of the commentators,
with characteristic carelessness, states that the places mentioned in
the preachment of Fra Cipolla (an amusing specimen of the
patter-sermon of the mendicant friar of the middle ages, that
ecclesiastical Cheap Jack of his day) are all names of streets or
places of Florence, a statement which, it is evident to the most
cursory reader, is altogether inaccurate.]

[Footnote 325: Apparently the island of that name near Venice.]

[Footnote 326: _i.e._ Nonsense-land.]

[Footnote 327: _i.e._ Land of Tricks or Cozenage.]

[Footnote 328: _i.e._ Falsehood, Lie-land.]

[Footnote 329: _i.e._ paying their way with fine words, instead of
coin.]

[Footnote 330: _i.e._ making sausages of them.]

[Footnote 331: _Bachi_, drones or maggots. _Pastinaca_ means "parsnip"
and is a meaningless addition of Fra Cipolla's fashion.]

[Footnote 332: A play of words upon the primary meaning (winged
things) of the word _pennate_, hedge-bills.]

Being unable to find that which I went seeking, for that thence one
goeth thither by water, I turned back and arrived in those holy
countries, where, in summer-years, cold bread is worth four farthings
a loaf and the hot goeth for nothing. There I found the venerable
father my lord Blamemenot Anitpleaseyou, the very worshipful Patriarch
of Jerusalem, who, for reverence of the habit I have still worn of my
lord Baron St. Anthony, would have me see all the holy relics that he
had about him and which were so many that, an I sought to recount
them all to you, I should not come to an end thereof in several miles.
However, not to leave you disconsolate, I will tell you some thereof.
First, he showed me the finger of the Holy Ghost, as whole and sound
as ever it was, and the forelock of the seraph that appeared to St.
Francis and one of the nails of the Cherubim and one of the ribs of
the Verbum Caro[333] Get-thee-to-the-windows and some of the vestments
of the Holy Catholic Faith and divers rays of the star that appeared
to the Three Wise Men in the East and a vial of the sweat of St.
Michael, whenas he fought with the devil, and the jawbone of the death
of St. Lazarus and others. And for that I made him a free gift of the
Steeps[334] of Monte Morello in the vernacular and of some chapters of
the Caprezio,[335] which he had long gone seeking, he made me a sharer
in his holy relics and gave me one of the teeth of the Holy Rood and
somewhat of the sound of the bells of Solomon's Temple in a vial and
the feather of the Angel Gabriel, whereof I have already bespoken you,
and one of the pattens of St. Gherardo da Villa Magna, which not long
since at Florence I gave to Gherardo di Bonsi, who hath a particular
devotion for that saint; and he gave me also of the coals wherewith
the most blessed martyr St. Lawrence was roasted; all which things I
devoutly brought home with me and yet have. True it is that my
superior hath never suffered me to show them till such time as he
should be certified if they were the very things or not. But now that,
by certain miracles performed by them and by letters received from the
patriarch, he hath been made certain of this, he hath granted me leave
to show them; and I, fearing to trust them to others, still carry them
with me.

[Footnote 333: _i.e._ The Word [made] flesh. Get-thee-to-the-windows
is only a patter tag.]

[Footnote 334: Or Slopes or Coasts (_piaggie_).]

[Footnote 335: ?]

Now I carry the Angel Gabriel's feather, so it may not be marred, in
one casket, and the coals wherewith St. Lawrence was roasted in
another, the which are so like one to other, that it hath often
happened to me to take one for the other, and so hath it betided me at
this present, for that, thinking to bring hither the casket wherein
was the feather, I have brought that wherein are the coals. The which
I hold not to have been an error; nay, meseemeth certain that it was
God's will and that He Himself placed the casket with the coals in my
hands, especially now I mind me that the feast of St. Lawrence is but
two days hence; wherefore God, willing that, by showing you the coals
wherewith he was roasted, I should rekindle in your hearts the
devotion it behoveth you have for him, caused me take, not the
feather, as I purposed, but the blessed coals extinguished by the
sweat of that most holy body. So, O my blessed children, put off your
bonnets and draw near devoutly to behold them; but first I would have
you knew that whoso is scored with these coals, in the form of the
sign of the cross, may rest assured, for the whole year to come, that
fire shall not touch him but he shall feel it.'

Having thus spoken, he opened the casket, chanting the while a
canticle in praise of St. Lawrence, and showed the coals, which after
the simple multitude had awhile beheld with reverent admiration, they
all crowded about Fra Cipolla and making him better offerings than
they were used, besought him to touch them withal. Accordingly, taking
the coals in hand, he fell to making the biggest crosses for which he
could find room upon their white smocks and doublets and upon the
veils of the women, avouching that how much soever the coals
diminished in making these crosses, they after grew again in the
casket, as he had many a time proved. On this wise he crossed all the
people of Certaldo, to his no small profit, and thus, by his ready wit
and presence of mind, he baffled those who, by taking the feather from
him, had thought to baffle him and who, being present at his
preachment and hearing the rare shift employed by him and from how far
he had taken it and with what words, had so laughed that they thought
to have cracked their jaws. Then, after the common folk had departed,
they went up to him and with all the mirth in the world discovered to
him that which they had done and after restored him his feather, which
next year stood him in as good stead as the coals had done that day."



This story afforded unto all the company alike the utmost pleasure and
solace, and it was much laughed of all at Fra Cipolla, and
particularly of his pilgrimage and the relics seen and brought back by
him. The queen, seeing the story and likewise her sovantry at an end,
rose to her feet and put off the crown, which she set laughingly on
Dioneo's head, saying, "It is time, Dioneo, that thou prove awhile
what manner charge it is to have ladies to govern and guide; be thou,
then, king and rule on such wise that, in the end, we may have reason
to give ourselves joy of thy governance." Dioneo took the crown and
answered, laughing, "You may often enough have seen much better kings
than I, I mean chess-kings; but, an you obey me as a king should in
truth be obeyed, I will cause you enjoy that without which assuredly
no entertainment is ever complete in its gladness. But let that talk
be; I will rule as best I know."

Then, sending for the seneschal, according to the wonted usance, he
orderly enjoined him of that which he should do during the continuance
of his seignory and after said, "Noble ladies, it hath in divers
manners been devised of human industry[336] and of the various chances
[of fortune,] insomuch that, had not Dame Licisca come hither a while
agone and found me matter with her prate for our morrow's relations, I
misdoubt me I should have been long at pains to find a subject of
discourse. As you heard, she avouched that she had not a single gossip
who had come to her husband a maid and added that she knew right well
how many and what manner tricks married women yet played their
husbands. But, letting be the first part, which is a childish matter,
methinketh the second should be an agreeable subject for discourse;
wherefore I will and ordain it that, since Licisca hath given us
occasion therefor, it be discoursed to-morrow OF THE TRICKS WHICH, OR
FOR LOVE OR FOR THEIR OWN PRESERVATION, WOMEN HAVE HERETOFORE PLAYED
THEIR HUSBANDS, WITH OR WITHOUT THE LATTER'S COGNIZANCE THEREOF."

[Footnote 336: _Industria_ in the old sense of ingenuity, skilful
procurement, etc.]

It seemed to some of the ladies that to discourse of such a matter
would ill beseem them and they prayed him, therefore, to change the
theme proposed; wherefore answered he, "Ladies, I am no less cognizant
than yourselves of that which I have ordained, and that which you
would fain allege to me availed not to deter me from ordaining it,
considering that the times are such that, provided men and women are
careful to eschew unseemly actions, all liberty of discourse is
permitted. Know you not that, for the malignity of the season, the
judges have forsaken the tribunals, that the laws, as well Divine as
human, are silent and full licence is conceded unto every one for the
preservation of his life? Wherefore, if your modesty allow itself some
little freedom in discourse, not with intent to ensue it with aught of
unseemly in deeds, but to afford yourselves and others diversion, I
see not with what plausible reason any can blame you in the future.
Moreover, your company, from the first day of our assembling until
this present, hath been most decorous, nor, for aught that hath been
said here, doth it appear to me that its honour hath anywise been
sullied. Again, who is there knoweth not your virtue? Which, not to
say mirthful discourse, but even fear of death I do not believe could
avail to shake. And to tell you the truth, whosoever should hear that
you shrank from devising bytimes of these toys would be apt to suspect
that you were guilty in the matter and were therefore unwilling to
discourse thereof. To say nothing of the fine honour you would do me
in that, I having been obedient unto all, you now, having made me your
king, seek to lay down the law to me, and not to discourse of the
subject which I propose. Put off, then, this misdoubtance, apter to
mean minds than to yours, and good luck to you, let each of you
bethink herself of some goodly story to tell." When the ladies heard
this, they said it should be as he pleased; whereupon he gave them all
leave to do their several pleasures until supper-time.

The sun was yet high, for that the discoursement[337] had been brief;
wherefor Dioneo having addressed himself to play at tables with the
other young men, Elisa called the other ladies apart and said to them,
"Since we have been here, I have still wished to carry you to a place
very near at hand, whither methinketh none of you hath ever been and
which is called the Ladies' Valley, but have never yet found an
occasion of bringing you thither unto to-day; wherefore, as the sun is
yet high, I doubt not but, an it please you come thither, you will be
exceeding well pleased to have been there." They answered that they
were ready and calling one of their maids, set out upon their way,
without letting the young men know aught thereof; nor had they gone
much more than a mile, when they came to the Ladies' Valley. They
entered therein by a very strait way, on one side whereof ran a very
clear streamlet, and saw it as fair and as delectable, especially at
that season whenas the heat was great, as most might be conceived.
According to that which one of them after told me, the plain that was
in the valley was as round as if it had been traced with the compass,
albeit it seemed the work of nature and not of art, and was in circuit
a little more than half a mile, encompassed about with six little
hills not over-high, on the summit of each of which stood a palace
builded in guise of a goodly castle. The sides of these hills went
sloping gradually downward to the plain on such wise as we see in
amphitheatres, the degrees descend in ordered succession from the
highest to the lowest, still contracting their circuit; and of these
slopes those which looked toward the south were all full of vines and
olives and almonds and cherries and figs and many another kind of
fruit-bearing trees, without a span thereof being wasted; whilst those
which faced the North Star[338] were all covered with thickets of
dwarf oaks and ashes and other trees as green and straight as might
be. The middle plain, which had no other inlet than that whereby the
ladies were come thither, was full of firs and cypresses and laurels
and various sorts of pines, as well arrayed and ordered as if the best
artist in that kind had planted them; and between these little or no
sun, even at its highest, made its way to the ground, which was all
one meadow of very fine grass, thick-sown with flowers purpurine and
others. Moreover, that which afforded no less delight than otherwhat
was a little stream, which ran down from a valley that divided two of
the hills aforesaid and falling over cliffs of live rock, made a
murmur very delectable to hear, what while it showed from afar, as it
broke over the stones, like so much quicksilver jetting out, under
pressure of somewhat, into fine spray. As it came down into the little
plain, it was there received into a fair channel and ran very swiftly
into the middest thereof, where it formed a lakelet, such as the
townsfolk made whiles, by way of fishpond, in their gardens, whenas
they have a commodity thereof. This lakelet was no deeper than a man's
stature, breast high, and its waters being exceeding clear and
altogether untroubled with any admixture, it showed its bottom to be
of a very fine gravel, the grains whereof whoso had nought else to do
might, an he would, have availed to number; nor, looking into the
water, was the bottom alone to be seen, nay, but so many fish fleeting
hither and thither that, over and above the pleasure thereof, it was a
marvel to behold; nor was it enclosed with other banks than the very
soil of the meadow, which was the goodlier thereabout in so much as it
received the more of its moisture. The water that abounded over and
above the capacity of the lake was received into another channel,
whereby, issuing forth of the little valley, it ran off into the lower
parts.

[Footnote 337: _i.e._ the tale-telling.]

[Footnote 338: Lit. the northern chariot (_carro di tramontana_);
_quÃ¦re_ the Great Bear?]

Hither then came the young ladies and after they had gazed all about
and much commended the place, they took counsel together to bathe, for
that the heat was great and that they saw the lakelet before them and
were in no fear of being seen. Accordingly, bidding their serving
maid abide over against the way whereby one entered there and look if
any should come and give them notice thereof, they stripped themselves
naked, all seven, and entered the lake, which hid their white bodies
no otherwise than as a thin glass would do with a vermeil rose. Then,
they being therein and no troubling of the water ensuing thereof, they
fell, as best they might, to faring hither and thither in pursuit of
the fish, which had uneath where to hide themselves, and seeking to
take them with the naked hand. After they had abidden awhile in such
joyous pastime and had taken some of the fish, they came forth of the
lakelet and clad themselves anew. Then, unable to commend the place
more than they had already done and themseeming time to turn homeward,
they set out, with soft step, upon their way, discoursing much of the
goodliness of the valley.

They reached the palace betimes and there found the young men yet at
play where they had left them; to whom quoth Pampinea, laughing. "We
have e'en stolen a march on you to-day." "How?" asked Dioneo. "Do you
begin to do deeds ere you come to say words?"[339] "Ay, my lord,"
answered she and related to him at large whence they came and how the
place was fashioned and how far distant thence and that which they had
done. The king, hearing tell of the goodliness of the place and
desirous of seeing it, caused straightway order the supper, which
being dispatched to the general satisfaction, the three young men,
leaving the ladies, betook themselves with their servants to the
valley and having viewed it in every part, for that none of them had
ever been there before, extolled it for one of the goodliest things in
the world. Then, for that it grew late, after they had bathed and
donned their clothes, they returned home, where they found the ladies
dancing a round, to the accompaniment of a song sung by Fiammetta.

[Footnote 339: Alluding to the subject fixed for the next day's
discourse, as who should say, "Have you begun already to play tricks
upon us men in very deed, ere you tell about them in words?"]

The dance ended, they entered with them into a discourse of the
Ladies' Valley and said much in praise and commendation thereof.
Moreover, the king, sending for the seneschal, bade him look that the
dinner be made ready there on the following morning and have sundry
beds carried thither, in case any should have a mind to lie or sleep
there for nooning; after which he let bring lights and wine and
confections and the company having somedele refreshed themselves, he
commanded that all should address themselves to dancing. Then, Pamfilo
having, at his commandment, set up a dance, the king turned to Elisa
and said courteously to her, "Fair damsel, thou has to-day done me the
honour of the crown and I purpose this evening to do thee that of the
song; wherefore look thou sing such an one as most liketh thee." Elisa
answered, smiling, that she would well and with dulcet voice began on
this wise:

       Love, from thy clutches could I but win free,
         Hardly, methinks, again
       Shall any other hook take hold on me.
       I entered in thy wars a youngling maid,
         Thinking thy strife was utmost peace and sweet,
       And all my weapons on the ground I laid,
         As one secure, undoubting of defeat;
         But thou, false tyrant, with rapacious heat,
       Didst fall on me amain
     With all the grapnels of thine armoury.

       Then, wound about and fettered with thy chains,
         To him, who for my death in evil hour
       Was born, thou gav'st me, bounden, full of pains
         And bitter tears; and syne within his power
         He hath me and his rule's so harsh and dour
       No sighs can move the swain
     Nor all my wasting plaints to set me free.

       My prayers, the wild winds bear them all away;
         He hearkeneth unto none and none will hear;
       Wherefore each hour my torment waxeth aye;
         I cannot die, albeit life irks me drear.
         Ah, Lord, have pity on my heavy cheer;
       Do that I seek in vain
     And give him bounden in thy chains to me.

       An this thou wilt not, at the least undo
         The bonds erewhen of hope that knitted were;
       Alack, O Lord, thereof to thee I sue,
         For, an thou do it, yet to waxen fair
         Again I trust, as was my use whilere,
       And being quit of pain
     Myself with white flowers and with red besee.

Elisa ended her song with a very plaintive sigh, and albeit all
marvelled at the words thereof, yet was there none who might conceive
what it was that caused her sing thus. But the king, who was in a
merry mood, calling for Tindaro, bade him bring out his bagpipes, to
the sound whereof he let dance many dances; after which, a great part
of the night being now past, he bade each go sleep.


HERE ENDETH THE SIXTH DAY
OF THE DECAMERON




_Day the Seventh_

     HERE BEGINNETH THE SEVENTH DAY OF THE DECAMERON WHEREIN
     UNDER THE GOVERNANCE OF DIONEO IS DISCOURSED OF THE TRICKS
     WHICH OR FOR LOVE OR FOR THEIR OWN PRESERVATION WOMEN HAVE
     HERETOFORE PLAYED THEIR HUSBANDS WITH OR WITHOUT THE
     LATTER'S COGNIZANCE THEREOF


Every star was already fled from the parts of the East, save only that
which we style Lucifer and which shone yet in the whitening dawn, when
the seneschal, arising, betook himself, with a great baggage-train, to
the Ladies' Valley, there to order everything, according to
commandment had of his lord. The king, whom the noise of the packers
and of the beasts had awakened, tarried not long after his departure
to rise and being risen, caused arouse all the ladies and likewise the
young men; nor had the rays of the sun yet well broken forth, when
they all entered upon the road. Never yet had the nightingales and the
other birds seemed to them to sing so blithely as they did that
morning, what while, accompanied by their carols, they repaired to the
Ladies' Valley, where they were received by many more, which seemed to
them to make merry for their coming. There, going round about the
place and reviewing it all anew, it appeared to them so much fairer
than on the foregoing day as the season of the day was more sorted to
its goodliness. Then, after they had broken their fast with good wine
and confections, not to be behindhand with the birds in the matter of
song, they fell a-singing and the valley with them, still echoing
those same songs which they did sing, whereto all the birds, as if
they would not be outdone, added new and dulcet notes. Presently, the
dinner-hour being come and the tables spread hard by the fair lakelet
under the thickset laurels and other goodly trees, they seated
themselves there, as it pleased the king, and eating, watched the fish
swim in vast shoals about the lake, which gave bytimes occasion for
talk as well as observation. When they had made an end of dining and
the meats and tables were removed, they fell anew to singing more
blithely than ever; after which, beds having been spread in various
places about the little valley and all enclosed about by the discreet
seneschal with curtains and canopies of French serge, whoso would
might with the king's permission, go sleep; whilst those who had no
mind to sleep might at their will take pleasure of their other wonted
pastimes. But, after awhile, all being now arisen and the hour come
when they should assemble together for story-telling, carpets were, at
the king's commandment, spread upon the grass, not far from the place
where they had eaten, and all having seated themselves thereon hard by
the lake, the king bade Emilia begin; whereupon she blithely proceeded
to speak, smiling, thus:




THE FIRST STORY

[Day the Seventh]

     GIANNI LOTTERINGHI HEARETH KNOCK AT HIS DOOR BY NIGHT AND
     AWAKENETH HIS WIFE, WHO GIVETH HIM TO BELIEVE THAT IT IS A
     PHANTOM; WHEREUPON THEY GO TO EXORCISE IT WITH A CERTAIN
     ORISON AND THE KNOCKING CEASETH


"My Lord, it had been very agreeable to me, were such your pleasure,
that other than I should have given a beginning to so goodly a matter
as is that whereof we are to speak; but, since it pleaseth you that I
give all the other ladies assurance by my example, I will gladly do
it. Moreover, dearest ladies, I will study to tell a thing that may be
useful to you in time to come, for that, if you others are as fearful
as I, and especially of phantoms, (though what manner of thing they
may be God knoweth I know not, nor ever found I any woman who knew it,
albeit all are alike adread of them,) you may, by noting well my
story, learn a holy and goodly orison of great virtue for the
conjuring them away, should they come to you.

There was once in Florence, in the quarter of San Brancazio, a
wool-comber called Gianni Lotteringhi, a man more fortunate in his
craft than wise in other things, for that, savoring of the simpleton,
he was very often made captain of the Laudsingers[340] of Santa Maria
Novella and had the governance of their confraternity, and he many a
time had other little offices of the same kind, upon which he much
valued himself. This betided him for that, being a man of substance,
he gave many a good pittance to the clergy, who, getting of him often,
this a pair of hose, that a gown and another a scapulary, taught him
in return store of goodly orisons and gave him the paternoster in the
vulgar tongue, the Song of Saint Alexis, the Lamentations of Saint
Bernard, the Canticles of Madam Matilda and the like trumpery, all
which he held very dear and kept very diligently for his soul's
health. Now he had a very fair and lovesome lady to wife, by name
Mistress Tessa, who was the daughter of Mannuccio dalla Cuculia and
was exceeding discreet and well advised. She, knowing her husband's
simplicity and being enamoured of Federigo di Neri Pegolotti, a brisk
and handsome youth, and he of her, took order with a serving-maid of
hers that he should come speak with her at a very goodly country house
which her husband had at Camerata, where she sojourned all the summer
and whither Gianni came whiles to sup and sleep, returning in the
morning to his shop and bytimes to his Laudsingers.

[Footnote 340: See p. 144, note 2.]

Federigo, who desired this beyond measure, taking his opportunity,
repaired thither on the day appointed him towards vespers and Gianni
not coming thither that evening, supped and lay the night in all ease
and delight with the lady, who, being in his arms, taught him that
night a good half dozen of her husband's lauds. Then, neither she nor
Federigo purposing that this should be the last, as it had been the
first time [of their foregathering], they took order together on this
wise, so it should not be needful to send the maid for him each time,
to wit, that every day, as he came and went to and from a place he had
a little farther on, he should keep his eye on a vineyard that
adjoined the house, where he would see an ass's skull set up on one of
the vine poles, which whenas he saw with the muzzle turned towards
Florence, he should without fail and in all assurance betake himself
to her that evening after dark; and if he found the door shut he
should knock softly thrice and she would open to him; but that, whenas
he saw the ass's muzzle turned towards Fiesole, he should not come,
for that Gianni would be there; and doing on this wise, they
foregathered many a time.

But once, amongst other times, it chanced that, Federigo being one
night to sup with Mistress Tessa and she having let cook two fat
capons, Gianni, who was not expected there that night, came thither
very late, whereat the lady was much chagrined and having supped with
her husband on a piece of salt pork, which she had let boil apart,
caused the maid wrap the two boiled capons in a white napkin and carry
them, together with good store of new-laid eggs and a flask of good
wine, into a garden she had, whither she could go, without passing
through the house, and where she was wont to sup whiles with her
lover, bidding her lay them at the foot of a peach-tree that grew
beside a lawn there. But such was her trouble and annoy that she
remembered not to bid the maid wait till Federigo should come and tell
him that Gianni was there and that he should take the viands from the
garden; wherefore, she and Gianni betaking themselves to bed and the
maid likewise, it was not long before Federigo came to the door and
knocked softly once. The door was so near to the bedchamber that
Gianni heard it incontinent, as also did the lady; but she made a show
of being asleep, so her husband might have no suspicion of her. After
waiting a little, Federigo knocked a second time, whereupon Gianni,
marvelling, nudged his wife somewhat and said, 'Tessa, hearest thou
what I hear? Meseemeth there is a knocking at our door.'

The lady, who had heard it much better than he, made a show of awaking
and said, 'Eh? How sayst thou?' 'I say,' answered Gianni, 'that
meseemeth there is a knocking at our door.' 'Knocking!' cried she.
'Alack, Gianni mine, knowst thou not what it is? It is a phantom, that
hath these last few nights given me the greatest fright that ever was,
insomuch that, whenas I hear it, I put my head under the clothes and
dare not bring it out again until it is broad day.' Quoth Gianni, 'Go
to, wife; have no fear, if it be so; for I said the _Te Lucis_ and the
_Intemerata_ and such and such other pious orisons, before we lay
down, and crossed the bed from side to side, in the name of the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, so that we have no need to fear,
for that, what power soever it have, it cannot avail to harm us.'

The lady, fearing lest Federigo should perchance suspect otherwhat and
be angered with her, determined at all hazards to arise and let him
know that Gianni was there; wherefore quoth she to her husband, 'That
is all very well; thou sayst thy words, thou; but, for my part, I
shall never hold myself safe nor secure, except we exorcise it, since
thou art here.' 'And how is it to be exorcised?' asked he; and she, 'I
know full well how to exorcise it; for, the other day, when I went to
the Pardon at Fiesole, a certain anchoress (the very holiest of
creatures, Gianni mine, God only can say how holy she is,) seeing me
thus fearful, taught me a pious and effectual orison and told me that
she had made trial of it several times, ere she became a recluse, and
that it had always availed her. God knoweth I should never have dared
go alone to make proof of it; but, now that thou art here, I would
have us go exorcise the phantom.'

Gianni answered that he would well and accordingly they both arose and
went softly to the door, without which Federigo, who now began to
misdoubt him of somewhat, was yet in waiting. When they came thither,
the lady said to Gianni, 'Do thou spit, whenas I shall bid thee.' And
he answered, 'Good.' Then she began the conjuration and said,
'Phantom, phantom that goest by night, with tail upright[341] thou
cam'st to us; now get thee gone with tail upright. Begone into the
garden to the foot of the great peach tree; there shalt thou find an
anointed twice-anointed one[342] and an hundred turds of my sitting
hen;[343] set thy mouth to the flagon and get thee gone again and do
thou no hurt to my Gianni nor to me.' Then to her husband, 'Spit,
Gianni,' quoth she, and he spat. Federigo, who heard all this from
without and was now quit of jealousy, had, for all his vexation, so
great a mind to laugh that he was like to burst, and when Gianni spat,
he said under his breath '[Would it were] thy teeth!'

[Footnote 341: _i.e._ pene arrecto.]

[Footnote 342: _i.e._ a fattened capon well larded.]

[Footnote 343: _i.e._ eggs.]

The lady, having thrice conjured the phantom on this wise, returned to
bed with her husband, whilst Federigo, who had not supped, looking to
sup with her, and had right well apprehended the words of the
conjuration, betook himself to the garden and finding the capons and
wine and eggs at the foot of the great peach-tree, carried them off to
his house and there supped at his ease; and after, when he next
foregathered with the lady, he had a hearty laugh with her anent the
conjuration aforesaid. Some say indeed that the lady had actually
turned the ass's skull towards Fiesole, but that a husbandman, passing
through the vineyard, had given it a blow with a stick and caused it
spin round and it had become turned towards Florence, wherefore
Federigo, thinking himself summoned, had come thither, and that the
lady had made the conjuration on this wise: 'Phantom, phantom, get
thee gone in God's name; for it was not I turned the ass's head; but
another it was, God put him to shame! and I am here with my Gianni in
bed'; whereupon he went away and abode without supper or lodging. But
a neighbour of mine, a very ancient lady, telleth me that, according
to that which she heard, when a child, both the one and the other were
true; but that the latter happened, not to Gianni Lotteringhi, but to
one Gianni di Nello, who abode at Porta San Piero and was no less
exquisite a ninny than the other. Wherefore, dear my ladies, it
abideth at your election to take whether of the two orisons most
pleaseth you, except you will have both. They have great virtue in
such cases, as you have had proof in the story you have heard; get
them, therefore, by heart and they may yet avail you."




THE SECOND STORY

[Day the Seventh]

     PERONELLA HIDETH A LOVER OF HERS IN A VAT, UPON HER
     HUSBAND'S UNLOOKED FOR RETURN, AND HEARING FROM THE LATTER
     THAT HE HATH SOLD THE VAT, AVOUCHETH HERSELF TO HAVE SOLD IT
     TO ONE WHO IS PRESENTLY THEREWITHIN, TO SEE IF IT BE SOUND;
     WHEREUPON THE GALLANT, JUMPING OUT OF THE VAT, CAUSETH THE
     HUSBAND SCRAPE IT OUT FOR HIM AND AFTER CARRY IT HOME TO HIS
     HOUSE


Emilia's story was received with loud laughter and the conjuration
commended of all as goodly and excellent; and this come to an end, the
king bade Filostrato follow on, who accordingly began, "Dearest
ladies, so many are the tricks that men, and particularly husbands,
play you, that, if some woman chance whiles to put a cheat upon her
husband, you should not only be blithe that this hath happened and
take pleasure in coming to know it or hearing it told of any, but
should yourselves go telling it everywhere, so men may understand
that, if they are knowing, women, on their part, are no less so! the
which cannot be other than useful unto you, for that, when one knoweth
that another is on the alert, he setteth himself not overlightly to
cozen him. Who, then, can doubt but that which we shall say to-day
concerning this matter, coming to be known of men, may be exceeding
effectual in restraining them from cozening you ladies, whenas they
find that you likewise know how to cozen, an you will? I purpose,
therefore, to tell you the trick which, on the spur of the moment, a
young woman, albeit she was of mean condition, played her husband for
her own preservation.

In Naples no great while agone there was a poor man who took to wife a
fair and lovesome damsel called Peronella, and albeit he with his
craft, which was that of a mason, and she by spinning, earned but a
slender pittance, they ordered their life as best they might. It
chanced one day that a young gallant of the neighbourhood saw this
Peronella and she pleasing him mightily, he fell in love with her and
importuned her one way and another till he became familiar with her
and they took order with each other on this wise, so they might be
together; to wit, seeing that her husband arose every morning betimes
to go to work or to find work, they agreed that the young man should
be whereas he might see him go out, and that, as soon as he was
gone,--the street where she abode, which was called Avorio, being very
solitary,--he should come to her house. On this wise they did many
times; but one morning, the good man having gone out and Giannello
Strignario (for so was the lover named) having entered the house and
being with Peronella, it chanced that, after awhile, the husband
returned home, whereas it was his wont to be abroad all day, and
finding the door locked within, knocked and after fell a-saying in
himself, 'O my God, praised be Thou ever! For, though Thou hast made
me poor, at least Thou hast comforted me with a good and honest damsel
to wife. See how she locked the door within as soon as I was gone out,
so none might enter to do her any annoy.'

Peronella, knowing her husband by his way of knocking, said to her
lover, 'Alack, Giannello mine, I am a dead woman! For here is my
husband, whom God confound, come back and I know not what this
meaneth, for never yet came he back hither at this hour; belike he saw
thee whenas thou enteredst here. But, for the love of God, however the
case may be, get thee into yonder vat, whilst I go open to him, and we
shall see what is the meaning of his returning home so early this
morning.' Accordingly, Giannello betook himself in all haste into the
vat, whilst Peronella, going to the door, opened to her husband and
said to him, with an angry air, 'What is to do now, that thou
returnest home so soon this morning? Meseemeth thou hast a mind to do
nought to-day, that I see thee come back, tools in hand; and if thou
do thus, on what are we to live? Whence shall we get bread? Thinkest
thou I will suffer thee pawn my gown and my other poor clothes? I, who
do nothing but spin day and night, till the flesh is come apart from
my nails, so I may at the least have so much oil as will keep our lamp
burning! Husband, husband, there is not a neighbour's wife of ours but
marvelleth thereat and maketh mock of me for the pains I give myself
and all that I endure; and thou, thou returnest home to me, with thy
hands a-dangle, whenas thou shouldst be at work.'

So saying, she fell a-weeping and went on to say, 'Alack, woe is me,
unhappy woman that I am! In what an ill hour was I born, at what an
ill moment did I come hither! I who might have had a young man of such
worth and would none of him, so I might come to this fellow here, who
taketh no thought to her whom he hath brought home! Other women give
themselves a good time with their lovers, for there is none [I know]
but hath two and some three, and they enjoy themselves and show their
husbands the moon for the sun. But I, wretch that I am! because I am
good and occupy myself not with such toys, I suffer ill and ill hap. I
know not why I do not take me a lover, as do other women. Understand
well, husband mine, that had I a mind to do ill, I could soon enough
find the wherewithal, for there be store of brisk young fellows who
love me and wish me well and have sent to me, proffering money galore
or dresses and jewels, at my choice; but my heart would never suffer
me to do it, for that I was no mother's daughter of that ilk; and here
thou comest home to me, whenas thou shouldst be at work.'

'Good lack, wife,' answered the husband, 'fret not thyself, for God's
sake; thou shouldst be assured that I know what manner of woman thou
art, and indeed this morning I have in part had proof thereof. It is
true that I went out to go to work; but it seemeth thou knowest not,
as I myself knew not, that this is the Feast-day of San Galeone and
there is no work doing; that is why I am come back at this hour; but
none the less I have provided and found a means how we shall have
bread for more than a month, for I have sold yonder man thou seest
here with me the vat which, as thou knowest, hath this long while
cumbered the house; and he is to give me five lily-florins[344] for
it.' Quoth Peronella, 'So much the more cause have I to complain;
thou, who art a man and goest about and should be versed in the things
of the world, thou hast sold a vat for five florins, whilst I, a poor
silly woman who hath scarce ever been without the door, seeing the
hindrance it gave us in the house, have sold it for seven to an honest
man, who entered it but now, as thou camest back, to see if it were
sound!' When the husband heard this, he was more than satisfied and
said to him who had come for the vat, 'Good man, begone in peace; for
thou hearest that my wife hath sold the vat for seven florins, whereas
thou wast to give me but five for it.' 'Good,' replied the other and
went his way; whereupon quoth Peronella to her husband, 'Since thou
art here, come up and settle with him thyself.' Giannello, who abode
with his ears pricked up to hear if it behoved him fear or be on his
guard against aught, hearing his mistress's words, straightway
scrambled out of the vat and cried out, as if he had heard nothing of
the husband's return, 'Where art thou, good wife?' whereupon the
goodman, coming up, answered, 'Here am I; what wouldst thou have?'
'Who art thou?' asked Giannello. 'I want the woman with whom I made
the bargain for this vat.' Quoth the other, 'You may deal with me in
all assurance, for I am her husband.' Then said Giannello, 'The vat
appeareth to me sound enough; but meseemeth you have kept dregs or the
like therein, for it is all overcrusted with I know not what that is
so hard and dry that I cannot remove aught thereof with my nails;
wherefore I will not take it, except I first see it clean.' 'Nay,'
answered Peronella, 'the bargain shall not fall through for that; my
husband will clean it all out.' 'Ay will I,' rejoined the latter, and
laying down his tools, put off his coat; then, calling for a light and
a scraper, he entered the vat and fell to scraping. Peronella, as if
she had a mind to see what he did, thrust her head and one of her
arms, shoulder and all, in at the mouth of the vat, which was not
overbig, and fell to saying, 'Scrape here' and 'There' and 'There
also' and 'See, here is a little left.'

[Footnote 344: So called from the figure of a lily stamped on the
coin; cf. our rose-nobles.]

Whilst she was thus engaged in directing her husband and showing him
where to scrape, Giannello, who had scarce yet that morning done his
full desire, when they were interrupted by the mason's coming, seeing
that he could not as he would, bethought himself to accomplish it as
he might; wherefore, boarding her, as she held the mouth of the vat
all closed up, on such wise as in the ample plains the unbridled
stallions, afire with love, assail the mares of Parthia, he satisfied
his juvenile ardour, the which enterprise was brought to perfection
well nigh at the same moment as the scraping of the vat; whereupon he
dismounted and Peronella withdrawing her head from the mouth of the
vat, the husband came forth thereof. Then said she to her gallant,
'Take this light, good man, and look if it be clean to thy mind.'
Giannello looked in and said that it was well and that he was
satisfied and giving the husband seven florins, caused carry the vat
to his own house."




THE THIRD STORY

[Day the Seventh]

     FRA RINALDO LIETH WITH HIS GOSSIP AND BEING FOUND OF HER
     HUSBAND CLOSETED WITH HER IN HER CHAMBER, THEY GIVE HIM TO
     BELIEVE THAT HE WAS IN ACT TO CONJURE WORMS FROM HIS GODSON


Filostrato had not known to speak so obscurely of the mares of Parthia
but that the roguish ladies laughed thereat, making believe to laugh
at otherwhat. But, when the king saw that his story was ended, he bade
Elisa tell, who accordingly, with obedient readiness, began, "Charming
ladies, Emilia's conjuration of the phantom hath brought to my memory
the story of another conjuration, which latter, though it be not so
goodly as hers, nevertheless, for that none other bearing upon our
subject occurreth to me at this present, I will proceed to relate.

You must know that there was once in Siena a very agreeable young man
and of a worshipful family, by name Rinaldo, who was passionately
enamored of a very beautiful lady, a neighbour of his and the wife of
a rich man, and flattered himself that, could he but find means to
speak with her unsuspected, he might avail to have of her all that he
should desire. Seeing none other way and the lady being great with
child, he bethought himself to become her gossip and accordingly,
clapping up an acquaintance with her husband, he offered him, on such
wise as appeared to him most seemly, to be godfather to his child. His
offer was accepted and he being now become Madam Agnesa's gossip and
having a somewhat more colourable excuse for speaking with her, he
took courage and gave her in so many words to know that of his intent
which she had indeed long before gathered from his looks; but little
did this profit him, although the lady was nothing displeased to have
heard him.

Not long after, whatever might have been the reason, it came to pass
that Rinaldo turned friar and whether or not he found the pasturage to
his liking, he persevered in that way of life; and albeit, in the days
of his becoming a monk, he had for awhile laid on one side the love he
bore his gossip, together with sundry other vanities of his, yet, in
process of time, without quitting the monk's habit, he resumed
them[345] and began to delight in making a show and wearing fine
stuffs and being dainty and elegant in all his fashions and making
canzonets and sonnets and ballads and in singing and all manner other
things of the like sort. But what say I of our Fra Rinaldo, of whom we
speak? What monks are there that do not thus? Alack, shame that they
are of the corrupt world, they blush not to appear fat and ruddy in
the face, dainty in their garb and in all that pertaineth unto them,
and strut along, not like doves, but like very turkey-cocks, with
crest erect and breast puffed out; and what is worse (to say nothing
of having their cells full of gallipots crammed with electuaries and
unguents, of boxes full of various confections, of phials and flagons
of distilled waters and oils, of pitchers brimming with Malmsey and
Cyprus and other wines of price, insomuch that they seem to the
beholder not friars' cells, but rather apothecaries' or perfumers'
shops) they think no shame that folk should know them to be gouty,
conceiving that others see not nor know that strict fasting, coarse
viands and spare and sober living make men lean and slender and for
the most part sound of body, and that if indeed some sicken thereof,
at least they sicken not of the gout, whereto it is used to give, for
medicine, chastity and everything else that pertaineth to the natural
way of living of an honest friar. Yet they persuade themselves that
others know not that,--let alone the scant and sober living,--long
vigils, praying and discipline should make men pale and mortified and
that neither St. Dominic nor St. Francis, far from having four gowns
for one, clad themselves in cloth dyed in grain nor in other fine
stuffs, but in garments of coarse wool and undyed, to keep out the
cold and not to make a show. For which things, as well as for the
souls of the simpletons who nourish them, there is need that God
provide.

[Footnote 345: _i.e._ the discarded vanities aforesaid.]

Fra Rinaldo, then, having returned to his former appetites, began to
pay frequent visits to his gossip and waxing in assurance, proceeded
to solicit her with more than his former instancy to that which he
desired of her. The good lady, seeing herself hard pressed and Fra
Rinaldo seeming to her belike goodlier than she had thought him
aforetime, being one day sore importuned of him, had recourse to that
argument which all women use who have a mind to yield that which is
asked of them and said, 'How now, Fra Rinaldo? Do monks such things?'
'Madam,' answered he, 'when as I shall have this gown off my
back,--and I can put it off mighty easily,--I shall appear to you a
man fashioned like other men and not a monk.' The lady pulled a demure
face and said, 'Alack, wretched me! You are my gossip; how can I do
this? It were sadly ill, and I have heard many a time that it is a
very great sin; but, certes, were it not for this, I would do that
which you wish.' Quoth Fra Rinaldo, 'You are a simpleton, if you
forbear for this; I do not say that it is not a sin, but God pardoneth
greater than this to whoso repenteth. But tell me, who is more akin to
your child, I who held him at baptism or your husband who begat him?'
'My husband is more akin to him,' answered the lady; whereupon, 'You
say sooth,' rejoined the friar. 'And doth not your husband lie with
you?' 'Ay doth he,' replied she. 'Then,' said Fra Rinaldo, 'I, who am
less akin to your child than is your husband, may lie with you even
as doth he.' The lady, who knew no logic and needed little persuasion,
either believed or made a show of believing that the friar spoke the
truth and answered, 'Who might avail to answer your learned words?'
And after, notwithstanding the gossipship, she resigned herself to do
his pleasure; nor did they content themselves with one bout, but
foregathered many and many a time, having the more commodity thereof
under cover of the gossipship, for that there was less suspicion.

But once, amongst other times, it befell that Fra Rinaldo, coming to
the lady's house and finding none with her but a little maid of hers,
who was very pretty and agreeable, despatched his comrade with the
latter to the pigeon-loft, to teach her her Paternoster, and entered
with the lady, who had her child in her hand, into her bedchamber,
where they locked themselves in and fell to taking their pleasure upon
a daybed that was there. As they were thus engaged, it chanced that
the husband came home and making for the bedchamber-door, unperceived
of any, knocked and called to the lady, who, hearing this, said to the
friar, 'I am a dead woman, for here is my husband, and now he will
certainly perceive what is the reason of our familiarity.' Now Rinaldo
was stripped to his waistcoat, to wit, he had put off his gown and his
scapulary, and hearing this, answered, 'You say sooth; were I but
dressed, there might be some means; but, if you open to him and he
find me thus, there can be no excuse for us.' The lady, seized with a
sudden idea, said, 'Harkye, dress yourself and when you are dressed,
take your godchild in your arms and hearken well to that which I shall
say to him, so your words may after accord with mine, and leave me
do.' Then, to the good man, who had not yet left knocking, 'I come to
thee,' quoth she and rising, opened the chamber-door and said, with a
good countenance, 'Husband mine, I must tell thee that Fra Rinaldo,
our gossip, is come hither and it was God sent him to us; for, certes,
but for his coming, we should to-day have lost our child.'

The good simple man, hearing this, was like to swoon and said, 'How
so?' 'O husband mine,' answered Agnesa, 'there took him but now of a
sudden a fainting-fit, that methought he was dead, and I knew not what
to do or say; but just then Fra Rinaldo our gossip came in and taking
him in his arms, said, "Gossip, these be worms he hath in his body,
the which draw near to his heart and would infallibly kill him; but
have no fear, for I will conjure them and make them all die; and ere I
go hence, you shall see the child whole again as ever you saw him."
And for that we had need of thee to repeat certain orisons and that
the maid could not find thee, he caused his comrade say them in the
highest room of our house, whilst he and I came hither and locked
ourselves in, so none should hinder us, for that none other than the
child's mother might be present at such an office. Indeed, he hath the
child yet in his arms and methinketh he waiteth but for his comrade to
have made an end of saying the orisons and it will be done, for that
the boy is already altogether restored to himself.' The good simple
man, believing all this, was so straitened with concern for his child
that it never entered his mind to suspect the cheat put upon him by
his wife; but, heaving a great sigh, he said, 'I will go see him.'
'Nay,' answered she, 'thou wouldst mar that which hath been done.
Wait; I will go see an thou mayst come in and call thee.'

Meanwhile, Fra Rinaldo, who had heard everything and had dressed
himself at his leisure, took the child in his arms and called out, as
soon as he had ordered matters to his mind, saying, 'Harkye, gossip,
hear I not my gossip your husband there?' 'Ay, sir,' answered the
simpleton; whereupon, 'Then,' said the other, 'come hither.' The
cuckold went to him and Fra Rinaldo said to him, 'Take your son by the
grace of God whole and well, whereas I deemed but now you would not
see him alive at vespers; and look you let make a waxen image of his
bigness and set it up, to the praise and glory of God, before the
statue of our lord St. Ambrose, through whose intercession He hath
vouchsafed to restore him unto you.' The child, seeing his father, ran
to him and caressed him, as little children used to do, whilst the
latter, taking him, weeping, in his arms, no otherwise than as he had
brought him forth of the grave, fell to kissing him and returning
thanks to his gossip for that he had made him whole.

Meanwhile, Fra Rinaldo's comrade, who had by this taught the
serving-wench not one, but maybe more than four paternosters, and had
given her a little purse of white thread, which he had from a nun, and
made her his devotee, hearing the cuckold call at his wife's
chamber-door, had softly betaken himself to a place whence he could,
himself unseen, both see and hear what should betide and presently,
seeing that all had passed off well, came down and entering the
chamber, said, 'Fra Rinaldo, I have despatched all four of the orisons
which you bade me say.' 'Brother mine,' answered the friar, 'thou hast
a good wind and hast done well; I, for my part, had said but two
thereof, when my gossip came; but God the Lord, what with thy pains
and mine, hath shown us such favour that the child is healed.'
Therewithal the cuckold let bring good wines and confections and
entertained his gossip and the latter's comrade with that whereof they
had more need than of aught else. Then, attending them to the door, he
commended them to God and letting make the waxen image without delay,
he sent to hang it up with the others[346] before the statue of St.
Ambrose, but not that of Milan."[347]

[Footnote 346: _i.e._ the other ex votos.]

[Footnote 347: There is apparently some satirical allusion here, which
I cannot undertake to explain.]




THE FOURTH STORY

[Day the Seventh]

     TOFANO ONE NIGHT SHUTTETH HIS WIFE OUT OF DOORS, WHO,
     AVAILING NOT TO RE-ENTER BY DINT OF ENTREATIES, FEIGNETH TO
     CAST HERSELF INTO A WELL AND CASTETH THEREIN A GREAT STONE.
     TOFANO COMETH FORTH OF THE HOUSE AND RUNNETH THITHER,
     WHEREUPON SHE SLIPPETH IN AND LOCKING HIM OUT, BAWLETH
     REPROACHES AT HIM FROM THE WINDOW


The king no sooner perceived Elisa's story to be ended than, turning
without delay to Lauretta, he signified to her his pleasure that she
should tell; whereupon she, without hesitation, began thus, "O Love,
how great and how various is thy might! How many thy resources and thy
devices! What philosopher, what craftsman[348] could ever have availed
or might avail to teach those shifts, those feints, those subterfuges
which thou on the spur of the moment suggestest to whoso ensueth in
thy traces! Certes, all others' teaching is halting compared with
thine, as may very well have been apprehended by the devices which
have already been set forth and to which, lovesome ladies, I will add
one practised by a woman of a simple wit enough and such as I know
none but Love could have taught her.

[Footnote 348: Syn. professor of the liberal arts (_artista_).]

There was once, then, in Arezzo, a rich man called Tofano and he was
given to wife a very fair lady, by name Madam Ghita, of whom, without
knowing why, he quickly waxed jealous. The lady, becoming aware of
this, was despited thereat and questioned him once and again of the
reason of his jealousy; but he was able to assign her none, save such
as were general and naught; wherefore it occurred to her mind to cause
him die of the disease whereof he stood without reason in fear.
Accordingly, perceiving that a young man, who was much to her taste,
sighed for her, she proceeded discreetly to come to an understanding
with him and things being so far advanced between them that there
lacked but with deeds to give effect to words, she cast about for a
means of bringing this also to pass; wherefore, having already
remarked, amongst her husband's other ill usances, that he delighted
in drinking, she began not only to commend this to him, but would
often artfully incite him thereto. This became so much his wont that,
well nigh whensoever it pleased her, she led him to drink even to
intoxication, and putting him to bed whenas she saw him well drunken,
she a first time foregathered with her lover, with whom many a time
thereafter she continued to do so in all security. Indeed, she grew to
put such trust in her husband's drunkenness that not only did she make
bold to bring her gallant into the house, but went whiles to pass a
great part of the night with him in his own house, which was not very
far distant.

The enamoured lady continuing on this wise, it befell that the
wretched husband came to perceive that she, whilst encouraging him to
drink, natheless herself drank never; wherefore suspicion took him
that it might be as in truth it was, to wit, that she made him
drunken, so she might after do her pleasure what while he slept, and
wishing to make proof of this, an it were so, he one evening, not
having drunken that day, feigned himself, both in words and fashions,
the drunkenest man that was aye. The lady, believing this and judging
that he needed no more drink, put him to bed in all haste and this
done, betook herself, as she was used to do whiles, to the house of
her lover, where she abode till midnight. As for Tofano, no sooner did
he know the lady to have left the house than he straightway arose and
going to the doors, locked them from within; after which he posted
himself at the window, so he might see her return and show her that he
had gotten wind of her fashions; and there he abode till such time as
she came back. The lady, returning home and finding herself locked
out, was beyond measure woeful and began to essay an she might avail
to open the door by force, which, after Tofano had awhile suffered,
'Wife,' quoth he, 'thou weariest thyself in vain, for thou canst
nowise come in here again. Go, get thee back whereas thou hast been
till now and be assured that thou shalt never return thither till such
time as I shall have done thee, in respect of this affair, such honour
as beseemeth thee in the presence of thy kinsfolk and of the
neighbours.'

The lady fell to beseeching him for the love of God that it would
please him open to her, for that she came not whence he supposed, but
from keeping vigil with a she-neighbour of hers, for that the nights
were long and she could not sleep them all out nor watch at home
alone. However, prayers profited her nought, for that her brute of a
husband was minded to have all the Aretines[349] know their shame,
whereas none as yet knew it; wherefore, seeing that prayers availed
her not, she had recourse to threats and said, 'An thou open not to
me, I will make thee the woefullest man alive.' 'And what canst thou
do to me?' asked Tofano, and Mistress Tessa, whose wits Love had
already whetted with his counsels, replied, 'Rather than brook the
shame which thou wouldst wrongfully cause me suffer, I will cast
myself into this well that is herenigh, where when I am found dead,
there is none will believe otherwise than that thou, for very
drunkenness, hast cast me therein; wherefore it will behove thee flee
and lose all thou hast and abide in banishment or have thy head cut
off for my murderer, as thou wilt in truth have been.'

[Footnote 349: _i.e._ inhabitants of Arezzo.]

Tofano was nowise moved by these words from his besotted intent;
wherefore quoth she to him, 'Harkye now, I can no longer brook this
thy fashery, God pardon it thee! Look thou cause lay up[350] this
distaff of mine that I leave here.' So saying, the night being so dark
that one might scarce see other by the way, she went up to the well
and taking a great stone that lay thereby, cried out, 'God pardon me!'
and let it drop into the water. The stone, striking the water, made a
very great noise, which when Tofano heard, he verily believed that she
had cast herself in; wherefore, snatching up the bucket and the rope,
he rushed out of the house and ran to the well to succour her. The
lady, who had hidden herself near the door, no sooner saw him run to
the well than she slipped into the house and locked herself in; then,
getting her to the window, 'You should water your wine, whenas you
drink it,' quoth she, 'and not after and by night.' Tofano, hearing
this, knew himself to have been fooled and returned to the door, but
could get no admission and proceeded to bid her open to him; but she
left speaking softly, as she had done till then, and began, well nigh
at a scream, to say, 'By Christ His Cross, tiresome sot that thou art,
thou shalt not enter here to-night; I cannot brook these thy fashions
any longer; needs must I let every one see what manner of man thou art
and at what hour thou comest home anights.' Tofano, on his side,
flying into a rage, began to rail at her and bawl; whereupon the
neighbours, hearing the clamour, arose, both men and women, and coming
to the windows, asked what was to do. The lady answered, weeping, 'It
is this wretch of a man, who still returneth to me of an evening,
drunken, or falleth asleep about the taverns and after cometh home at
this hour; the which I have long suffered, but, it availing me not and
I being unable to put up with it longer, I have bethought me to shame
him therefor by locking him out of doors, to see and he will mend
himself thereof.'

[Footnote 350: _Riporre_, possibly a mistake for _riportare_, to fetch
back.]

Tofano, on the other hand, told them, like an ass as he was, how the
case stood and threatened her sore; but she said to the neighbours,
'Look you now what a man he is! What would you say, were I in the
street, as he is, and he in the house, as am I? By God His faith, I
doubt me you would believe he said sooth. By this you may judge of his
wits; he saith I have done just what methinketh he hath himself done.
He thought to fear me by casting I know not what into the well; but
would God he had cast himself there in good sooth and drowned himself,
so he might have well watered the wine which he hath drunken to
excess.' The neighbours, both men and women, all fell to blaming
Tofano, holding him at fault, and chid him for that which he said
against the lady; and in a short time the report was so noised abroad
from neighbour to neighbour that it reached the ears of the lady's
kinsfolk, who came thither and hearing the thing from one and another
of the neighbours, took Tofano and gave him such a drubbing that they
broke every bone in his body. Then, entering the house, they took the
lady's gear and carried her off home with them, threatening Tofano
with worse. The latter, finding himself in ill case and seeing that
his jealousy had brought him to a sorry pass, for that he still loved
his wife heartily,[351] procured certain friends to intercede for him
and so wrought that he made his peace with the lady and had her home
again with him, promising her that he would never be jealous again.
Moreover, he gave her leave to do her every pleasure, provided she
wrought so discreetly that he should know nothing thereof; and on this
wise, like a crack-brained churl as he was, he made peace after
suffering damage. So long live Love and death to war and all its
company!"

[Footnote 351: Lit. wished her all his weal.]




THE FIFTH STORY

[Day the Seventh]

     A JEALOUS HUSBAND, IN THE GUISE OF A PRIEST, CONFESSETH HIS
     WIFE, WHO GIVETH HIM TO BELIEVE THAT SHE LOVETH A PRIEST,
     WHO COMETH TO HER EVERY NIGHT; AND WHILST THE HUSBAND
     SECRETLY KEEPETH WATCH AT THE DOOR FOR THE LATTER, THE LADY
     BRINGETH IN A LOVER OF HERS BY THE ROOF AND LIETH WITH HIM


Lauretta having made an end of her story and all having commended the
lady for that she had done aright and even as befitted her wretch of a
husband, the king, to lose no time, turned to Fiammetta and
courteously imposed on her the burden of the story-telling; whereupon
she began thus, "Most noble ladies, the foregoing story moveth me to
tell you, on like wise, of a jealous husband, accounting, as I do, all
that their wives do unto such,--particularly whenas they are jealous
without cause,--to be well done and holding that, if the makers of the
laws had considered everything, they should have appointed none other
penalty unto women who offend in this than that which they appoint
unto whoso offendeth against other in self-defence; for that jealous
men are plotters against the lives of young women and most diligent
procurers of their deaths. Wives abide all the week mewed up at home,
occupying themselves with domestic offices and the occasions of their
families and households, and after they would fain, like every one
else, have some solace and some rest on holidays and be at leisure to
take some diversion even as do the tillers of the fields, the artisans
of the towns and the administrators of the laws, according to the
example of God himself, who rested from all His labours the seventh
day, and to the intent of the laws, both human and Divine, which,
looking to the honour of God and the common weal of all, have
distinguished working days from those of repose. But to this jealous
men will on no wise consent; nay, those days which are gladsome for
all other women they make wretcheder and more doleful than the others
to their wives, keeping them yet closelier straitened and confined;
and what a misery and a languishment this is for the poor creatures
those only know who have proved it. Wherefore, to conclude, I say that
what a woman doth to a husband who is jealous without cause should
certes not be condemned, but rather commended.

There was, then, in Arimino a merchant, very rich both in lands and
monies, who, having to wife a very fair lady, became beyond measure
jealous of her; nor had he other cause for this save that, as he loved
her exceedingly and held her very fair and saw that she studied with
all her might to please him, even so he imagined that every man loved
her and that she appeared fair to all and eke that she studied to
please others as she did himself, which was the reasoning of a man of
nought and one of little sense. Being grown thus jealous, he kept such
strict watch over her and held her in such constraint that belike many
there be of those who are condemned to capital punishment who are less
straitly guarded of their gaolers; for, far from being at liberty to
go to weddings or entertainments or to church or indeed anywise to set
foot without the house, she dared not even stand at the window nor
look abroad on any occasion; wherefore her life was most wretched and
she brooked this annoy with the more impatience as she felt herself
the less to blame. Accordingly, seeing herself unjustly suspected of
her husband, she determined, for her own solacement, to find a means
(an she but might) of doing on such wise that he should have reason
for his ill usage of her. And for that she might not station herself
at the window and so had no opportunity of showing herself favourable
to the suit of any one who might take note of her, as he passed along
her street, and pay his court to her,--knowing that in the adjoining
house there was a certain young man both handsome and agreeable,--she
bethought herself to look if there were any hole in the wall that
parted the two houses and therethrough to spy once and again till such
time as she should see the youth aforesaid and find an occasion of
speaking with him and bestowing on him her love, so he would accept
thereof, purposing, if a means could be found, to foregather with him
bytimes and on this wise while away her sorry life till such time as
the demon [of jealousy] should take leave of her husband.

Accordingly, she went spying about the walls of the house, now in one
part and now in another, whenas her husband was abroad, and happened
at last upon a very privy place where the wall was somewhat opened by
a fissure and looking therethrough, albeit she could ill discover what
was on the other side, algates she perceived that the opening gave
upon a bedchamber there and said in herself, 'Should this be the
chamber of Filippo,' to wit, the youth her neighbour, 'I were half
sped.' Then, causing secretly enquire of this by a maid of hers, who
had pity upon her, she found that the young man did indeed sleep in
that chamber all alone; wherefore, by dint of often visiting the
crevice and dropping pebbles and such small matters, whenas she
perceived him to be there, she wrought on such wise that he came to
the opening, to see what was to do; whereupon she called to him
softly. He, knowing her voice, answered her, and she, profiting by the
occasion, discovered to him in brief all her mind; whereat the youth
was mightily content and made shift to enlarge the hole from his side
on such wise that none could perceive it; and therethrough they many a
time bespoke one another and touched hands, but could go no farther,
for the jealous vigilance of the husband.

After awhile, the Feast of the Nativity drawing near, the lady told
her husband that, an it pleased him, she would fain go to church on
Christmas morning and confess and take the sacrament, as other
Christians did. Quoth he, 'And what sin hast thou committed that thou
wouldst confess?' 'How?' answered the lady. 'Thinkest thou that I am a
saint, because thou keepest me mewed up? Thou must know well enough
that I commit sins like all others that live in this world; but I will
not tell them to thee, for that thou art not a priest.' The jealous
wretch took suspicion at these words and determined to seek to know
what sins she had committed; wherefore, having bethought himself of a
means whereby he might gain his end, he answered that he was content,
but that he would have her go to no other church than their parish
chapel and that thither she must go betimes in the morning and confess
herself either to their chaplain or to such priest as the latter
should appoint her and to none other and presently return home.
Herseemed she half apprehended his meaning; but without saying
otherwhat, she answered that she would do as he said.

Accordingly, Christmas Day come, the lady arose at daybreak and
attiring herself, repaired to the church appointed her of her husband,
who, on his part, betook himself to the same place and reached it
before her. Having already taken order with the chaplain of that which
he had a mind to do, he hastily donned one of the latter's gowns, with
a great flapped cowl, such as we see priests wear, and drawing the
hood a little over his face, seated himself in the choir. The lady,
entering the chapel, enquired for the chaplain, who came and hearing
from her that she would fain confess, said that he could not hear her,
but would send her one of his brethren. Accordingly, going away, he
sent her the jealous man, in an ill hour for the latter, who came up
with a very grave air, and albeit the day was not over bright and he
had drawn the cowl far over his eyes, knew not so well to disguise
himself but he was readily recognized by the lady, who, seeing this,
said in herself, 'Praised be God! From a jealous man he is turned
priest; but no matter; I will e'en give him what he goeth seeking.'

Accordingly, feigning not to know him, she seated herself at his feet.
My lord Jealousy had put some pebbles in his mouth, to impede his
speech somewhat, so his wife might not know him by his voice,
himseeming he was in every other particular so thoroughly disguised
that he was nowise fearful of being recognized by her. To come to the
confession, the lady told him, amongst other things, (having first
declared herself to be married,) that she was enamoured of a priest,
who came every night to lie with her. When the jealous man heard this,
himseemed he had gotten a knife-thrust in the heart, and had not
desire constrained him to know more, he had abandoned the confession
and gone away. Standing fast, then, he asked the lady, 'How! Doth not
your husband lie with you?' 'Ay doth he, sir,' replied she. 'How,
then,' asked the jealous man, 'can the priest also lie with you?'
'Sir,' answered she, 'by what art he doth it I know not, but there is
not a door in the house so fast locked but it openeth so soon as he
toucheth it; and he telleth me that, whenas he cometh to the door of
my chamber, before opening it, he pronounceth certain words, by virtue
whereof my husband incontinent falleth asleep, and so soon as he
perceiveth him to be fast, he openeth the door and cometh in and lieth
with me; and this never faileth.' Quoth the mock priest, 'Madam, this
is ill done, and it behoveth you altogether to refrain therefrom.'
'Sir,' answered the lady, 'methinketh I could never do that, for that
I love him too well.' 'Then,' said the other, 'I cannot shrive you.'
Quoth she, 'I am grieved for that; but I came not hither to tell you
lies; an I thought I could do it, I would tell you so.' 'In truth,
madam,' replied the husband, 'I am concerned for you, for that I see
you lose your soul at this game; but, to do you service, I will well
to take the pains of putting up my special orisons to God in your
name, the which maybe shall profit you, and I will send you bytimes a
little clerk of mine, to whom you shall say if they have profited you
or not; and if they have profited you, we will proceed farther.'
'Sir,' answered the lady, 'whatever you do, send none to me at home,
for, should my husband come to know of it, he is so terribly jealous
that nothing in the world would get it out of his head that your
messenger came hither for nought[352] but ill, and I should have no
peace with him this year to come.' Quoth the other, 'Madam, have no
fear of that, for I will certainly contrive it on such wise that you
shall never hear a word of the matter from him.' Then said she, 'So
but you can engage to do that, I am content.' Then, having made her
confession and gotten her penance, she rose to her feet and went off
to hear mass; whilst the jealous man, (ill luck go with him!)
withdrew, bursting with rage, to put off his priest's habit, and
returned home, impatient to find a means of surprising the priest with
his wife, so he might play the one and the other an ill turn.

[Footnote 352: Boccaccio writes carelessly "for _aught_" (_altro_),
which makes nonsense of the passage.]

Presently the lady came back from church and saw plainly enough from
her husband's looks that she had given him an ill Christmas; albeit he
studied, as most he might, to conceal that which he had done and what
himseemed he had learned. Then, being inwardly resolved to lie in wait
near the street-door that night and watch for the priest's coming, he
said to the lady, 'Needs must I sup and lie abroad to-night, wherefore
look thou lock the street-door fast, as well as that of the midstair
and that of thy chamber, and get thee to bed, whenas it seemeth good
to thee.' The lady answered, 'It is well,' and betaking herself, as
soon as she had leisure, to the hole in the wall, she made the wonted
signal, which when Filippo heard, he came to her forthright. She told
him how she had done that morning and what her husband had said to her
after dinner and added, 'I am certain he will not leave the house, but
will set himself to watch the door; wherefore do thou find means to
come hither to me to-night by the roof, so we may lie together.' The
young man was mightily rejoiced at this and answered, 'Madam, leave me
do.'

Accordingly, the night come, the jealous man took his arms and hid
himself by stealth in a room on the ground floor, whilst the lady,
whenas it seemed to her time,--having caused lock all the doors and in
particular that of the midstair, so he might not avail to come
up,--summoned the young man, who came to her from his side by a very
privy way. Thereupon they went to bed and gave themselves a good time,
taking their pleasure one of the other till daybreak, when the young
man returned to his own house. Meanwhile, the jealous man stood to his
arms well nigh all night beside the street-door, sorry and supperless
and dying of cold, and waited for the priest to come till near upon
day, when, unable to watch any longer, he returned to the ground floor
room and there fell asleep. Towards tierce he awoke and the street
door being now open, he made a show of returning from otherwhere and
went up into his house and dined. A little after, he sent a lad, as he
were the priest's clerkling that had confessed her, to the lady to ask
if she wot of were come thither again. She knew the messenger well
enough and answered that he had not come thither that night and that
if he did thus, he might haply pass out of her mind, albeit she wished
it not. What more should I tell you? The jealous man abode on the
watch night after night, looking to catch the priest at his entering
in, and the lady still had a merry life with her lover the while.

At length the cuckold, able to contain himself no longer, asked his
wife, with an angry air, what she had said to the priest the morning
she had confessed herself to him. She answered that she would not tell
him, for that it was neither a just thing nor a seemly; whereupon,
'Vile woman that thou art!' cried he. 'In despite of thee I know what
thou saidst to him, and needs must I know the priest of whom thou art
so mightily enamoured and who, by means of his conjurations, lieth
with thee every night; else will I slit thy weasand.' She replied that
it was not true that she was enamoured of any priest. 'How?' cried the
husband, 'Saidst thou not thus and thus to the priest who confessed
thee?' And she, 'Thou couldst not have reported it better, not to say
if he had told it thee, but if thou hadst been present; ay, I did tell
him this.' 'Then,' rejoined the jealous man, 'tell me who is this
priest, and that quickly.'

The lady fell a-smiling and answered, 'It rejoiceth me mightily to see
a wise man led by the nose by a woman, even as one leadeth a ram by
the horns to the shambles, albeit thou art no longer wise nor hast
been since the hour when, unknowing why, thou sufferedst the malignant
spirit of jealousy to enter thy breast; and the sillier and more
besotted thou art, so much the less is my glory thereof. Deemest thou,
husband mine, I am as blind of the eyes of the body as thou of those
of the mind? Certes, no; I perceived at first sight who was the priest
that confessed me and know that thou wast he; but I had it at heart to
give thee that which thou wentest seeking, and in sooth I have done
it. Wert thou as wise as thou thinkest to be, thou wouldst not have
essayed by this means to learn the secrets of thy good wife, but
wouldst, without taking vain suspicion, have recognized that which she
confessed to thee to be the very truth, without her having sinned in
aught. I told thee that I loved a priest, and wast not thou, whom I am
much to blame to love as I do, become a priest? I told thee that no
door of my house could abide locked, whenas he had a mind to lie with
me; and what door in the house was ever kept against thee, whenas thou
wouldst come whereas I might be? I told thee that the priest lay with
me every night, and when was it that thou layest not with me? And
whenassoever thou sentest thy clerk to me, which was thou knowest, as
often as thou layest from me, I sent thee word that the priest had not
been with me. What other than a crack-brain like thee, who has
suffered thyself to be blinded by thy jealousy, had failed to
understand these things? Thou hast abidden in the house, keeping
watch anights, and thoughtest to have given me to believe that thou
wast gone abroad to sup and sleep. Bethink thee henceforth and become
a man again, as thou wast wont to be; and make not thyself a laughing
stock to whoso knoweth thy fashions, as do I, and leave this
unconscionable watching that thou keepest; for I swear to God that, an
the fancy took me to make thee wear the horns, I would engage, haddest
thou an hundred eyes, as thou hast but two, to do my pleasure on such
wise that thou shouldst not be ware thereof.'

The jealous wretch, who thought to have very adroitly surprised his
wife's secrets, hearing this, avouched himself befooled and without
answering otherwhat, held the lady for virtuous and discreet; and
whenas it behoved him to be jealous, he altogether divested himself of
his jealousy, even as he had put it on, what time he had no need
thereof. Wherefore the discreet lady, being in a manner licensed to do
her pleasures, thenceforward no longer caused her lover to come to her
by the roof, as go the cats, but e'en brought him in at the door, and
dealing advisedly, many a day thereafter gave herself a good time and
led a merry life with him."




THE SIXTH STORY

[Day the Seventh]

     MADAM ISABELLA, BEING IN COMPANY WITH LEONETTO HER LOVER, IS
     VISITED BY ONE MESSER LAMBERTUCCIO, OF WHOM SHE IS BELOVED;
     HER HUSBAND RETURNING, [UNEXPECTED,] SHE SENDETH
     LAMBERTUCCIO FORTH OF THE HOUSE, WHINGER IN HAND, AND THE
     HUSBAND AFTER ESCORTETH LEONETTO HOME


The company were wonder-well pleased with Fiammetta's story, all
affirming that the lady had done excellently well and as it behoved
unto such a brute of a man, and after it was ended, the king bade
Pampinea follow on, who proceeded to say, "There are many who,
speaking ignorantly, avouch that love bereaveth folk of their senses
and causeth whoso loveth to become witless. Meseemeth this is a
foolish opinion, as hath indeed been well enough shown by the things
already related, and I purpose yet again to demonstrate it.

In our city, which aboundeth in all good things, there was once a
young lady both gently born and very fair, who was the wife of a very
worthy and notable gentleman; and as it happeneth often that folk
cannot for ever brook one same food, but desire bytimes to vary their
diet, this lady, her husband not altogether satisfying her, became
enamoured of a young man called Leonetto and very well bred and
agreeable, for all he was of no great extraction. He on like wise fell
in love with her, and as you know that seldom doth that which both
parties desire abide without effect, it was no great while before
accomplishment was given to their loves. Now it chanced that, she
being a fair and engaging lady, a gentleman called Messer
Lambertuccio became sore enamoured of her, whom, for that he seemed
to her a disagreeable man and a tiresome, she could not for aught in
the world bring herself to love. However, after soliciting her amain
with messages and it availing him nought, he sent to her threatening
her, for that he was a notable man, to dishonour her, an she did not
his pleasure; wherefore she, fearful and knowing his character,
submitted herself to do his will.

It chanced one day that the lady, whose name was Madam Isabella, being
gone, as is our custom in summer-time, to abide at a very goodly
estate she had in the country and her husband having ridden
somewhither to pass some days abroad, she sent for Leonetto to come
and be with her, whereat he was mightily rejoiced and betook himself
thither incontinent. Meanwhile Messer Lambertuccio, hearing that her
husband was gone abroad, took horse and repairing, all alone, to her
house, knocked at the door. The lady's waiting-woman, seeing him, came
straight to her mistress, who was closeted with Leonetto, and called
to her, saying, 'Madam, Messer Lambertuccio is below, all alone.' The
lady, hearing this, was the woefullest woman in the world, but, as she
stood in great fear of Messer Lambertuccio, she besought Leonetto not
to take it ill to hide himself awhile behind the curtains of her bed
till such time as the other should be gone. Accordingly, Leonetto, who
feared him no less than did the lady, hid himself there and she bade
the maid go open to Messer Lambertuccio, which being done, he lighted
down in the courtyard and making his palfrey fast to a staple there,
went up into the house. The lady put on a cheerful countenance and
coming to the head of the stair, received him with as good a grace as
she might and asked him what brought him thither; whereupon he caught
her in his arms and clipped her and kissed her, saying, 'My soul, I
understood that your husband was abroad and am come accordingly to be
with you awhile.' After these words, they entered a bedchamber, where
they locked themselves in, and Messer Lambertuccio fell to taking
delight of her.

As they were thus engaged, it befell, altogether out of the lady's
expectation, that her husband returned, whom when the maid saw near
the house, she ran in haste to the lady's chamber and said, 'Madam,
here is my lord come back; methinketh he is already below in the
courtyard.' When the lady heard this, bethinking her that she had two
men in the house and knowing that there was no hiding Messer
Lambertuccio, by reason of his palfrey which was in the courtyard, she
gave herself up for lost. Nevertheless, taking a sudden resolution,
she sprang hastily down from the bed and said to Messer Lambertuccio,
'Sir, an you wish me anywise well and would save me from death, do
that which I shall bid you. Take your hanger naked in your hand and go
down the stair with an angry air and all disordered and begone,
saying, "I vow to God that I will take him elsewhere." And should my
husband offer to detain you or question you of aught, do you say no
otherwhat than that which I have told you, but take horse and look you
abide not with him on any account.' The gentleman answered that he
would well, and accordingly, drawing his hanger, he did as she had
enjoined him, with a face all afire what with the swink he had
furnished and with anger at the husband's return. The latter was by
this dismounted in the courtyard and marvelled to see the palfrey
there; then, offering to go up into the house, he saw Messer
Lambertuccio come down and wondering both at his words and his air,
said, 'What is this, sir?' Messer Lambertuccio putting his foot in the
stirrup and mounting to horse, said nought but, 'Cock's body, I shall
find him again otherwhere,' and made off.

The gentleman, going up, found his wife at the stairhead, all
disordered and fearful, and said to her, 'What is all this? Whom goeth
Messer Lambertuccio threatening thus in such a fury?' The lady,
withdrawing towards the chamber where Leonetto was, so he might hear
her, answered, 'Sir, never had I the like of this fright. There came
fleeing hither but now a young man, whom I know not, followed by
Messer Lambertuccio, hanger in hand, and finding by chance the door of
this chamber open, said to me, all trembling, "For God's sake, madam,
help me, that I be not slain in your arms." I rose to my feet and was
about to question him who he was and what ailed him, when, behold, in
rushed Messer Lambertuccio, saying, "Where art thou, traitor?" I set
myself before the chamber-door and hindered him from entering; and he
was in so far courteous that, after many words, seeing it pleased me
not that he should enter there, he went his way down, as you have
seen.' Quoth the husband, 'Wife, thou didst well, it were too great a
reproach to us, had a man been slain in our house, and Messer
Lambertuccio did exceeding unmannerly to follow a person who had taken
refuge here.'

Then he asked where the young man was, and the lady answered, 'Indeed
sir, I know not where he hath hidden himself.' Then said the husband
'Where art thou? Come forth in safety.' Whereupon Leonetto, who had
heard everything, came forth all trembling for fear, (as indeed he had
had a great fright,) of the place where he had hidden himself, and the
gentleman said to him, 'What hast thou to do with Messer
Lambertuccio?' 'Sir,' answered he, 'I have nothing in the world to do
with him, wherefore methinketh assuredly he is either not in his right
wits or he hath mistaken me for another; for that no sooner did he set
eyes on me in the road not far from this house than he forthright
clapped his hand to his hanger and said, "Traitor, thou art a dead
man!" I stayed not to ask why, but took to my heels as best I might
and made my way hither, where, thanks to God and to this gentlewoman,
I have escaped.' Quoth the husband, 'Go to; have no fears; I will
bring thee to thine own house safe and sound, and thou canst after
seek out what thou hast to do with him.' Accordingly, when they had
supped, he mounted him a-horseback and carrying him back to Florence,
left him in his own house. As for Leonetto, that same evening,
according as he had been lessoned of the lady, he privily bespoke
Messer Lambertuccio and took such order with him, albeit there was
much talk of the matter thereafterward, the husband never for all that
became aware of the cheat that had been put on him by his wife."




THE SEVENTH STORY

[Day the Seventh]

     LODOVICO DISCOVERETH TO MADAM BEATRICE THE LOVE HE BEARETH
     HER, WHEREUPON SHE SENDETH EGANO HER HUSBAND INTO THE
     GARDEN, IN HER OWN FAVOUR, AND LIETH MEANWHILE WITH
     LODOVICO, WHO, PRESENTLY ARISING, GOETH AND CUDGELLETH EGANO
     IN THE GARDEN


Madam Isabella's presence of mind, as related by Pampinea, was held
admirable by all the company; but, whilst they yet marvelled thereat,
Filomena, whom the king had appointed to follow on, said, "Lovesome
ladies, and I mistake not, methinketh I can tell you no less goodly a
story on the same subject, and that forthright.

You must know, then, that there was once in Paris a Florentine
gentleman, who was for poverty turned merchant and had thriven so well
in commerce that he was grown thereby very rich. He had by his lady
one only son, whom he had named Lodovico, and for that he might
concern himself with his father's nobility and not with trade, he had
willed not to place him in any warehouse, but had sent him to be with
other gentlemen in the service of the King of France, where he learned
store of goodly manners and other fine things. During his sojourn
there, it befell that certain gentlemen, who were returned from
visiting the Holy Sepulchre, coming in upon a conversation between
certain young men, of whom Lodovico was one, and hearing them
discourse among themselves of the fair ladies of France and England
and other parts of the world, one of them began to say that assuredly,
in all the lands he had traversed and for all the ladies he had seen,
he had never beheld the like for beauty of Madam Beatrice, the wife of
Messer Egano de' Gulluzzi of Bologna; to which all his companions, who
had with him seen her at Bologna, agreed.

Lodovico, who had never yet been enamoured of any woman, hearkening to
this, was fired with such longing to see her that he could hold his
thought to nothing else and being altogether resolved to journey to
Bologna for that purpose and there, if she pleased him, to abide
awhile, he feigned to his father that he had a mind to go visit the
Holy Sepulchre, the which with great difficulty he obtained of him.
Accordingly, taking the name of Anichino, he set out for Bologna, and
on the day following [his arrival,] as fortune would have it, he saw
the lady in question at an entertainment, where she seemed to him
fairer far than he had imagined her; wherefore, falling most ardently
enamoured of her, he resolved never to depart Bologna till he should
have gained her love. Then, devising in himself what course he should
take to this end, he bethought himself, leaving be all other means,
that, an he might but avail to become one of her husband's servants,
whereof he entertained many, he might peradventure compass that which
he desired. Accordingly, having sold his horses and disposed as best
might be of his servants, bidding them make a show of knowing him not,
he entered into discourse with his host and told him that he would
fain engage for a servant with some gentleman of condition, could
such an one be found. Quoth the host, 'Thou art the right serving-man
to please a gentleman of this city, by name Egano, who keepeth many
and will have them all well looking, as thou art. I will bespeak him
of the matter.' As he said, so he did, and ere he took leave of Egano,
he had brought Anichino to an accord with him, to the exceeding
satisfaction of the latter, who, abiding with Egano and having
abundant opportunity of seeing his lady often, proceeded to serve him
so well and so much to his liking that he set such store by him that
he could do nothing without him and committed to him the governance,
not of himself alone, but of all his affairs.

It chanced one day that, Egano being gone a-fowling and having left
Anichino at home, Madam Beatrice (who was not yet become aware of his
love for her, albeit, considering him and his fashions, she had
ofttimes much commended him to herself and he pleased her,) fell to
playing chess with him and he, desiring to please her, very adroitly
contrived to let himself be beaten, whereat the lady was marvellously
rejoiced. Presently, all her women having gone away from seeing them
play and left them playing alone, Anichino heaved a great sigh,
whereupon she looked at him and said, 'What aileth thee, Anichino?
Doth it irk thee that I should beat thee?' 'Madam,' answered he, 'a
far greater thing than that was the cause of my sighing.' Quoth the
lady, 'Prithee, as thou wishest me well, tell it me.' When Anichino
heard himself conjured, 'as thou wishest me well,' by her whom he
loved over all else, he heaved a sigh yet heavier than the first;
wherefore the lady besought him anew that it would please him tell her
the cause of his sighing. 'Madam,' replied Anichino, 'I am sore
fearful lest it displease you, if I tell it you, and moreover I
misdoubt me you will tell it again to others.' Whereto rejoined she,
'Certes, it will not displease me, and thou mayst be assured that,
whatsoever thou sayest to me I will never tell to any, save whenas it
shall please thee.' Quoth he, 'Since you promise me this, I will e'en
tell it you.' Then, with tears in his eyes, he told her who he was and
what he had heard of her and when and how he was become enamoured of
her and why he had taken service with her husband and after humbly
besought her that it would please her have compassion on him and
comply with him in that his secret and so fervent desire, and in case
she willed not to do this, that she should suffer him to love her,
leaving him be in that his then present guise.

O singular blandness of the Bolognese blood! How art thou still to be
commended in such circumstance! Never wast thou desirous of tears or
sighs; still wast thou compliant unto prayers and amenable unto
amorous desires! Had I words worthy to commend thee, my voice should
never weary of singing thy praises. The gentle lady, what while
Anichino spoke, kept her eyes fixed on him and giving full credence to
his words, received, by the prevalence of his prayers, the love of him
with such might into her heart that she also fell a-sighing and
presently answered, 'Sweet my Anichino, be of good courage; neither
presents nor promises nor solicitations of nobleman or gentleman or
other (for I have been and am yet courted of many) have ever availed
to move my heart to love any one of them; but thou, in this small
space of time that thy words have lasted, hast made me far more thine
than mine own. Methinketh thou hast right well earned my love,
wherefore I give it thee and promise thee that I will cause thee have
enjoyment thereof ere this next night be altogether spent. And that
this may have effect, look thou come to my chamber about midnight. I
will leave the door open; thou knowest which side the bed I lie; do
thou come thither and if I sleep, touch me so I may awake, and I will
ease thee of this so long desire that thou hast had. And that thou
mayst believe this that I say, I will e'en give thee a kiss by way of
arles.' Accordingly, throwing her arms about his neck, she kissed him
amorously and he on like wise kissed her. These things said, he left
her and went to do certain occasions of his, awaiting with the
greatest gladness in the world the coming of the night.

Presently, Egano returned from fowling and being weary, betook himself
to bed, as soon as he had supper, and after him the lady, who left the
chamber-door open, as she had promised. Thither, at the appointed
hour, came Anichino and softly entering the chamber, shut the door
again from within; then, going up to the bed on the side where the
lady lay, he put his hand to her breast and found her awake. As soon
as she felt him come, she took his hand in both her own and held it
fast; then, turning herself about in the bed, she did on such wise
that Egano, who was asleep, awoke; whereupon quoth she to him, 'I
would not say aught to thee yestereve, for that meseemed thou was
weary; but tell me, Egano, so God save thee, whom holdest thou thy
best and trustiest servant and him who most loveth thee of those whom
thou hast in the house?' 'Wife,' answered Egano, 'what is this whereof
thou askest me? Knowest thou it not? I have not nor had aye any in
whom I so trusted and whom I loved as I love and trust in Anichino.
But why dost thou ask me thereof?'

Anichino, seeing Egano awake and hearing talk of himself, was sore
afraid lest the lady had a mind to cozen him and offered again and
again to draw his hand away, so he might begone; but she held it so
fast that he could not win free. Then said she to Egano, 'I will tell
thee. I also believed till to-day that he was even such as thou sayest
and that he was more loyal to thee than any other, but he hath
undeceived me; for that, what while thou wentest a-fowling to-day, he
abode here, and whenas it seemed to him time, he was not ashamed to
solicit me to yield myself to his pleasures, and I, so I might make
thee touch and see this thing and that it might not behove me certify
thee thereof with too many proofs, replied that I would well and that
this very night, after midnight, I would go into our garden and there
await him at the foot of the pine. Now for my part I mean not to go
thither; but thou, an thou have a mind to know thy servant's fidelity,
thou mayst lightly do it by donning a gown and a veil of mine and
going down yonder to wait and see if he will come thither, as I am
assured he will.' Egano hearing this, answered, 'Certes, needs must I
go see,' and rising, donned one of the lady's gowns, as best he knew
in the dark; then, covering his head with a veil, he betook himself to
the garden and proceeded to await Anichino at the foot of the pine.

As for the lady, as soon as she knew him gone forth of the chamber,
she arose and locked the door from within, whilst Anichino, (who had
had the greatest fright he had ever known and had enforced himself as
most he might to escape from the lady's hands, cursing her and her
love and himself who had trusted in her an hundred thousand times,)
seeing this that she had done in the end, was the joyfullest man that
was aye. Then, she having returned to bed, he, at her bidding, put off
his clothes and coming to bed to her, they took delight and pleasure
together a pretty while; after which, herseeming he should not abide
longer, she caused him arise and dress himself and said to him,
'Sweetheart, do thou take a stout cudgel and get thee to the garden
and there, feigning to have solicited me to try me, rate Egano, as he
were I, and ring me a good peal of bells on his back with the cudgel,
for that thereof will ensue to us marvellous pleasance and delight.'
Anichino accordingly repaired to the garden, with a sallow-stick in
his hand, and Egano, seeing him draw near the pine, rose up and came
to meet him, as he would receive him with the utmost joy; whereupon
quoth Anichino, 'Ah, wicked woman, art thou then come hither, and
thinkest thou I would do my lord such a wrong? A thousand times ill
come to thee!' Then, raising the cudgel, he began to lay on to him.

Egano, hearing this and seeing the cudgel, took to his heels, without
saying a word, whilst Anichino still followed after him, saying, 'Go
to, God give thee an ill year, vile woman that thou art! I will
certainly tell it to Egano to-morrow morning.' Egano made his way back
to the chamber as quickliest he might, having gotten sundry good
clouts, and being questioned of the lady if Anichino had come to the
garden, 'Would God he had not!' answered he. 'For that, taking me for
thee, he hath cudgelled me to a mummy and given me the soundest rating
that was aye bestowed upon lewd woman. Certes, I marvelled sore at him
that he should have said these words to thee, with intent to do aught
that might be a shame to me; but, for that he saw thee so blithe and
gamesome, he had a mind to try thee.' Then said the lady, 'Praised be
God that he hath tried me with words and thee with deeds! Methinketh
he may say that I suffered his words more patiently than thou his
deeds. But, since he is so loyal to thee, it behoveth thee hold him
dear and do him honour.' 'Certes,' answered Egano, 'thou sayst sooth';
and reasoning by this, he concluded that he had the truest wife and
the trustiest servant that ever gentleman had; by reason whereof,
albeit both he and the lady made merry more than once with Anichino
over this adventure, the latter and his mistress had leisure enough of
that which belike, but for this, they would not have had, to wit, to
do that which afforded them pleasance and delight, that while it
pleased Anichino abide with Egano in Bologna."




THE EIGHTH STORY

[Day the Seventh]

     A MAN WAXETH JEALOUS OF HIS WIFE, WHO BINDETH A PIECE OF
     PACKTHREAD TO HER GREAT TOE ANIGHTS, SO SHE MAY HAVE NOTICE
     OF HER LOVER'S COMING. ONE NIGHT HER HUSBAND BECOMETH AWARE
     OF THIS DEVICE AND WHAT WHILE HE PURSUETH THE LOVER, THE
     LADY PUTTETH ANOTHER WOMAN TO BED IN HER ROOM. THIS LATTER
     THE HUSBAND BEATETH AND CUTTETH OFF HER HAIR, THEN FETCHETH
     HIS WIFE'S BROTHERS, WHO, FINDING HIS STORY [SEEMINGLY]
     UNTRUE, GIVE HIM HARD WORDS


It seemed to them all that Madam Beatrice had been extraordinarily
ingenious in cozening her husband and all agreed that Anichino's
fright must have been very great, whenas, being the while held fast by
the lady, he heard her say that he had required her of love. But the
king, seeing Filomena silent, turned to Neifile and said to her, "Do
you tell"; whereupon she, smiling first a little, began, "Fair ladies,
I have a hard task before me if I desire to pleasure you with a goodly
story, as those of you have done, who have already told; but, with
God's aid, I trust to discharge myself thereof well enough.

You must know, then, that there was once in our city a very rich
merchant called Arriguccio Berlinghieri, who, foolishly thinking, as
merchants yet do every day, to ennoble himself by marriage, took to
wife a young gentlewoman ill sorting with himself, by name Madam
Sismonda, who, for that he, merchant-like, was much abroad and
sojourned little with her, fell in love with a young man called
Ruberto, who had long courted her, and clapped up a lover's privacy
with him. Using belike over-little discretion in her dealings with her
lover, for that they were supremely delightsome to her, it chanced
that, whether Arriguccio scented aught of the matter or how else
soever it happened, the latter became the most jealous man alive and
leaving be his going about and all his other concerns, applied himself
well nigh altogether to the keeping good watch over his wife; nor
would he ever fall asleep, except he first felt her come into the bed;
by reason whereof the lady suffered the utmost chagrin, for that on no
wise might she avail to be with her Ruberto.

However, after pondering many devices for finding a means to
foregather with him and being to boot continually solicited thereof by
him, it presently occurred to her to do on this wise; to wit, having
many a time observed that Arriguccio tarried long to fall asleep, but
after slept very soundly, she determined to cause Ruberto come about
midnight to the door of the house and to go open to him and abide with
him what while her husband slept fast. And that she might know when he
should be come, she bethought herself to hang a twine out of the
window of her bedchamber, which looked upon the street, on such wise
that none might perceive it, one end whereof should well nigh reach
the ground, whilst she carried the other end along the floor of the
room to the bed and hid it under the clothes, meaning to make it fast
to her great toe, whenas she should be abed. Accordingly, she sent to
acquaint Ruberto with this and charged him, when he came, to pull the
twine, whereupon, if her husband slept, she would let it go and come
to open to him; but, if he slept not, she would hold it fast and draw
it to herself, so he should not wait. The device pleased Ruberto and
going thither frequently, he was whiles able to foregather with her
and whiles not.

On this wise they continued to do till, one night, the lady being
asleep, it chanced that her husband stretched out his foot in bed and
felt the twine, whereupon he put his hand to it and finding it made
fast to his wife's toe, said in himself, 'This should be some trick';
and presently perceiving that the twine led out of window, he held it
for certain. Accordingly, he cut it softly from the lady's toe and
making it fast to his own, abode on the watch to see what this might
mean. He had not waited long before up came Ruberto and pulled at the
twine, as of his wont; whereupon Arriguccio started up; but, he not
having made the twine well fast to his toe and Ruberto pulling hard,
it came loose in the latter's hand, whereby he understood that he was
to wait and did so. As for Arriguccio, he arose in haste and taking
his arms, ran to the door, to see who this might be and do him a
mischief, for, albeit a merchant, he was a stout fellow and a strong.
When he came to the door, he opened it not softly as the lady was used
to do, which when Ruberto, who was await, observed, he guessed how the
case stood, to wit, that it was Arriguccio who opened the door, and
accordingly made off in haste and the other after him. At last, having
fled a great way and Arriguccio stinting not from following him,
Ruberto, being also armed, drew his sword and turned upon his pursuer,
whereupon they fell to blows, the one attacking and the other
defending himself.

Meanwhile, the lady, awaking, as Arriguccio opened the chamber-door,
and finding the twine cut from her toe, knew incontinent that her
device was discovered, whereupon, perceiving that her husband had run
after her lover, she arose in haste and foreseeing what might happen,
called her maid, who knew all, and conjured her to such purpose that
she prevailed with her to take her own place in the bed, beseeching
her patiently to endure, without discovering herself, whatsoever
buffets Arriguccio might deal her, for that she would requite her
therefor on such wise that she should have no cause to complain; after
which she did out the light that burnt in the chamber and going forth
thereof, hid herself in another part of the house and there began to
await what should betide.

Meanwhile, the people of the quarter, aroused by the noise of the
affray between Arriguccio and Ruberto, arose and fell a-railing at
them; whereupon the husband, fearing to be known, let the youth go,
without having availed to learn who he was or to do him any hurt, and
returned to his house, full of rage and despite. There, coming into
the chamber, he cried out angrily, saying, 'Where art thou, vile
woman? Thou hast done out the light, so I may not find thee; but thou
art mistaken.' Then, coming to the bedside, he seized upon the maid,
thinking to take his wife, and laid on to her so lustily with cuffs
and kicks, as long as he could wag his hands and feet, that he bruised
all her face, ending by cutting off her hair, still giving her the
while the hardest words that were ever said to worthless woman. The
maid wept sore, as indeed she had good cause to do, and albeit she
said whiles, 'Alas, mercy, for God's sake!' and 'Oh, no more!' her
voice was so broken with sobs and Arriguccio was so hindered with his
rage that he never discerned it to be that of another woman than his
wife.

Having, then, as we have said, beaten her to good purpose and cut off
her hair, he said to her, 'Wicked woman that thou art, I mean not to
touch thee otherwise, but shall now go fetch thy brothers and acquaint
them with thy fine doings and after bid them come for thee and deal
with thee as they shall deem may do them honour and carry thee away;
for assuredly in this house thou shalt abide no longer.' So saying, he
departed the chamber and locking the door from without, went away all
alone. As soon as Madam Sismonda, who had heard all, was certified of
her husband's departure, she opened the door and rekindling the light,
found her maid all bruised and weeping sore; whereupon she comforted
her as best she might and carried her back to her own chamber, where
she after caused privily tend her and care for her and so rewarded her
of Arriguccio's own monies that she avouched herself content. No
sooner had she done this than she hastened to make the bed in her own
chamber and all restablished it and set it in such order as if none
had lain there that night; after which she dressed and tired herself,
as if she had not yet gone to bed; then, lighting a lamp, she took her
clothes and seated herself at the stairhead, where she proceeded to
sew and await the issue of the affair.

Meanwhile Arriguccio betook himself in all haste to the house of his
wife's brothers and there knocked so long and so loudly that he was
heard and it was opened to him. The lady's three brothers and her
mother, hearing that it was Arriguccio, rose all and letting kindle
lights, came to him and asked what he went seeking at that hour and
alone. Whereupon, beginning from the twine he had found tied to wife's
toe, he recounted to them all that he had discovered and done, and to
give them entire proof of the truth of his story, he put into their
hands the hair he thought to have cut from his wife's head, ending by
requiring them to come for her and do with her that which they should
judge pertinent to their honour, for that he meant to keep her no
longer in his house. The lady's brothers, hearing this and holding it
for certain, were sore incensed against her and letting kindle
torches, set out to accompany Arriguccio to his house, meaning to do
her a mischief; which their mother seeing, she followed after them,
weeping and entreating now the one, now the other not to be in such
haste to believe these things of their sister, without seeing or
knowing more of the matter, for that her husband might have been
angered with her for some other cause and have maltreated her and
might now allege this in his own excuse, adding that she marvelled
exceedingly how this [whereof he accused her] could have happened, for
that she knew her daughter well, as having reared her from a little
child, with many other words to the like purpose.

When they came to Arriguccio's house, they entered and proceeded to
mount the stair, whereupon Madam Sismonda, hearing them come, said,
'Who is there?' To which one of her brothers answered, 'Thou shalt
soon know who it is, vile woman that thou art!' 'God aid us!' cried
she. 'What meaneth this?' Then, rising to her feet, 'Brothers mine,'
quoth she, 'you are welcome; but what go you all three seeking at this
hour?' The brothers,--seeing her seated sewing, with no sign of
beating on her face, whereas Arriguccio avouched that he had beaten
her to a mummy,--began to marvel and curbing the violence of their
anger, demanded of her how that had been whereof Arriguccio accused
her, threatening her sore, and she told them not all. Quoth she, 'I
know not what you would have me say nor of what Arriguccio can have
complained to you of me.' Arriguccio, seeing her thus, eyed her as if
he had lost his wits, remembering that he had dealt her belike a
thousand buffets on the face and scratched her and done her all the
ill in the world, and now he beheld her as if nothing of all this had
been.

Her brothers told her briefly what they had heard from Arriguccio,
twine and beating and all, whereupon she turned to him and said,
'Alack, husband mine, what is this I hear? Why wilt thou make me pass,
to thine own great shame, for an ill woman, where as I am none, and
thyself for a cruel and wicked man, which thou art not? When wast thou
in this house to-night till now, let alone with me? When didst thou
beat me? For my part, I have no remembrance of it.' 'How, vile woman
that thou art!' cried he. 'Did we not go to bed together here? Did I
not return hither, after running after thy lover? Did I not deal thee
a thousand buffets and cut off thy hair?' 'Thou wentest not to bed in
this house to-night,' replied Sismonda. 'But let that pass, for I can
give no proof thereof other than mine own true words, and let us come
to that which thou sayest, to wit, that thou didst beat me and cut off
my hair. Me thou hast never beaten, and do all who are here and thou
thyself take note of me, if I have any mark of beating in any part of
my person. Indeed, I should not counsel thee make so bold as to lay a
hand on me, for, by Christ His Cross, I would mar thy face for thee!
Neither didst thou cut off my hair, for aught that I felt or saw; but
haply thou didst it on such wise that I perceived it not; let me see
if I have it shorn or no.' Then, putting off her veil from her head,
she showed that she had her hair unshorn and whole.

Her mother and brothers, seeing and hearing all this, turned upon her
husband and said to him, 'What meanest thou, Arriguccio? This is not
that so far which thou camest to tell us thou hadst done, and we know
not how thou wilt make good the rest.' Arriguccio stood as one in a
trance and would have spoken; but, seeing that it was not as he
thought he could show, he dared say nothing; whereupon the lady,
turning to her brothers, said to them, 'Brothers mine, I see he hath
gone seeking to have me do what I have never yet chosen to do, to wit,
that I should acquaint you with his lewdness and his vile fashions,
and I will do it. I firmly believe that this he hath told you hath
verily befallen him and that he hath done as he saith; and you shall
hear how. This worthy man, to whom in an ill hour for me you gave me
to wife, who calleth himself a merchant and would be thought a man of
credit, this fellow, forsooth, who should be more temperate than a
monk and chaster than a maid, there be few nights but he goeth
fuddling himself about the taverns, foregathering now with this lewd
woman and now with that and keeping me waiting for him, on such wise
as you find me, half the night and whiles even till morning. I doubt
not but that, having well drunken, he went to bed with some trull of
his and waking, found the twine on her foot and after did all these
his fine feats whereof he telleth, winding up by returning to her and
beating her and cutting off her hair; and not being yet well come to
himself, he fancied (and I doubt not yet fancieth) that he did all
this to me; and if you look him well in the face, you will see he is
yet half fuddled. Algates, whatsoever he may have said of me, I will
not have you take it to yourselves except as a drunken man's talk, and
since I forgive him, do you also pardon him.'

Her mother, hearing this, began to make an outcry and say, 'By Christ
His Cross, daughter mine, it shall not pass thus! Nay, he should
rather be slain for a thankless, ill-conditioned dog, who was never
worthy to have a girl of thy fashion to wife. Marry, a fine thing,
forsooth! He could have used thee no worse, had he picked thee up out
of the dirt! Devil take him if thou shalt abide at the mercy of the
spite of a paltry little merchant of asses' dung! They come to us out
of their pigstyes in the country, clad in homespun frieze, with their
bag-breeches and pen in arse, and as soon as they have gotten a leash
of groats, they must e'en have the daughters of gentlemen and right
ladies to wife and bear arms and say, "I am of such a family" and
"Those of my house did thus and thus." Would God my sons had followed
my counsel in the matter, for that they might have stablished thee so
worshipfully in the family of the Counts Guidi, with a crust of bread
to thy dowry! But they must needs give thee to this fine jewel of
fellow, who, whereas thou art the best girl in Florence and the
modestest, is not ashamed to knock us up in the middle of the night,
to tell us that thou art a strumpet, as if we knew thee not. But, by
God His faith, an they would be ruled by me, he should get such a
trouncing therefor that he should stink for it!' Then, turning to the
lady's brothers, 'My sons,' said she, 'I told you this could not be.
Have you heard how your fine brother-in-law here entreateth your
sister? Four-farthing[353] huckster that he is! Were I in your shoes,
he having said what he hath of her and doing that which he doth, I
would never hold myself content nor appeased till I had rid the earth
of him; and were I a man, as I am a woman, I would trouble none other
than myself to despatch his business. Confound him for a sorry drunken
beast, that hath no shame!'

[Footnote 353: Or, in modern parlance, "twopennny-halfpenny."]

The young men, seeing and hearing all this, turned upon Arriguccio and
gave him the soundest rating ever losel got; and ultimately they said
to him. 'We pardon thee this as to a drunken man; but, as thou
tenderest thy life, look henceforward we hear no more news of this
kind, for, if aught of the like come ever again to our ears, we will
pay thee at once for this and for that.' So saying, they went their
ways, leaving Arriguccio all aghast, as it were he had taken leave of
his wits, unknowing in himself whether that which he had done had
really been or whether he had dreamed it; wherefore he made no more
words thereof, but left his wife in peace. Thus the lady, by her ready
wit, not only escaped the imminent peril [that threatened her,] but
opened herself a way to do her every pleasure in time to come, without
evermore having any fear of her husband."




THE NINTH STORY

[Day the Seventh]

     LYDIA, WIFE OF NICOSTRATUS, LOVETH PYRRHUS, WHO, SO HE MAY
     BELIEVE IT, REQUIRETH OF HER THREE THINGS, ALL WHICH SHE
     DOTH. MOREOVER, SHE SOLACETH HERSELF WITH HIM IN THE
     PRESENCE OF NICOSTRATUS AND MAKETH THE LATTER BELIEVE THAT
     THAT WHICH HE HATH SEEN IS NOT REAL


Neifile's story so pleased the ladies that they could neither give
over to laugh at nor to talk of it, albeit the king, having bidden
Pamfilo tell his story, had several times imposed silence upon them.
However, after they had held their peace, Pamfilo began thus: "I do
not believe, worshipful ladies, that there is anything, how hard and
doubtful soever it be, that whoso loveth passionately will not dare to
do; the which, albeit it hath already been demonstrated in many
stories, methinketh, nevertheless, I shall be able yet more plainly to
show forth to you in one which I purpose to tell you and wherein you
shall hear of a lady, who was in her actions much more favoured of
fortune than well-advised of reason; wherefore I would not counsel any
one to adventure herself in the footsteps of her of whom I am to tell,
for that fortune is not always well disposed nor are all men in the
world equally blind.

In Argos, city of Achia far more famous for its kings of past time
than great in itself, there was once a nobleman called Nicostratus, to
whom, when already neighbouring on old age, fortune awarded a lady of
great family to wife, whose name was Lydia and who was no less
high-spirited than fair. Nicostratus, like a nobleman and a man of
wealth as he was, kept many servants and hounds and hawks and took the
utmost delight in the chase. Among his other servants he had a young
man called Pyrrhus, who was sprightly and well bred and comely of his
person and adroit in all that he had a mind to do, and him he loved
and trusted over all else. Of this Pyrrhus Lydia became so sore
enamoured that neither by day nor by night could she have her thought
otherwhere than with him; but he, whether it was that he perceived not
her liking for him or that he would none of it, appeared to reck
nothing thereof, by reason whereof the lady suffered intolerable
chagrin in herself and being altogether resolved to give him to know
of her passion, called a chamberwoman of hers, Lusca by name, in whom
she much trusted, and said to her, 'Lusca, the favours thou hast had
of me should make thee faithful and obedient; wherefore look thou none
ever know that which I shall presently say to thee, save he to whom I
shall charge thee tell it. As thou seest, Lusca, I am a young and
lusty lady, abundantly endowed with all those things which any woman
can desire; in brief, I can complain of but one thing, to wit, that my
husband's years are overmany, an they be measured by mine own,
wherefore I fare but ill in the matter of that thing wherein young
women take most pleasure, and none the less desiring it, as other
women do, I have this long while determined in myself, since fortune
hath been thus little my friend in giving me so old a husband, that I
will not be so much mine own enemy as not to contrive to find means
for my pleasures and my weal; which that I may have as complete in
this as in other things, I have bethought myself to will that our
Pyrrhus, as being worthier thereof than any other, should furnish them
with his embracements; nay, I have vowed him so great a love that I
never feel myself at ease save whenas I see him or think of him, and
except I foregather with him without delay, methinketh I shall
certainly die thereof. Wherefore, if my life be dear to thee, thou
wilt, on such wise as shall seem best to thee, signify to him any love
and beseech him, on my part, to be pleased to come to me, whenas thou
shalt go for him.'

The chamberwoman replied that she would well and taking Pyrrhus apart,
whenas first it seemed to her time and place, she did her lady's
errand to him as best she knew. Pyrrhus, hearing this, was sore amazed
thereat, as one who had never anywise perceived aught of the matter,
and misdoubted him the lady had let say this to him to try him;
wherefore he answered roughly and hastily, 'Lusca, I cannot believe
that these words come from my lady; wherefore, have a care what thou
sayst; or, if they do indeed come from her, I do not believe that she
caused thee say them with intent, and even if she did so, my lord doth
me more honour than I deserve and I would not for my life do him such
an outrage; wherefore look thou bespeak me no more of such things.'
Lusca, nowise daunted by his austere speech, said to him, 'Pyrrhus, I
will e'en bespeak thee both of this and of everything else wherewithal
my lady shall charge me when and as often as she shall bid me, whether
it cause thee pleasure or annoy; but thou art an ass.' Then, somewhat
despited at his words, she returned to her mistress, who, hearing what
Pyrrhus had said, wished for death, but, some days after, she again
bespoke the chamberwoman of the matter and said to her, 'Lusca, thou
knowest that the oak falleth not for the first stroke; wherefore
meseemeth well that thou return anew to him who so strangely willeth
to abide loyal to my prejudice, and taking a sortable occasion,
throughly discover to him my passion and do thine every endeavour that
the thing may have effect; for that, an it fall through thus, I shall
assuredly die of it. Moreover, he will think to have been befooled,
and whereas we seek to have his love, hate will ensue thereof.'

The maid comforted her and going in quest of Pyrrhus found him merry
and well-disposed and said to him, 'Pyrrhus I showed thee, a few days
agone, in what a fire my lady and thine abideth for the love she
beareth thee, and now anew I certify thee thereof, for that, an thou
persist in the rigour thou showedst the other day, thou mayst be
assured that she will not live long; wherefore I prithee be pleased to
satisfy her of her desire, and if thou yet abide fast in thine
obstinacy, whereas I have still accounted thee mighty discreet, I
shall hold thee a blockhead. What can be a greater glory for thee than
that such a lady, so fair and so noble, should love thee over all
else? Besides, how greatly shouldst thou acknowledge thyself beholden
unto Fortune, seeing that she proffereth thee a thing of such worth
and so conformable to the desires of thy youth and to boot, such a
resource for thy necessities! Which of thy peers knowest thou who
fareth better by way of delight than thou mayst fare, an thou be wise?
What other couldst thou find who may fare so well in the matter of
arms and horses and apparel and monies as thou mayst do, so thou wilt
but vouchsafe thy love to this lady? Open, then, thy mind to my words
and return to thy senses; bethink thee that once, and no oftener, it
is wont to betide that fortune cometh unto a man with smiling face and
open arms, who an he know not then to welcome, if after he find
himself poor and beggarly, he hath himself and not her to blame.
Besides, there is no call to use that loyalty between servants and
masters that behoveth between friends and kinsfolk; nay, servants
should use their masters, in so far as they may, like as themselves
are used of them. Thinkest thou, an thou hadst a fair wife or mother
or daughter or sister, who pleased Nicostratus, that he would go
questing after this loyalty that thou wouldst fain observe towards him
in respect of this lady? Thou are a fool, if thou think thus; for thou
mayst hold it for certain that, if blandishments and prayers sufficed
him not, he would not scruple to use force in the matter, whatsoever
thou mightest deem thereof. Let us, then, entreat them and their
affairs even as they entreat us and ours. Profit by the favour of
fortune and drive her not away, but welcome her with open arms and
meet her halfway, for assuredly, and thou do it not, thou wilt yet
(leave alone the death that will without fail ensue thereof to thy
lady) repent thee thereof so many a time thou wilt be fain to die
therefor.'

Pyrrhus, who had again and again pondered the words that Lusca had
said to him, had determined, and she should return to him, to make her
another guess answer and altogether to submit himself to comply with
the lady's wishes, so but he might be certified that it was not a
trick to try him, and accordingly answered, 'Harkye, Lusca; all that
thou sayst to me I allow to be true; but, on the other hand, I know my
lord for very discreet and well-advised, and as he committeth all his
affairs to my hands, I am sore adread lest Lydia, with his counsel and
by his wish, do this to try me; wherefore, an it please her for mine
assurance do three things that I shall ask, she shall for certain
thereafterward command me nought but I will do it forthright. And the
three things I desire are these: first, that in Nicostratus his
presence she slay his good hawk; secondly, that she send me a lock of
her husband's beard and lastly, one of his best teeth.' These
conditions seemed hard unto Lusca and to the lady harder yet;
however, Love, who is an excellent comforter[354] and a past master in
shifts and devices, made her resolve to do his pleasure and
accordingly she sent him word by her chamberwoman that she would
punctually do what he required and that quickly, and that over and
above this, for that he deemed Nicostratus so well-advised, she would
solace herself with him in her husband's presence and make the latter
believe that it was not true.

[Footnote 354: Syn. encourager, helper, auxiliary (_confortatore_).]

Pyrrhus, accordingly, began to await what the lady should do, and
Nicostratus having, a few days after, made, as he oftentimes used to
do, a great dinner to certain gentlemen, Madam Lydia, whenas the
tables were cleared away, came forth of her chamber, clad in green
samite and richly bedecked, and entered the saloon where the guests
were. There, in the sight of Pyrrhus and of all the rest, she went up
to the perch, whereon was the hawk that Nicostratus held so dear, and
cast it loose, as she would set it on her hand; then, taking it by the
jesses, she dashed it against the wall and killed it; whereupon
Nicostratus cried out at her, saying, 'Alack, wife, what hast thou
done?' She answered him nothing, but, turning to the gentlemen who had
eaten with him, she said to them, 'Gentlemen, I should ill know how to
avenge myself on a king who did me a despite, an I dared not take my
wreak of a hawk. You must know that this bird hath long robbed me of
all the time which should of men be accorded to the pleasuring of the
ladies; for that no sooner is the day risen than Nicostratus is up and
drest and away he goeth a-horseback, with his hawk on his fist, to the
open plains, to see him fly, whilst I, such as you see me, abide in
bed alone and ill-content; wherefore I have many a time had a mind to
do that which I have now done, nor hath aught hindered me therefrom
but that I waited to do it in the presence of gentlemen who would be
just judges in my quarrel, as methinketh you will be.' The gentlemen,
hearing this and believing her affection for Nicostratus to be no
otherwise than as her words denoted, turned all to the latter, who was
angered, and said, laughing, 'Ecod, how well hath the lady done to
avenge herself of her wrong by the death of the hawk!' Then, with
divers of pleasantries upon the subject (the lady being now gone back
to her chamber), they turned Nicostratus his annoy into laughter;
whilst Pyrrhus, seeing all this, said in himself, 'The lady hath given
a noble beginning to my happy loves; God grant she persevere!'

Lydia having thus slain the hawk, not many days were passed when,
being in her chamber with Nicostratus, she fell to toying and
frolicking with him, and he, pulling her somedele by the hair, by way
of sport, gave her occasion to accomplish the second thing required of
her by Pyrrhus. Accordingly, taking him of a sudden by a lock of his
beard, she tugged so hard at it, laughing the while, that she plucked
it clean out of his chin; whereof he complaining, 'How now?' quoth
she. 'What aileth thee to pull such a face? Is it because I have
plucked out maybe half a dozen hairs of thy beard? Thou feltest not
that which I suffered, whenas thou pulledst me now by the hair.' On
this wise continuing their disport from one word to another, she
privily kept the lock of hair that she had plucked from his beard and
sent it that same day to her lover.

Anent the last of the three things required by Pyrrhus she was harder
put to it for a device; nevertheless, being of a surpassing wit and
Love making her yet quicker of invention, she soon bethought herself
what means she should use to give it accomplishment. Nicostratus had
two boys given him of their father, to the intent that, being of
gentle birth, they might learn somewhat of manners and good breeding
in his house, of whom, whenas he was at meat, one carved before him
and the other gave him to drink. Lydia called them both and giving
them to believe that they stank at the mouth, enjoined them that,
whenas they served Nicostratus, they should still hold their heads
backward as most they might nor ever tell this to any. The boys,
believing that which she said, proceeded to do as she had lessoned
them, and she after a while said to her husband one day, 'Hast thou
noted that which yonder boys do, whenas they serve thee?' 'Ay have I,'
replied Nicostratus; 'and indeed I had it in mind to ask them why they
did it.' Quoth the lady, 'Do it not, for I can tell thee the reason;
and I have kept it silent from thee this long while, not to cause thee
annoy; but, now I perceive that others begin to be aware thereof, it
skilleth not to hide it from thee longer. This betideth thee for none
other what than that thou stinkest terribly at the mouth, and I know
not what can be the cause thereof; for that it used not to be thus.
Now this is a very unseemly thing for thee who hast to do with
gentlemen, and needs must we see for a means of curing it.' Whereupon
said he, 'What can this be? Can I have some rotten tooth in my head?'
'Maybe ay,' answered Lydia and carried him to a window, where she made
him open his mouth, and after she had viewed it in every part, 'O
Nicostratus,' cried she, 'how canst thou have put up with it so long?
Thou hast a tooth on this side which meseemth is not only decayed, but
altogether rotten, and assuredly, and thou keep it much longer in thy
mouth, it will mar thee those which be on either side; wherefore I
counsel thee have it drawn, ere the thing go farther.' 'Since it
seemeth good to thee,' answered he, 'I will well; let a surgeon be
sent for without more delay, who shall draw it for me.' 'God forbid,'
rejoined the lady, 'that a surgeon come hither for that! Methinketh it
lieth on such wise that I myself, without any surgeon, can very well
draw it for thee; more by token that these same surgeons are so
barbarous in doing such offices that my heart would on no account
suffer me to see or know thee in the hands of any one of them; for, an
it irk thee overmuch, I will at least loose thee incontinent, which a
surgeon would not do.'

Accordingly, she let fetch the proper instruments and sent every one
forth of the chamber, except only Lusca; after which, locking herself
in, she made Nicostratus lie down on a table and thrusting the pincers
into his mouth, what while the maid held him fast, she pulled out one
of his teeth by main force, albeit he roared out lustily for the pain.
Then, keeping to herself that which she had drawn, she brought out a
frightfully decayed tooth she had ready in her hand and showed it to
her husband, half dead as he was for pain, saying, 'See what thou
hast had in thy mouth all this while.' Nicostratus believed what she
said and now that the tooth was out, for all he had suffered the most
grievous pain and made sore complaint thereof, him seemed he was
cured; and presently, having comforted himself with one thing and
another and the pain being abated, he went forth of the chamber;
whereupon his wife took the tooth and straightway despatched it to her
gallant, who, being now certified of her love, professed himself ready
to do her every pleasure.

The lady, albeit every hour seemed to her a thousand till she should
be with him, desiring to give him farther assurance and wishful to
perform that which she had promised him, made a show one day of being
ailing and being visited after dinner by Nicostratus, with no one in
his company but Pyrrhus, she prayed them, by way of allaying her
unease, to help her go into the garden. Accordingly, Nicostratus
taking her on one side and Pyrrhus on the other, they carried her into
the garden and set her down on a grassplot, at the foot of a fine
pear-tree; where, after they had sat awhile, the lady, who had already
given her gallant to know what he had to do, said, 'Pyrrhus, I have a
great desire to eat of yonder pears; do thou climb up and throw us
down some of them.' Pyrrhus straightway climbed up into the tree and
fell to throwing down of the pears, which as he did, he began to say,
'How now, my lord! What is this you do? And you, madam, are you not
ashamed to suffer it in my presence? Think you I am blind? But now you
were sore disordered; how cometh it you have so quickly recovered that
you do such things? An you have a mind unto this, you have store of
goodly chambers; why go you not do it in one of these? It were more
seemly than in my presence.'

The lady turned to her husband and said, 'What saith Pyrrhus? Doth he
rave?' 'No, madam,' answered the young man, 'I rave not. Think you I
cannot see?' As for Nicostratus, he marvelled sore and said, 'Verily,
Pyrrhus, methinketh thou dreamest.' 'My lord,' replied Pyrrhus, 'I
dream not a jot, neither do you dream; nay, you bestir yourselves on
such wise that were this tree to do likewise, there would not be a
pear left on it.' Quoth the lady, 'What may this be? Can it be that
this he saith appeareth to him to be true? So God save me, and I were
whole as I was aforetime, I would climb up into the tree, to see what
marvels are those which this fellow saith he seeth.' Meanwhile Pyrrhus
from the top of the pear-tree still said the same thing and kept up
the pretence; whereupon Nicostratus bade him come down. Accordingly he
came down and his master said to him, 'Now, what sayst thou thou
sawest?' 'Methinketh,' answered he, 'you take me for a lackwit or a
loggerhead. Since I must needs say it, I saw you a-top of your lady,
and after, as I came down, I saw you arise and seat yourself where you
presently are.' 'Assuredly,' said Nicostratus, 'thou dotest; for we
have not stirred a jot, save as thou seest, since thou climbest up
into the pear-tree.' Whereupon quoth Pyrrhus, 'What booteth it to make
words of the matter? I certainly saw you; and if I did see you, it was
a-top of your own.'

Nicostratus waxed momently more and more astonished, insomuch that he
said, 'Needs must I see if this pear-tree is enchanted and if whoso is
thereon seeth marvels.' Thereupon he climbed up into the tree and no
sooner was he come to the top than the lady and Pyrrhus fell to
solacing themselves together; which when Nicostratus saw, he began to
cry out, saying, 'Ah, vile woman that thou art, what is this thou
dost? And thou, Pyrrhus, in whom I most trusted?' So saying, he
proceeded to descend the tree, whilst the lovers said, 'We are sitting
here'; then, seeing him come down, they reseated themselves whereas he
had left them. As soon as he was down and saw his wife and Pyrrhus
where he had left them, he fell a-railing at them; whereupon quoth
Pyrrhus, 'Now, verily, Nicostratus, I acknowledged that, as you said
before, I must have seen falsely what while I was in the pear-tree,
nor do I know it otherwise than by this, that I see and know yourself
to have seen falsely in the like case. And that I speak the truth
nought else should be needful to certify you but that you have regard
to the circumstances of the case and consider if it be possible that
your lady, who is the most virtuous of women and discreeter than any
other of her sex, could, an she had a mind to outrage you on such
wise, bring herself to do it before your very eyes. I speak not of
myself, who would rather suffer myself to be torn limb-meal than so
much as think of such a thing, much more come to do it in your
presence. Wherefore the fault of this misseeing must needs proceed
from the pear-tree, for that all the world had not made me believe but
that you were in act to have carnal knowledge of your lady here, had I
not heard you say that it appeared to yourself that I did what I know
most certainly I never thought, much less did.'

Thereupon the lady, feigning to be mightily incensed, rose to her feet
and said, 'Ill luck betide thee, dost thou hold me so little of wit
that, an I had a mind to such filthy fashions as thou wouldst have us
believe thou sawest, I should come to do them before thy very eyes?
Thou mayst be assured of this that, if ever the fancy took me thereof,
I should not come hither; marry, methinketh I should have sense enough
to contrive it in one of our chambers, on such wise and after such a
fashion that it would seem to me an extraordinary thing if ever thou
camest to know of it.' Nicostratus, himseeming that what the lady and
Pyrrhus said was true, to wit, that they would never have ventured
upon such an act there before himself, gave over words and reproaches
and fell to discoursing of the strangeness of the fact and the miracle
of the sight, which was thus changed unto whoso climbed up into the
pear-tree. But his wife, feigning herself chagrined for the ill
thought he had shown of her, said, 'Verily, this pear-tree shall never
again, if I can help it, do me nor any other lady the like of this
shame; wherefore do thou run, Pyrrhus, and fetch a hatchet and at one
stroke avenge both thyself and me by cutting it down; albeit it were
better yet lay it about Nicostratus his cosard, who, without any
consideration, suffered the eyes of his understanding to be so quickly
blinded, whenas, however certain that which thou[355] saidst might
seem to those[356] which thou hast in thy head, thou shouldst for
nought in the world in the judgment of thy mind have believed or
allowed that such a thing could be.'

[Footnote 355: This sudden change from the third to the second person,
in speaking of Nicostratus, is a characteristic example of Boccaccio's
constant abuse of the figure enallage in his dialogues.]

[Footnote 356: _i.e._ those eyes.]

Pyrrhus very readily fetched the hatchet and cut down the tree, which
when the lady saw fallen, she said to Nicostratus, 'Since I see the
enemy of mine honour overthrown, my anger is past,' and graciously
forgave her husband, who besought her thereof, charging him that it
should never again happen to him to presume such a thing of her, who
loved him better than herself. Accordingly, the wretched husband, thus
befooled, returned with her and her lover to the palace, where many a
time thereafterward Pyrrhus took delight and pleasance more at ease of
Lydia and she of him. God grant us as much!"




THE TENTH STORY

[Day the Seventh]

     TWO SIENNESE LOVE A LADY, WHO IS GOSSIP TO ONE OF THEM; THE
     LATTER DIETH AND RETURNING TO HIS COMPANION, ACCORDING TO
     PROMISE MADE HIM, RELATETH TO HIM HOW FOLK FARE IN THE OTHER
     WORLD


It now rested only with the king to tell and he accordingly, as soon
as he saw the ladies quieted, who lamented the cutting down of the
unoffending pear-tree, began, "It is a very manifest thing that every
just king should be the first to observe the laws made by him, and an
he do otherwise, he must be adjudged a slave deserving of punishment
and not a king, into which offence and under which reproach I, who am
your king, am in a manner constrained to fall. True it is that
yesterday I laid down the law for to-day's discourses, purposing not
this day to make use of my privilege, but, submitting myself to the
same obligation as you, to discourse of that whereof you have all
discoursed. However, not only hath that story been told which I had
thought to tell, but so many other and far finer things have been said
upon the matter that, for my part, ransack my memory as I will, I can
call nothing to mind and must avouch myself unable to say aught anent
such a subject that may compare with those stories which have already
been told. Wherefore, it behoving me transgress against the law made
by myself, I declare myself in advance ready, as one deserving of
punishment, to submit to any forfeit which may be imposed on me, and
so have recourse to my wonted privilege. Accordingly, dearest ladies,
I say that Elisa's story of Fra Rinaldo and his gossip and eke the
simplicity of the Siennese have such efficacy that they induce me,
letting be the cheats put upon foolish husbands by their wily wives,
to tell you a slight story of them,[357] which though it have in it no
little of that which must not be believed, will natheless in part, at
least, be pleasing to hear.

[Footnote 357: _i.e._ the Siennese.]

There were, then, in Siena two young men of the people, whereof one
was called Tingoccio Mini and the other Meuccio di Tura; they abode at
Porta Salaja and consorted well nigh never save one with the other. To
all appearance they loved each exceedingly and resorting, as men do,
to churches and preachings, they had many a time heard tell of the
happiness and of the misery that are, according to their deserts,
allotted in the next world to the souls of those who die; of which
things desiring to have certain news and finding no way thereto, they
promised one another that whichever of them died first should, an he
might, return to him who abode on life and give him tidings of that
which he would fain know; and this they confirmed with an oath. Having
come to this accord and companying still together, as hath been said,
it chanced that Tingoccio became godfather to a child which one
Ambruogio Anselmini, abiding at Campo Reggi, had had of his wife,
Mistress Mita by name, and from time to time visiting, together with
Meuccio, his gossip who was a very fair and lovesome lady, he became,
notwithstanding the gossipship, enamoured of her. Meuccio, on like
wise, hearing her mightily commended of his friend and being himself
much pleased with her, fell in love with her, and each hid his love
from the other, but not for one same reason. Tingoccio was careful not
to discover it to Meuccio, on account of the naughty deed which
himseemed he did to love his gossip and which he had been ashamed that
any should know. Meuccio, on the other hand, kept himself
therefrom,[358] for that he had already perceived that the lady
pleased Tingoccio; whereupon he said in himself, 'If I discover this
to him, he will wax jealous of me and being able, as her gossip, to
bespeak her at his every pleasure, he will, inasmuch as he may, bring
me in ill savour with her, and so I shall never have of her aught that
may please me.'

[Footnote 358: _i.e._ from discovering to his friend his liking for
the lady.]

Things being at this pass, it befell that Tingoccio, having more
leisure of discovering his every desire to the lady, contrived with
acts and words so to do that he had his will of her, of which Meuccio
soon became aware and albeit it sore misliked him, yet, hoping some
time or other to compass his desire, he feigned ignorance thereof, so
Tingoccio might not have cause or occasion to do him an ill turn or
hinder him in any of his affairs. The two friends loving thus, the one
more happily than the other, it befell that Tingoccio, finding the
soil of his gossip's demesne soft and eath to till, so delved and
laboured there that there overcame him thereof a malady, which after
some days waxed so heavy upon him that, being unable to brook it, he
departed this life. The third day after his death (for that belike he
had not before been able) he came by night, according to the promise
made, into Meuccio's chamber and called the latter, who slept fast.
Meuccio awoke and said, 'Who art thou?' Whereto he answered, 'I am
Tingoccio, who, according to the promise which I made thee, am come
back to thee to give thee news of the other world.'

Meuccio was somewhat affrighted at seeing him; nevertheless, taking
heart, 'Thou art welcome, brother mine,' quoth he, and presently asked
him if he were lost. 'Things are lost that are not to be found,'
replied Tingoccio; 'and how should I be here, if I were lost?'
'Alack,' cried Meuccio, 'I say not so; nay, I ask thee if thou art
among the damned souls in the avenging fire of hell.' Whereto quoth
Tingoccio, 'As for that, no; but I am, notwithstanding, in very
grievous and anguishful torment for the sins committed by me.' Meuccio
then particularly enquired of him what punishments were awarded in the
other world for each of the sins that folk use to commit here below,
and he told him them all. After this Meuccio asked if there were aught
he might do for him in this world, whereto Tingoccio replied that
there was, to wit, that he should let say for him masses and orisons
and do alms in his name, for that these things were mightily
profitable to those who abode yonder. Meuccio said that he would well
and Tingoccio offering to take leave of him, he remembered himself of
the latter's amour with his gossip and raising his head, said, 'Now
that I bethink me, Tingoccio, what punishment is given thee over
yonder anent thy gossip, with whom thou layest, whenas thou wast here
below?' 'Brother mine,' answered Tingoccio, 'whenas I came yonder,
there was one who it seemed knew all my sins by heart and bade me
betake myself to a certain place, where I bemoaned my offences in
exceeding sore punishment and where I found many companions condemned
to the same penance as myself. Being among them and remembering me of
that which I had done whilere with my gossip, I looked for a much
sorer punishment on account thereof than that which had presently been
given me and went all shivering for fear, albeit I was in a great fire
and an exceeding hot; which one who was by my side perceiving, he said
to me, "What aileth thee more than all the others who are here that
thou shiverest, being in the fire?" "Marry," said I, "my friend, I am
sore in fear of the sentence I expect for a grievous sin I wrought
aforetime." The other asked me what sin this was, and I answered, "It
was that I lay with a gossip of mine, and that with such a vengeance
that it cost me my life"; whereupon quoth he, making merry over my
fear, "Go to, fool; have no fear. Here is no manner of account taken
of gossips." Which when I heard, I was altogether reassured.' This
said and the day drawing near, 'Meuccio,' quoth he, 'abide with God,
for I may no longer be with thee,' and was suddenly gone. Meuccio,
hearing that no account was taken of gossips in the world to come,
began to make mock of his own simplicity, for that whiles he had
spared several of them; wherefore, laying by his ignorance, he became
wiser in that respect for the future. Which things if Fra Rinaldo had
known, he had not needed to go a-syllogizing,[359] whenas he converted
his good gossip to his pleasure."

[Footnote 359: Or, in modern parlance, logic-chopping
(_sillogizzando_).]



Zephyr was now arisen, for the sun that drew near unto the setting,
when the king, having made an end of his story and there being none
other left to tell, put off the crown from his own head and set it on
that of Lauretta, saying, "Madam, with yourself[360] I crown you
queen of our company; do you then, from this time forth, as sovereign
lady, command that which you may deem shall be for the pleasure and
solacement of all." This said, he reseated himself, whereupon
Lauretta, become queen, let call the seneschal and bade him look that
the tables be set in the pleasant valley somewhat earlier than of
wont, so they might return to the palace at their leisure; after which
she instructed him what he should do what while her sovranty lasted.
Then, turning to the company, she said, "Dioneo willed yesterday that
we should discourse to-day of the tricks that women play their
husbands and but that I am loath to show myself of the tribe of
snappish curs, which are fain incontinent to avenge themselves of any
affront done them, I would say that to-morrow's discourse should be of
the tricks that men play their wives. But, letting that be, I ordain
that each bethink himself to tell OF THE TRICKS THAT ALL DAY LONG
WOMEN PLAY MEN OR MEN WOMEN OR MEN ONE ANOTHER; and I doubt not but
that in this[361] there will be no less of pleasant discourse than
there hath been to-day." So saying, she rose to her feet and dismissed
the company till supper-time.

[Footnote 360: _i.e._ with that whereof you bear the name, _i.e._
laurel (_laurea_).]

[Footnote 361: Or "on this subject" (_in questo_).]

Accordingly, they all, ladies and men alike, arose and some began to
go barefoot through the clear water, whilst others went a-pleasuring
upon the greensward among the straight and goodly trees. Dioneo and
Fiammetta sang together a great while of Arcite and Palemon, and on
this wise, taking various and divers delights, they passed the time
with the utmost satisfaction until the hour of supper; which being
come, they seated themselves at table beside the lakelet and there, to
the song of a thousand birds, still refreshed by a gentle breeze, that
came from the little hills around, and untroubled of any fly, they
supped in peace and cheer. Then, the tables being removed and the sun
being yet half-vespers[362] high, after they had gone awhile round
about the pleasant valley, they wended their way again, even as it
pleased their queen, with slow steps towards their wonted
dwelling-place, and jesting and chattering a thousand things, as well
of those whereof it had been that day discoursed as of others, they
came near upon nightfall to the fair palace, where having with the
coolest of wines and confections done away the fatigues of the little
journey, they presently fell to dancing about the fair fountain,
carolling[363] now to the sound of Tindaro's bagpipe and anon to that
of other instruments. But, after awhile, the queen bade Filomena sing
a song, whereupon she began thus:

[Footnote 362: _QuÃ¦re_, "half-complines," _i.e._ half-past seven p.m.
"Half-vespers" would be half-past four, which seems too early.]

[Footnote 363: _Carolando_, _i.e._ dancing in a round and singing the
while, the original meaning of our word "carol."]

     Alack, my life forlorn!
       Will't ever chance I may once more regain
     Th' estate whence sorry fortune hath me torn?

       Certes, I know not, such a wish of fire
         I carry in my thought
           To find me where, alas! I was whilere.
       O dear my treasure, thou my sole desire,
         That holdst my heart distraught.
           Tell it me, thou; for whom I know nor dare
           To ask it otherwhere.
       Ah, dear my lord, oh, cause me hope again,
     So I may comfort me my spright wayworn.

       What was the charm I cannot rightly tell
         That kindled in me such
           A flame of love that rest nor day nor night
       I find; for, by some strong unwonted spell,
         Hearing and touch
           And seeing each new fires in me did light,
           Wherein I burn outright;
       Nor other than thyself can soothe my pain
     Nor call my senses back, by love o'erborne.

       O tell me if and when, then, it shall be
         That I shall find thee e'er
           Whereas I kissed those eyes that did me slay.
       O dear my good, my soul, ah, tell it me,
         When thou wilt come back there,
           And saying "Quickly," comfort my dismay
           Somedele. Short be the stay
       Until thou come, and long mayst thou remain!
     I'm so love-struck, I reck not of men's scorn.

       If once again I chance to hold thee aye,
         I will not be so fond
           As erst I was to suffer thee to fly;
       Nay, fast I'll hold thee, hap of it what may,
         And having thee in bond,
           Of thy sweet mouth my lust I'll satisfy.
           Now of nought else will I
       Discourse. Quick, to thy bosom come me strain;
     The sheer thought bids me sing like lark at morn.

This song caused all the company conclude that a new and pleasing love
held Filomena in bonds, and as by the words it appeared that she had
tasted more thereof than sight alone, she was envied of this by
certain who were there and who held her therefor so much the happier.
But, after her song was ended, the queen, remembering her that the
ensuing day was Friday, thus graciously bespoke all, "You know, noble
ladies and you also, young men, that to-morrow is the day consecrated
to the passion of our Lord, the which, an you remember aright, what
time Neifile was queen, we celebrated devoutly and therein gave pause
to our delightsome discoursements, and on like wise we did with the
following Saturday. Wherefore, being minded to follow the good example
given us by Neifile, I hold it seemly that to-morrow and the next day
we abstain, even as we did a week agone, from our pleasant
story-telling, recalling to memory that which on those days befell
whilere for the salvation of our souls." The queen's pious speech was
pleasing unto all and a good part of the night being now past, they
all, dismissed by her, betook them to repose.


HERE ENDETH THE SEVENTH DAY
OF THE DECAMERON




_Day the Eighth_

     HERE BEGINNETH THE EIGHTH DAY OF THE DECAMERON WHEREIN UNDER
     THE GOVERNANCE OF LAURETTA IS DISCOURSED OF THE TRICKS THAT
     ALL DAY LONG WOMEN PLAY MEN OR MEN WOMEN OR MEN ONE ANOTHER


Already on the Sunday morning the rays of the rising light appeared on
the summits of the higher mountains and every shadow having departed,
things might manifestly be discerned, when the queen, arising with her
company, went wandering first through the dewy grass and after,
towards half-tierce,[364] visiting a little neighboring church, heard
there divine service; then, returning home, they ate with mirth and
joyance and after sang and danced awhile till the queen dismissed
them, so whoso would might go rest himself. But, whenas the sun had
passed the meridian, they all seated themselves, according as it
pleased the queen, near the fair fountain, for the wonted
story-telling, and Neifile, by her commandment, began thus:

[Footnote 364: _i.e._ half-past seven a.m.]




THE FIRST STORY

[Day the Eighth]

     GULFARDO BORROWETH OF GUASPARRUOLO CERTAIN MONIES, FOR WHICH
     HE HATH AGREED WITH HIS WIFE THAT HE SHALL LIE WITH HER, AND
     ACCORDINGLY GIVETH THEM TO HER; THEN, IN HER PRESENCE, HE
     TELLETH GUASPARRUOLO THAT HE GAVE THEM TO HER, AND SHE
     CONFESSETH IT TO BE TRUE


"Since God hath so ordered it that I am to give a beginning to the
present day's discourses, with my story, I am content, and therefore,
lovesome ladies, seeing that much hath been said of the tricks played
by women upon men, it is my pleasure to relate one played by a man
upon a woman, not that I mean therein to blame that which the man did
or to deny that it served the woman aright, nay, rather to commend the
man and blame the woman and to show that men also know how to cozen
those who put faith in them, even as themselves are cozened by those
in whom they believe. Indeed, to speak more precisely, that whereof I
have to tell should not be called cozenage; nay, it should rather be
styled a just requital; for that, albeit a woman should still be
virtuous and guard her chastity as her life nor on any account suffer
herself be persuaded to sully it, yet, seeing that, by reason of our
frailty, this is not always possible as fully as should be, I affirm
that she who consenteth to her own dishonour for a price is worthy of
the fire, whereas she who yieldeth for Love's sake, knowing his
exceeding great puissance, meriteth forgiveness from a judge not too
severe, even as, a few days agone, Filostrato showed it to have been
observed towards Madam Filippa at Prato.

There was, then, aforetime at Milan a German, by name Gulfardo, in the
pay of the state, a stout fellow of his person and very loyal to those
in whose service he engaged himself, which is seldom the case with
Germans; and for that he was a very punctual repayer of such loans as
were made him, he might always find many merchants ready to lend him
any quantity of money at little usance. During his sojourn in Milan,
he set his heart upon a very fair lady called Madam Ambruogia, the
wife of a rich merchant, by name Guasparruolo Cagastraccio, who was
much his acquaintance and friend, and loving her very discreetly, so
that neither her husband nor any other suspected it, he sent one day
to speak with her, praying her that it would please her vouchsafe him
her favours and protesting that he, on his part, was ready to do
whatsoever she should command him. The lady, after many parleys, came
to this conclusion, that she was ready to do that which Gulfardo
wished, provided two things should ensue thereof; one, that this
should never be by him discovered to any and the other, that, as she
had need of two hundred gold florins for some occasion of hers, he,
who was a rich man, should give them to her; after which she would
still be at his service.

Gulfardo, hearing this and indignant at the sordidness of her whom he
had accounted a lady of worth, was like to exchange his fervent love
for hatred and thinking to cheat her, sent back to her, saying that he
would very willingly do this and all else in his power that might
please her and that therefore she should e'en send him word when she
would have him go to her, for that he would carry her the money, nor
should any ever hear aught of the matter, save a comrade of his in
whom he trusted greatly and who still bore him company in whatsoever
he did. The lady, or rather, I should say, the vile woman, hearing
this, was well pleased and sent to him, saying that Guasparruolo her
husband was to go to Genoa for his occasions a few days hence and that
she would presently let him know of this and send for him. Meanwhile,
Gulfardo, taking his opportunity, repaired to Guasparruolo and said to
him, 'I have present occasion for two hundred gold florins, the which
I would have thee lend me at that same usance whereat thou art wont to
lend me other monies.' The other replied that he would well and
straightway counted out to him the money.

A few days thereafterward Guasparruolo went to Genoa, even as the
lady had said, whereupon she sent to Gulfardo to come to her and
bring the two hundred gold florins. Accordingly, he took his comrade
and repaired to the lady's house, where finding her expecting him, the
first thing he did was to put into her hands the two hundred gold
florins, in his friend's presence, saying to her, 'Madam, take these
monies and give them to your husband, whenas he shall be returned.'
The lady took them, never guessing why he said thus, but supposing
that he did it so his comrade should not perceive that he gave them to
her by way of price, and answered, 'With all my heart; but I would
fain see how many they are.' Accordingly, she turned them out upon the
table and finding them full two hundred, laid them up, mighty content
in herself; then, returning to Gulfardo and carrying him into her
chamber, she satisfied him of her person not that night only, but many
others before her husband returned from Genoa.

As soon as the latter came back, Gulfardo, having spied out a time
when he was in company with his wife, betook himself to him, together
with his comrade aforesaid, and said to him, in the lady's presence,
'Guasparruolo, I had no occasion for the monies, to wit, the two
hundred gold florins, thou lentest me the other day, for that I could
not compass the business for which I borrowed them. Accordingly, I
brought them presently back to thy lady here and gave them to her;
wherefore look thou cancel my account.' Guasparruolo, turning to his
wife, asked her if she had the monies, and she, seeing the witness
present, knew not how to deny, but said, 'Ay, I had them and had not
yet remembered me to tell thee.' Whereupon quoth Guasparruolo,
'Gulfardo, I am satisfied; get you gone and God go with you: I will
settle your account aright.' Gulfardo gone, the lady, finding herself
cozened, gave her husband the dishonourable price of her baseness; and
on this wise the crafty lover enjoyed his sordid mistress without
cost."




THE SECOND STORY

[Day the Eighth]

     THE PARISH PRIEST OF VARLUNGO LIETH WITH MISTRESS BELCOLORE
     AND LEAVETH HER A CLOAK OF HIS IN PLEDGE; THEN, BORROWING A
     MORTAR OF HER, HE SENDETH IT BACK TO HER, DEMANDING IN
     RETURN THE CLOAK LEFT BY WAY OF TOKEN, WHICH THE GOOD WOMAN
     GRUDGINGLY GIVETH HIM BACK


Men and ladies alike commended that which Gulfardo had done to the
sordid Milanese lady, and the queen, turning to Pamfilo, smilingly
charged him follow on; whereupon quoth he, "Fair ladies, it occurreth
to me to tell you a little story against those who continually offend
against us, without being open to retaliation on our part, to wit, the
clergy, who have proclaimed a crusade against our wives and who,
whenas they avail to get one of the latter under them, conceive
themselves to have gained forgiveness of fault and pardon of penalty
no otherwise than as they had brought the Soldan bound from
Alexandria to Avignon.[365] Whereof the wretched laymen cannot return
them the like, albeit they wreak their ire upon the priests' mothers
and sisters, doxies and daughters, assailing them with no less ardour
than the former do their wives. Wherefore I purpose to recount to you
a village love-affair, more laughable for its conclusion than long in
words, wherefrom you may yet gather, by way of fruit, that priests are
not always to be believed in everything.

[Footnote 365: Where the papal court then was. See p. 257, note.]

You must know, then, that there was once at Varlungo,--a village very
near here, as each of you ladies either knoweth or may have heard,--a
worthy priest and a lusty of his person in the service of the ladies,
who, albeit he knew not overwell how to read, natheless regaled his
parishioners with store of good and pious saws at the elmfoot on
Sundays and visited their women, whenas they went abroad anywhither,
more diligently than any priest who had been there aforetime, carrying
them fairings and holy water and a stray candle-end or so, whiles even
to their houses. Now it chanced that, among other his she-parishioners
who were most to his liking, one pleased him over all, by name
Mistress Belcolore, the wife of a husbandman who styled himself
Bentivegna del Mazzo, a jolly, buxom country wench, brown-favoured and
tight-made, as apt at turning the mill[366] as any woman alive.
Moreover, it was she who knew how to play the tabret and sing 'The
water runneth to the ravine' and lead up the haye and the round, when
need was, with a fine muckender in her hand and a quaint, better than
any woman of her neighbourhood; by reason of which things my lord
priest became so sore enamoured of her that he was like to lose his
wits therefor and would prowl about all day long to get a sight of
her. Whenas he espied her in church of a Sunday morning, he would say
a Kyrie and a Sanctus, studying to show himself a past master in
descant, that it seemed as it were an ass a-braying; whereas, when he
saw her not there, he passed that part of the service over lightly
enough. But yet he made shift to do on such wise that neither
Bentivegna nor any of his neighbours suspected aught; and the better
to gain Mistress Belcolore's goodwill, he made her presents from time
to time, sending her whiles a clove of garlic, which he had the finest
of all the countryside in a garden he tilled with his own hands, and
otherwhiles a punnet of peascods or a bunch of chives or scallions,
and whenas he saw his opportunity, he would ogle her askance and cast
a friendly gibe at her; but she, putting on the prude, made a show of
not observing it and passed on with a demure air; wherefore my lord
priest could not come by his will of her.

[Footnote 366: Or, as La Fontaine would say, "aussi bien faite pour
armer un lit."]

It chanced one day that as he sauntered about the quarter on the
stroke of noon, he encountered Bentivegna del Mazzo, driving an ass
laden with gear, and accosting him, asked whither he went. 'Faith,
sir,' answered the husbandman, 'to tell you the truth, I am going to
town about a business of mine and am carrying these things to Squire
Bonaccorri da Ginestreto, so he may help me in I know not what whereof
the police-court judge hath summoned me by his proctor for a
peremptory attendance.' The priest was rejoiced to hear this and
said, 'Thou dost well, my son; go now with my benison and return
speedily; and shouldst thou chance to see Lapuccio or Naldino, forget
not to bid them bring me those straps they wot of for my flails.'
Bentivegna answered that it should be done and went his way towards
Florence, whereupon the priest bethought himself that now was his time
to go try his luck with Belcolore. Accordingly, he let not the grass
grow under his feet, but set off forthright and stayed not till he
came to her house and entering in, said, 'God send us all well! Who is
within there?' Belcolore, who was gone up into the hay-loft, hearing
him, said, 'Marry, sir, you are welcome; but what do you gadding it
abroad in this heat?' 'So God give me good luck,' answered he, 'I came
to abide with thee awhile, for that I met thy man going to town.'

Belcolore came down and taking a seat, fell to picking over
cabbage-seed which her husband had threshed out a while before;
whereupon quoth the priest to her, 'Well, Belcolore, wilt thou still
cause me die for thee on this wise?' She laughed and answered, 'What
is it I do to you?' Quoth he, 'Thou dost nought to me, but thou
sufferest me not do to thee that which I would fain do and which God
commandeth.' 'Alack!' cried Belcolore, 'Go to, go to. Do priests do
such things?' 'Ay do we,' replied he, 'as well as other men; and why
not? And I tell thee more, we do far and away better work and knowest
thou why? Because we grind with a full head of water. But in good
sooth it shall be shrewdly to thy profit, an thou wilt but abide quiet
and let me do.' 'And what might this "shrewdly to my profit" be?'
asked she. 'For all you priests are stingier than the devil.' Quoth
he, 'I know not; ask thou. Wilt have a pair of shoes or a head-lace or
a fine stammel waistband or what thou wilt?' 'Pshaw!' cried Belcolore.
'I have enough and to spare of such things; but an you wish me so
well, why do you not render me a service, and I will do what you
will?' Quoth the priest, 'Say what thou wilt have of me, and I will do
it willingly.' Then said she, 'Needs must I go to Florence, come
Saturday, to carry back the wool I have spun and get my spinning-wheel
mended; and an you will lend me five crowns, which I know you have by
you, I can take my watchet gown out of pawn and my Sunday girdle[367]
that I brought my husband, for you see I cannot go to church nor to
any decent place, because I have them not; and after I will still do
what you would have me.' 'So God give me a good year,' replied the
priest, 'I have them not about me; but believe me, ere Saturday come,
I will contrive that thou shalt have them, and that very willingly.'
'Ay,' said Belcolore, 'you are all like this, great promisers, and
after perform nothing to any. Think you to do with me as you did with
Biliuzza, who went off with the ghittern-player?[368] Cock's faith,
then, you shall not, for that she is turned a common drab only for
that. If you have them not about you, go for them.' 'Alack,' cried the
priest, 'put me not upon going all the way home. Thou seest that I
have the luck just now to find thee alone, but maybe, when I return,
there will be some one or other here to hinder us; and I know not when
I shall find so good an opportunity again.' Quoth she, 'It is well; an
you choose to go, go; if not, go without.'

[Footnote 367: Or apron.]

[Footnote 368: _Se n'andÃ² col ceteratojo_; a proverbial expression of
similar meaning to our "was whistled down the wind," _i.e._ was
lightly dismissed without provision, like a cast-off hawk.]

The priest, seeing that she was not in the humour to do his pleasure
without a _salvum me fac_, whereas he would fain have done it _sine
custodiÃ¢_, said, 'Harkye, thou believest not that I will bring thee
the money; but, so thou mayst credit me, I will leave thee this my
blue-cloth cloak.' Belcolore raised her eyes and said, 'Eh what! That
cloak? What is it worth?' 'Worth?' answered the priest. 'I would have
thee know that it is cloth of Douay, nay, Threeay, and there be some
of our folk here who hold it for Fouray.[369] It is scarce a fortnight
since it cost me seven crowns of hard money to Lotto the broker, and
according to what Buglietto telleth me (and thou knowest he is a judge
of this kind of cloth), I had it good five shillings overcheap.'
'Indeed!' quoth Belcolore. 'So God be mine aid, I had never thought
it. But give it me first of all.' My lord priest, who had his arbalest
ready cocked, pulled off the cloak and gave it her; and she, after she
had laid it up, said, 'Come, sir, let us go into the barn, for no one
ever cometh there.' And so they did. There the priest gave her the
heartiest busses in the world and making her sib to God Almighty,[370]
solaced himself with her a great while; after which he took leave of
her and returned to the parsonage in his cassock, as it were he came
from officiating at a wedding.

[Footnote 369: A play of words upon the Italian equivalent of the
French word Douay (_Duagio, i.e. Twoay, Treagio, Quattragio_) invented
by the roguish priest to impose upon the simple goodwife.]

[Footnote 370: Or in modern parlance, "making her a connection by
marriage of etc.," Boccaccio feigning priests to be members of the
Holy Family, by virtue of their office.]

There, bethinking himself that all the candle-ends he got by way of
offertory in all the year were not worth the half of five crowns,
himseemed he had done ill and repenting him of having left the cloak,
he fell to considering how he might have it again without cost. Being
shrewd enough in a small way, he soon hit upon a device and it
succeeded to his wish; for that on the morrow, it being a holiday, he
sent a neighbour's lad of his to Mistress Belcolore's house, with a
message praying her be pleased to lend him her stone mortar, for that
Binguccio dal Poggio and Nuto Buglietti were to dine with him that
morning and he had a mind to make sauce. She sent it to him and
towards dinner-time, the priest, having spied out when Bentivegna and
his wife were at meat together, called his clerk and said to him,
'Carry this mortar back to Belcolore and say to her, 'His reverence
biddeth you gramercy and prayeth you send him back the cloak that the
boy left you by way of token.' The clerk accordingly repaired to her
house and there, finding her at table with Bentivegna, set down the
mortar and did the priest's errand. Belcolore, hearing require the
cloak again, would have answered; but her husband said, with an angry
air, 'Takest thou a pledge of his reverence? I vow to Christ, I have a
mind to give thee a good clout over the head! Go, give it quickly back
to him, pox take thee! And in future, let him ask what he will of
ours, (ay, though he should seek our ass,) look that it be not denied
him.' Belcolore rose, grumbling, and pulling the cloak out of the
chest, gave it to the clerk, saying, 'Tell her reverence from me,
Belcolore saith, she voweth to God you shall never again pound sauce
in her mortar; you have done her no such fine honour of this bout.'

The clerk made off with the cloak and did her message to the priest,
who said, laughing, 'Tell her, when thou seest her, that, an she will
not lend me her mortar, I will not lend her my pestle; and so we shall
be quits.' Bentivegna concluded that his wife had said this, because
he had chidden her, and took no heed thereof; but Belcolore bore the
priest a grudge and held him at arm's length till vintage-time; when,
he having threatened to cause her go into the mouth of Lucifer the
great devil, for very fear she made her peace with him over must and
roast chestnuts and they after made merry together time and again. In
lieu of the five crowns, the priest let put new parchment to her
tabret and string thereto a cast of hawk's bells, and with this she
was fain to be content."




THE THIRD STORY

[Day the Eighth]

     CALANDRINO, BRUNO AND BUFFALMACCO GO COASTING ALONG THE
     MUGNONE IN SEARCH OF THE HELIOTROPE AND CALANDRINO THINKETH
     TO HAVE FOUND IT. ACCORDINGLY HE RETURNETH HOME, LADEN WITH
     STONES, AND HIS WIFE CHIDETH HIM; WHEREUPON, FLYING OUT INTO
     A RAGE, HE BEATETH HER AND RECOUNTETH TO HIS COMPANIONS THAT
     WHICH THEY KNOW BETTER THAN HE


Pamfilo having made an end of his story, at which the ladies had
laughed so much that they laugh yet, the queen bade Elisa follow on,
who, still laughing, began, "I know not, charming ladies, if with a
little story of mine, no less true than pleasant, I shall succeed in
making you laugh as much as Pamfilo hath done with his; but I will do
my endeavor thereof.

In our city, then, which hath ever abounded in various fashions and
strange folk, there was once, no great while since, a painter called
Calandrino, a simple-witted man and of strange usances. He companied
most of his time with other two painters, called the one Bruno and the
other Buffalmacco, both very merry men, but otherwise well-advised and
shrewd, who consorted with Calandrino for that they ofttimes had great
diversion of his fashions and his simplicity. There was then also in
Florence a young man of a mighty pleasant humor and marvellously
adroit in all he had a mind to do, astute and plausible, who was
called Maso del Saggio, and who, hearing certain traits of
Calandrino's simplicity, determined to amuse himself at his expense
by putting off some cheat on him or causing him believe some strange
thing. He chanced one day to come upon him in the church of San
Giovanni and seeing him intent upon the carved work and paintings of
the pyx, which is upon the altar of the said church and which had then
not long been placed there, he judged the place and time opportune for
carrying his intent into execution. Accordingly, acquainting a friend
of his with that which he purposed to do, they both drew near unto the
place where Calandrino sat alone and feigning not to see him, fell
a-discoursing together of the virtues of divers stones, whereof Maso
spoke as authoritatively as if he had been a great and famous
lapidary.

Calandrino gave ear to their talk and presently, seeing that it was no
secret, he rose to his feet and joined himself to them, to the no
small satisfaction of Maso, who, pursuing his discourse, was asked by
Calandrino where these wonder-working stones were to be found. Maso
replied that the most of them were found in Berlinzone, a city of the
Basques, in a country called Bengodi,[371] where the vines are tied up
with sausages and a goose is to be had for a farthing[372] and a
gosling into the bargain, and that there was a mountain all of grated
Parmesan cheese, whereon abode folk who did nothing but make maccaroni
and ravioli[373] and cook them in capon-broth, after which they threw
them down thence and whoso got most thereof had most; and that hard by
ran a rivulet of vernage,[374] the best ever was drunk, without a drop
of water therein. 'Marry,' cried Calandrino, 'that were a fine
country; but tell me, what is done with the capons that they boil for
broth?' Quoth Maso, 'The Basques eat them all.' Then said Calandrino,
'Wast thou ever there?' 'Was I ever there, quotha!' replied Maso. 'If
I have been there once I have been there a thousand times.' 'And how
many miles is it distant hence?' asked Calandrino; and Maso, 'How
many? a million or more; you might count them all night and not know.'
'Then,' said Calandrino, 'it must be farther off than the Abruzzi?'
'Ay, indeed,' answered Maso; 'it is a trifle farther.'

[Footnote 371: _i.e._ Good cheer.]

[Footnote 372: A play upon the double meaning of _a denajo_, which
signifies also "for money."]

[Footnote 373: A kind of rissole made of eggs, sweet herbs and
cheese.]

[Footnote 374: _Vernaccia_, a kind of rich white wine like Malmsey.]

Calandrino, like a simpleton as he was, hearing Maso tell all this
with an assured air and without laughing, gave such credence thereto
as can be given to whatsoever verity is most manifest and so, holding
it for truth, said, 'That is overfar for my money; though, were it
nearer, I tell thee aright I would go thither with thee once upon a
time, if but to see the maccaroni come tumbling headlong down and take
my fill thereof. But tell me, God keep thee merry, is there none of
those wonder-working stones to be found in these parts?' 'Ay is
there,' answered Maso; 'there be two kinds of stones of very great
virtue found here; the first are the grits of Settignano and Montisci,
by virtue whereof, when they are wrought into millstones, flour is
made; wherefore it is said in those parts that grace cometh from God
and millstones from Montisci; but there is such great plenty of these
grits that they are as little prized with us as emeralds with the folk
over yonder, where they have mountains of them bigger than Mount
Morello, which shine in the middle of the night, I warrant thee. And
thou must know that whoso should cause set fine and perfect
millstones, before they are pierced, in rings and carry them to the
Soldan might have for them what he would. The other is what we
lapidaries call Heliotrope, a stone of exceeding great virtue, for
that whoso hath it about him is not seen of any other person whereas
he is not, what while he holdeth it.' Quoth Calandrino, 'These be
indeed great virtues; but where is this second stone found?' To which
Maso replied that it was commonly found in the Mugnone. 'What bigness
is this stone,' asked Calandrino, 'and what is its colour?' Quoth
Maso, 'It is of various sizes, some more and some less; but all are
well nigh black of colour.'

Calandrino noted all this in himself and feigning to have otherwhat to
do, took leave of Maso, inwardly determined to go seek the stone in
question, but bethought himself not to do it without the knowledge of
Bruno and Buffalmacco, whom he most particularly affected. Accordingly
he addressed himself to seek for them, so they might, without delay
and before any else, set about the search, and spent all the rest of
the morning seeking them. At last, when it was past none, he
remembered him that they were awork in the Ladies' Convent at Faenza
and leaving all his other business, he betook himself thither well
nigh at a run, notwithstanding the great heat. As soon as he saw them,
he called them and bespoke them thus: 'Comrades, an you will hearken
to me, we may become the richest men in all Florence, for that I have
learned from a man worthy of belief that in the Mugnone is to be found
a stone, which whoso carrieth about him is not seen of any; wherefore
meseemeth we were best go thither in quest thereof without delay, ere
any forestall us. We shall certainly find it, for that I know it well,
and when we have gotten it, what have we to do but put it in our poke
and getting us to the moneychangers' tables, which you know stand
still laden with groats and florins, take as much as we will thereof?
None will see us, and so may we grow rich of a sudden, without having
to smear walls all day long, snail-fashion.'

Bruno and Buffalmacco, hearing this, fell a-laughing in their sleeves
and eyeing each other askance, made a show of exceeding wonderment and
praised Calandrino's counsel, but Bruno asked how the stone in
question was called. Calandrino, who was a clod-pated fellow, had
already forgotten the name, wherefore quoth he, 'What have we to do
with the name, since we know the virtue of the stone? Meseemeth we
were best go about the quest without more ado.' 'Well, then,' said
Bruno, 'how is it fashioned?' 'It is of all fashions,' replied
Calandrino; 'but all are well nigh black; wherefore meseemeth that
what we have to do is to gather up all the black stones we see, till
we happen upon the right. So let us lose no time, but get us gone.'
Quoth Bruno, 'Wait awhile,' and turning to his comrade, said,
'Methinketh Calandrino saith well; but meseemeth this is no season
for the search, for that the sun is high and shineth full upon the
Mugnone, where it hath dried all the stones, so that certain of those
that be there appear presently white, which of a morning, ere the sun
have dried them, show black; more by token that, to-day being a
working day, there be many folk, on one occasion or another abroad
along the banks, who, seeing us, may guess what we are about and maybe
do likewise, whereby the stone may come to their hands and we shall
have lost the trot for the amble. Meseemeth (an you be of the same way
of thinking) that this is a business to be undertaken of a morning,
whenas the black may be the better known from the white, and of a
holiday, when there will be none there to see us.'

Buffalmacco commended Bruno's counsel and Calandrino fell in
therewith; wherefore they agreed to go seek for the stone all three on
the following Sunday morning, and Calandrino besought them over all
else not to say a word of the matter to any one alive, for that it had
been imparted to him in confidence, and after told them that which he
had heard tell of the land of Bengodi, affirming with an oath that it
was as he said. As soon as he had taken his leave, the two others
agreed with each other what they should do in the matter and
Calandrino impatiently awaited the Sunday morning, which being come,
he arose at break of day and called his friends, with whom he sallied
forth of the city by the San Gallo gate and descending into the bed of
the Mugnone, began to go searching down stream for the stone.
Calandrino, as the eagerest of the three, went on before, skipping
nimbly hither and thither, and whenever he espied any black stone, he
pounced upon it and picking it up, thrust it into his bosom. His
comrades followed after him picking up now one stone and now another;
but Calandrino had not gone far before he had his bosom full of
stones; wherefore, gathering up the skirts of his grown, which was not
cut Flanders fashion,[375] he tucked them well into his surcingle all
round and made an ample lap thereof. However, it was no great while
ere he had filled it, and making a lap on like wise of his mantle,
soon filled this also with stones. Presently, the two others seeing
that he had gotten his load and that dinner-time drew nigh, quoth
Bruno to Buffalmacco, in accordance with the plan concerted between
them, 'Where is Calandrino?' Buffalmacco, who saw him hard by, turned
about and looking now here and now there, answered, 'I know not; but
he was before us but now.' 'But now, quotha!' cried Bruno. 'I warrant
you he is presently at home at dinner and hath left us to play the
fool here, seeking black stones down the Mugnone.' 'Egad,' rejoined
Buffalmacco 'he hath done well to make mock of us and leave us here,
since we were fools enough to credit him. Marry, who but we had been
simple enough to believe that a stone of such virtue was to be found
in the Mugnone?'

[Footnote 375: _i.e._ not strait-cut.]

Calandrino, hearing this, concluded that the heliotrope had fallen
into his hands and that by virtue thereof they saw him not, albeit he
was present with them, and rejoiced beyond measure at such a piece of
good luck, answered them not a word, but determined to return;
wherefore, turning back, he set off homeward. Buffalmacco, seeing
this, said to Bruno, 'What shall we do? Why do we not get us gone?'
Whereto Bruno answered, 'Let us begone; but I vow to God that
Calandrino shall never again serve me thus, and were I presently near
him as I have been all the morning, I would give him such a clout on
the shins with this stone that he should have cause to remember this
trick for maybe a month to come.' To say this and to let fly at
Calandrino's shins with the stone were one and the same thing; and the
latter, feeling the pain, lifted up his leg and began to puff and
blow, but yet held his peace and fared on. Presently Buffalmacco took
one of the flints he had picked up and said to Bruno, 'Look at this
fine flint; here should go for Calandrino's loins!' So saying, he let
fly and dealt him a sore rap in the small of the back with the stone.
Brief, on this wise, now with one word and now with another, they went
pelting him up the Mugnone till they came to the San Gallo gate, where
they threw down the stones they had gathered and halted awhile at the
custom house.

The officers, forewarned by them, feigned not to see Calandrino and
let him pass, laughing heartily at the jest, whilst he, without
stopping, made straight for his house, which was near the Canto alla
Macina, and fortune so far favoured the cheat that none accosted him,
as he came up the stream and after through the city, as, indeed, he
met with few, for that well nigh every one was at dinner. Accordingly,
he reached his house, thus laden, and as chance would have it, his
wife, a fair and virtuous lady, by name Mistress Tessa, was at the
stairhead. Seeing him come and somewhat provoked at his long
tarriance, she began to rail at him, saying, 'Devil take the man! Wilt
thou never think to come home betimes? All the folk have already dined
whenas thou comest back to dinner.' Calandrino, hearing this and
finding that he was seen, was overwhelmed with chagrin and vexation
and cried out, 'Alack, wicked woman that thou art, wast thou there?
Thou hast undone me; but, by God His faith, I will pay thee therefor!'
Therewithal he ran up to a little saloon he had and there disburdened
himself of the mass of stones he had brought home; then, running in a
fury at his wife, he laid hold of her by the hair and throwing her
down at his feet, cuffed and kicked her in every part as long as he
could wag his arms and legs, without leaving a hair on her head or a
bone in her body that was not beaten to a mash, nor did it avail her
aught to cry him mercy with clasped hands.

Meanwhile Bruno and Buffalmacco, after laughing awhile with the
keepers of the gate, proceeded with slow step to follow Calandrino
afar off and presently coming to the door of his house, heard the
cruel beating he was in act to give his wife; whereupon, making a show
of having but then come back, they called Calandrino, who came to the
window, all asweat and red with anger and vexation, and prayed them
come up to him. Accordingly, they went up, making believe to be
somewhat vexed, and seeing the room full of stones and the lady, all
torn and dishevelled and black and blue in the face for bruises,
weeping piteously in one corner of the room, whilst Calandrino sat in
another, untrussed and panting like one forspent, eyed them awhile,
then said, 'What is this, Calandrino? Art thou for building, that we
see all these stones here? And Mistress Tessa, what aileth her? It
seemeth thou hast beaten her. What is all this ado?' Calandrino,
outwearied with the weight of the stones and the fury with which he
had beaten his wife, no less than with chagrin for the luck which
himseemed he had lost, could not muster breath to give them aught but
broken words in reply; wherefore, as he delayed to answer, Buffalmacco
went on, 'Harkye, Calandrino, whatever other cause for anger thou
mightest have had, thou shouldst not have fooled us as thou hast done,
in that, after thou hadst carried us off to seek with thee for the
wonder-working stone, thou leftest us in the Mugnone, like a couple of
gulls, and madest off home, without saying so much as God be with you
or devil; the which we take exceeding ill; but assuredly this shall be
the last trick thou shalt ever play us.'

Therewithal, Calandrino enforcing himself,[376] answered, 'Comrades,
be not angered; the case standeth otherwise than as you deem. I
(unlucky wretch that I am!) had found the stone in question, and you
shall hear if I tell truth. When first you questioned one another of
me, I was less than half a score yards distant from you; but, seeing
that you made off and saw me not, I went on before you and came back
hither, still keeping a little in front of you.' Then, beginning from
the beginning, he recounted to them all that they had said and done,
first and last, and showed them how the stones had served his back and
shins; after which, 'And I may tell you,' continued he, 'that, whenas
I entered in at the gate, with all these stones about me which you see
here, there was nothing said to me, albeit you know how vexatious and
tiresome these gatekeepers use to be in wanting to see everything;
more by token that I met by the way several of my friends and gossips,
who are still wont to accost me and invite me to drink; but none of
them said a word to me, no, nor half a word, as those who saw me not.
At last, being come home hither, this accursed devil of a woman
presented herself before me, for that, as you know, women cause
everything lose its virtue, wherefore I, who might else have called
myself the luckiest man in Florence, am become the most unlucky. For
this I have beaten her as long as I could wag my fists and I know not
what hindereth me from slitting her weasand, accursed be the hour when
first I saw her and when she came to me in this house.' Then, flaming
out into fresh anger, he offered to rise and beat her anew.

[Footnote 376: _Sforzandosi_, _i.e._ recovering his wind with an
effort.]

Bruno and Buffalmacco, hearing all this, made believe to marvel
exceedingly and often confirmed that which Calandrino said, albeit
they had the while so great a mind to laugh that they were like to
burst; but, seeing him start up in a rage to beat his wife again, they
rose upon him and withheld him, avouching that the lady was nowise at
fault, but that he had only himself to blame for that which had
happened, since he knew that women caused things to lose their virtue
and had not bidden her beware of appearing before him that day, and
that God had bereft him of foresight to provide against this, either
for that the adventure was not to be his or because he had had it in
mind to cozen his comrades, to whom he should have discovered the
matter, as soon as he perceived that he had found the stone. Brief,
after many words, they made peace, not without much ado, between him
and the woebegone lady and went their ways, leaving him disconsolate,
with the house full of stones."




THE FOURTH STORY

[Day the Eighth]

     THE RECTOR OF FIESOLE LOVETH A WIDOW LADY, BUT IS NOT LOVED
     BY HER AND THINKING TO LIE WITH HER, LIETH WITH A
     SERVING-WENCH OF HERS, WHILST THE LADY'S BROTHERS CAUSE THE
     BISHOP FIND HIM IN THIS CASE


Elisa being come to the end of her story, which she had related to the
no small pleasure of all the company, the queen turned to Emilia, and
signified to her her wish that she should follow after with her story,
whereupon she promptly began thus: "I have not forgotten, noble
ladies, that it hath already been shown, in sundry of the foregoing
stories, how much we women are exposed to the importunities of the
priests and friars and clergy of every kind; but, seeing that so much
cannot be said thereof but that yet more will remain to say, I
purpose, to boot, to tell you a story of a rector, who, maugre all the
world, would e'en have a gentlewoman wish him well,[377] whether she
would or not; whereupon she, like a very discreet woman as she was,
used him as he deserved.

[Footnote 377: _i.e._ love him, grant him her favours. See ante,
passim.]

As all of you know, Fiesole, whose hill we can see hence, was once a
very great and ancient city, nor, albeit it is nowadays all undone,
hath it ever ceased to be, as it is yet, the seat of a bishop. Near
the cathedral church there a widow lady of noble birth, by name Madam
Piccarda, had an estate, where, for that she was not overwell to do,
she abode the most part of the year in a house of hers that was not
very big, and with her, two brothers of hers, very courteous and
worthy youths. It chanced that, the lady frequenting the cathedral
church and being yet very young and fair and agreeable, the rector of
the church became so sore enamoured of her that he could think of
nothing else, and after awhile, making bold to discover his mind to
her, he prayed her accept of his love and love him as he loved her.
Now he was already old in years, but very young in wit, malapert and
arrogant and presumptuous in the extreme, with manners and fashions
full of conceit and ill grace, and withal so froward and
ill-conditioned that there was none who wished him well; and if any
had scant regard for him, it was the lady in question, who not only
wished him no whit of good, but hated him worse than the megrims;
wherefore, like a discreet woman as she was, she answered him, 'Sir,
that you love me should be mighty pleasing to me, who am bound to love
you and will gladly do so; but between your love and mine nothing
unseemly should ever befall. You are my spiritual father and a priest
and are presently well stricken in years, all which things should make
you both modest and chaste; whilst I, on the other hand, am no girl,
nor do these amorous toys beseem my present condition, for that I am a
widow and you well know what discretion is required in widows;
wherefore I pray you hold me excused, for that I shall never love you
after the fashion whereof you require me; nor do I wish to be thus
loved of you.'

The rector could get of her no other answer for that time, but, nowise
daunted or disheartened by the first rebuff, solicited her again and
again with the most overweening importunity, both by letter and
message, nay, even by word of mouth, whenas he saw her come into the
church. Wherefor, herseeming that this was too great and too grievous
an annoy, she cast about to rid herself of him after such a fashion as
he deserved, since she could no otherwise, but would do nought ere she
had taken counsel with her brothers. Accordingly, she acquainted them
with the rector's behaviour towards her and that which she purposed to
do, and having therein full license from them, went a few days after
to the church, as was her wont. As soon as the rector saw her, he came
up to her and with his usual assurance, accosted her familiarly. The
lady received him with a cheerful countenance and withdrawing apart
with him, after he had said many words to her in his wonted style, she
heaved a great sigh and said, 'Sir, I have heard that there is no
fortalice so strong but that, being every day assaulted, it cometh at
last to be taken, and this I can very well see to have happened to
myself; for that you have so closely beset me with soft words and with
one complaisance and another, that you have made me break my resolve,
and I am now disposed, since I please you thus, to consent to be
yours.' 'Gramercy, madam,' answered the rector, overjoyed, 'to tell
you the truth, I have often wondered how you could hold out so long,
considering that never did the like betide me with any woman; nay, I
have said whiles, "Were women of silver, they would not be worth a
farthing, for that not one of them would stand the hammer." But let
that pass for the present. When and where can we be together?' Whereto
quoth the lady, 'Sweet my lord, as for the when, it may be what time
soever most pleaseth us, for that I have no husband to whom it
behoveth me render an account of my nights; but for the where I know
not how to contrive.' 'How?' cried the priest. 'Why, in your house to
be sure.' 'Sir,' answered the lady, 'you know I have two young
brothers, who come and go about the house with their companions day
and night, and my house is not overbig; wherefore it may not be there,
except one chose to abide there mute-fashion, without saying a word or
making the least sound, and be in the dark, after the manner of the
blind. An you be content to do this, it might be, for they meddle not
with my bedchamber; but their own is so close to mine that one cannot
whisper the least word, without its being heard.' 'Madam,' answered
the rector, 'this shall not hinder us for a night or two, against I
bethink me where we may foregather more at ease.' Quoth she, 'Sir, let
that rest with you; but of one thing I pray you, that this abide
secret, so no word be ever known thereof.' 'Madam,' replied he, 'have
no fear for that; but, an it may be, make shift that we shall
foregather this evening.' 'With all my heart,' said the lady; and
appointing him how and when he should come, she took leave of him and
returned home.

Now she had a serving-wench, who was not overyoung, but had the
foulest and worst-favoured visnomy was ever seen; for she had a nose
flattened sore, a mouth all awry, thick lips and great ill-set teeth;
moreover, she inclined to squint, nor was ever without sore eyes, and
had a green and yellow complexion, which gave her the air of having
passed the summer not at Fiesole, but at Sinigaglia.[378] Besides all
this, she was hipshot and a thought crooked on the right side. Her
name was Ciuta, but, for that she had such a dog's visnomy of her own,
she was called of every one Ciutazza;[379] and for all she was
misshapen of her person, she was not without a spice of roguishness.
The lady called her and said to her, 'Harkye, Ciutazza, an thou wilt
do me a service this night. I will give thee a fine new shift.'
Ciutazza, hearing speak of the shift, answered, 'Madam, so you give me
a shift, I will cast myself into the fire, let alone otherwhat.'
'Well, then,' said her mistress, 'I would have thee lie to-night with
a man in my bed and load him with caresses, but take good care not to
say a word, lest thou be heard by my brothers, who, as thou knowest,
sleep in the next room; and after I will give thee the shift.' Quoth
Ciutazza, 'With all my heart. I will lie with half a dozen men, if
need be, let alone one.' Accordingly, at nightfall, my lord the rector
made his appearance, according to agreement, whilst the two young men,
by the lady's appointment, were in their bedchamber and took good care
to make themselves heard; wherefore he entered the lady's chamber in
silence and darkness and betook himself, as she had bidden him,
straight to the bed, whither on her part came Ciutazza, who had been
well lessoned by the lady of that which she had to do. My lord rector,
thinking he had his mistress beside him, caught Ciutazza in his arms
and fell to kissing her, without saying a word, and she him; whereupon
he proceeded to solace himself with her, taking, as he thought,
possession of the long-desired good.

[Footnote 378: _i.e._ in the malaria district.]

[Footnote 379: _i.e._ great ugly Ciuta.]

The lady, having done this, charged her brothers carry the rest of the
plot into execution, wherefore, stealing softly out of the chamber,
they made for the great square and fortune was more favorable to them
than they themselves asked in that which they had a mind to do,
inasmuch as, the heat being great, the bishop had enquired for the two
young gentlemen, so he might go a-pleasuring to their house and drink
with them. But, seeing them coming, he acquainted them with his wish
and returned with them to their house, where, entering a cool little
courtyard of theirs, in which were many flambeaux alight, he drank
with great pleasure of an excellent wine of theirs. When he had
drunken, the young men said to him, 'My lord, since you have done us
so much favour as to deign to visit this our poor house, whereto we
came to invite you, we would have you be pleased to view a small
matter with which we would fain show you.' The bishop answered that he
would well; whereupon one of the young men, taking a lighted flambeau
in his hand, made for the chamber where my lord rector lay with
Ciutazza, followed by the bishop and all the rest. The rector, to
arrive the quicklier at his journey's end, had hastened to take horse
and had already ridden more than three miles before they came thither;
wherefore, being somewhat weary, he had, notwithstanding the heat,
fallen asleep with Ciutazza in his arms. Accordingly, when the young
man entered the chamber, light in hand, and after him the bishop and
all the others, he was shown to the prelate in this plight; whereupon
he awoke and seeing the light and the folk about him, was sore abashed
and hid his head for fear under the bed-clothes. The bishop gave him a
sound rating and made him put out his head and see with whom he had
lain; whereupon the rector, understanding the trick that had been
played him of the lady, what with this and what with the disgrace
himseemed he had gotten, became of a sudden the woefullest man that
was aye. Then, having, by the bishop's commandment, reclad himself, he
was despatched to his house under good guard, to suffer sore penance
for the sin he had committed. The bishop presently enquiring how it
came to pass that he had gone thither to lie with Ciutazza, the young
men orderly related everything to him, which having heard, he greatly
commended both the lady and her brothers for that, without choosing to
imbrue their hands in the blood of a priest, they had entreated him as
he deserved. As for the rector, he caused him bewail his offence forty
days' space; but love and despite made him rue it for more than
nine-and-forty,[380] more by token that, for a great while after, he
could never go abroad but the children would point at him and say,
'See, there is he who lay with Ciutazza'; the which was so sore an
annoy to him that he was like to go mad therefor. On such wise did the
worthy lady rid herself of the importunity of the malapert rector and
Ciutazza gained the shift and a merry night."

[Footnote 380: _Quarantanove_, a proverbial expression for an
indefinite number.]




THE FIFTH STORY

[Day the Eighth]

     THREE YOUNG MEN PULL THE BREECHES OFF A MARCHEGAN JUDGE IN
     FLORENCE, WHAT WHILE HE IS ON THE BENCH, ADMINISTERING
     JUSTICE


Emilia having made an end of her story and the widow lady having been
commended of all, the queen looked to Filostrato and said, "It is now
thy turn to tell." He answered promptly that he was ready and began,
"Delightsome ladies, the mention by Elisa a little before of a certain
young man, to wit, Maso del Saggio, hath caused me leave a story I
purposed to tell you, so I may relate to you one of him and certain
companions of his, which, if (albeit it is nowise unseemly) it offer
certain expressions which you think shame to use, is natheless so
laughable that I will e'en tell it.

As you may all have heard, there come oftentimes to our city governors
from the Marches of Ancona, who are commonly mean-spirited folk and so
paltry and sordid of life that their every fashion seemeth nought
other than a lousy cadger's trick; and of this innate paltriness and
avarice, they bring with them judges and notaries, who seem men taken
from the plough-tail or the cobbler's stall rather than from the
schools of law. Now, one of these being come hither for Provost, among
the many judges whom he brought with him was one who styled himself
Messer Niccola da San Lepidio and who had more the air of a tinker
than of aught else, and he was set with other judges to hear criminal
causes. As it oft happeneth that, for all the townsfolk have nought in
the world to do at the courts of law, yet bytimes they go thither, it
befell that Maso del Saggio went thither one morning, in quest of a
friend of his, and chancing to cast his eyes whereas this said Messer
Niccola sat, himseemed that here was a rare outlandish kind of wild
fowl. Accordingly, he went on to examine him from head to foot, and
albeit he saw him with the miniver bonnet on his head all black with
smoke and grease and a paltry inkhorn at his girdle, a gown longer
than his mantle and store of other things all foreign to a man of good
breeding and manners, yet of all these the most notable, to his
thinking, was a pair of breeches, the backside whereof, as the judge
sat, with his clothes standing open in front for straitness, he
perceived came halfway down his legs. Thereupon, without tarrying
longer to look upon him, he left him with whom he went seeking and
beginning a new quest, presently found two comrades of his, called one
Ribi and the other Matteuzzo, men much of the same mad humour as
himself, and said to them, 'As you tender me, come with me to the law
courts, for I wish to show you the rarest scarecrow you ever saw.'

Accordingly, carrying them to the court house, he showed them the
aforesaid judge and his breeches, whereat they fell a-laughing, as
soon as they caught sight of him afar off; then, drawing nearer to the
platform whereon my lord judge sat, they saw that one might lightly
pass thereunder and that, moreover, the boards under his feet were so
broken that one might with great ease thrust his hand and arm between
them; whereupon quoth Maso to his comrades, 'Needs must we pull him
off those breeches of his altogether, for that it may very well be
done.' Each of the others had already seen how;[381] wherefore, having
agreed among themselves what they should say and do, they returned
thither next morning, when, the court being very full of folk,
Matteuzzo, without being seen of any, crept under the bench and posted
himself immediately beneath the judge's feet. Meanwhile, Maso came up
to my lord judge on one side and taking him by the skirt of his gown,
whilst Ribi did the like on the other side, began to say, 'My lord,
my lord, I pray you for God's sake, ere yonder scurvy thief on the
other side of you go elsewhere, make him restore me a pair of
saddle-bags whereof he hath saith indeed he did it not; but I saw him,
not a month ago, in act to have them resoled.' Ribi on his side cried
out with all his might, 'Believe him not, my lord; he is an arrant
knave, and for that he knoweth I am come to lay a complaint against
him for a pair of saddle-bags whereof he hath robbed me, he cometh now
with his story of the boothose, which I have had in my house this many
a day. An you believe me not, I can bring you to witness my next-door
neighbor Trecca and Grassa the tripewoman and one who goeth gathering
the sweepings from Santa Masia at Verjaza, who saw him when he came
back from the country.

[Footnote 381: _i.e._ how they might do this.]

Maso on the other hand suffered not Ribi to speak, but bawled his
loudest, whereupon the other but shouted the more. The judge stood up
and leaned towards them, so he might the better apprehend what they
had to say, wherefore Matteuzzo, watching his opportunity, thrust his
hand between the crack of the boards and laying hold of Messer
Niccola's galligaskins by the breech, tugged at them amain. The
breeches came down incontinent, for that the judge was lean and lank
of the crupper; whereupon, feeling this and knowing not what it might
be, he would have sat down again and pulled his skirts forward to
cover himself; but Maso on the one side and Ribi on the other still
held him fast and cried out, 'My lord, you do ill not to do me justice
and to seek to avoid hearing me and get you gone otherwhere; there be
no writs granted in this city for such small matters as this.' So
saying, they held him fast by the clothes on such wise that all who
were in the court perceived that his breeches had been pulled down.
However, Matteuzzo, after he had held them awhile, let them go and
coming forth from under the platform, made off out of the court and
went his way without being seen; whereupon quoth Ribi, himseeming he
had done enough, 'I vow to God I will appeal to the syndicate!' Whilst
Maso, on his part, let go the mantle and said, 'Nay, I will e'en come
hither again and again until such time as I find you not hindered as
you seem to be this morning.' So saying, they both made off as
quickliest they might, each on his own side, whilst my lord judge
pulled up his breeches in every one's presence, as if he were arisen
from sleep; then, perceiving how the case stood, he enquired whither
they were gone who were at difference anent the boothose and the
saddle-bags; but they were not to be found, whereupon he began to
swear by Cock's bowels that need must he know and learn if it were the
wont at Florence to pull down the judges' breeches, whenas they sat on
the judicial bench. The Provost, on his part, hearing of this, made a
great stir; but, his friends having shown him that this had only been
done to give him notice that the Florentines right well understood
how, whereas he should have brought judges, he had brought them sorry
patches, to have them better cheap, he thought it best to hold his
peace, and so the thing went no farther for the nonce."




THE SIXTH STORY

[Day the Eighth]

     BRUNO AND BUFFALMACCO, HAVING STOLEN A PIG FROM CALANDRINO,
     MAKE HIM TRY THE ORDEAL WITH GINGER BOLUSES AND SACK AND
     GIVE HIM (INSTEAD OF THE GINGER) TWO DOG-BALLS COMPOUNDED
     WITH ALOES, WHEREBY IT APPEARETH THAT HE HIMSELF HATH HAD
     THE PIG AND THEY MAKE HIM PAY BLACKMAIL, AN HE WOULD NOT
     HAVE THEM TELL HIS WIFE


No sooner had Filostrato despatched his story, which had given rise to
many a laugh, than the queen bade Filomena follow on, whereupon she
began: "Gracious ladies, even as Filostrato was led by the mention of
Maso to tell the story which you have just heard from him, so neither
more nor less am I moved by that of Calandrino and his friends to tell
you another of them, which methinketh will please you.

Who Calandrino, Bruno and Buffalmacco were I need not explain to you,
for that you have already heard it well enough; wherefore, to proceed
with my story, I must tell you that Calandrino owned a little farm at
no great distance from Florence, that he had had to his wife's dowry.
From this farm, amongst other things that he got thence, he had every
year a pig, and it was his wont still to betake himself thither, he
and his wife, and kill the pig and have it salted on the spot. It
chanced one year that, his wife being somewhat ailing, he went himself
to kill the pig, which Bruno and Buffalmacco hearing and knowing that
his wife was not gone to the farm with him, they repaired to a priest,
very great friend of theirs and a neighbor of Calandrino, to sojourn
some days with him. Now Calandrino had that very morning killed the
pig and seeing them with the priest, called to them saying, 'You are
welcome. I would fain have you see what a good husband[382] I am.'
Then carrying them into the house, he showed them the pig, which they
seeing to be a very fine one and understanding from Calandrino that he
meant to salt it down for his family, 'Good lack,' quoth Bruno to him,
'what a ninny thou art! Sell it and let us make merry with the price,
and tell thy wife that it hath been stolen from thee.' 'Nay, answered
Calandrino, 'she would never believe it and would drive me out of the
house. Spare your pains, for I will never do it.' And many were the
words, but they availed nothing.

[Footnote 382: _i.e._ in the old sense of "manager" (_massajo_).]

Calandrino invited them to supper, but with so ill a grace that they
refused to sup there and took their leave of him; whereupon quoth
Bruno and Buffalmacco, 'What sayest thou to stealing yonder pig from
him to-night?' 'Marry,' replied the other, 'how can we do it?' Quoth
Bruno, 'I can see how well enough, an he remove it not from where it
was but now.' 'Then,' rejoined his companion, 'let us do it. Why
should we not? And after we will make merry over it with the parson
here.' The priest answered that he would well, and Bruno said, 'Here
must some little art be used. Thou knowest, Buffalmacco, how
niggardly Calandrino is and how gladly he drinketh when others pay;
let us go and carry him to the tavern, where the priest shall make
believe to pay the whole scot in our honor nor suffer him to pay
aught. Calandrino will soon grow fuddled and then we can manage it
lightly enough, for that he is alone in the house.' As he said, so
they did and Calandrino seeing that the priest suffered none to pay,
gave himself up to drinking and took in a good load, albeit it needed
no great matter to make him drunk. It was pretty late at night when
they left the tavern and Calandrino, without troubling himself about
supper, went straight home, where, thinking to have shut the door, he
left it open and betook himself to bed. Buffalmacco and Bruno went off
to sup with the priest and after supper repaired quietly to
Calandrino's house, carrying with them certain implements wherewithal
to break in whereas Bruno had appointed it; but, finding the door
open, they entered and unhooking the pig, carried it off to the
priest's house, where they laid it up and betook themselves to sleep.

On the morrow, Calandrino, having slept off the fumes of the wine,
arose in the morning and going down, missed his pig and saw the door
open; whereupon he questioned this one and that if they knew who had
taken it and getting no news of it, began to make a great outcry,
saying, 'Woe is me, miserable wretch that I am!' for that the pig had
been stolen from him. As soon as Bruno and Buffalmacco were risen,
they repaired to Calandrino's house, to hear what he would say anent
the pig, and he no sooner saw them than he called out to them, well
nigh weeping, and said, 'Woe's me, comrades mine; my pig hath been
stolen from me!' Whereupon Bruno came up to him and said softly, 'It
is a marvel that thou hast been wise for once.' 'Alack,' replied
Calandrino, 'indeed I say sooth.' 'That's the thing to say,' quoth
Bruno. 'Make a great outcry, so it may well appear that it is e'en as
thou sayst.' Therewithal Calandrino bawled out yet loudlier, saying,
'Cock's body, I tell thee it hath been stolen from me in good
earnest!' 'Good, good,' replied Bruno; 'that's the way to speak; cry
out lustily, make thyself well heard, so it may seem true.' Quoth
Calandrino, 'Thou wouldst make me give my soul to the Fiend! I tell
thee and thou believest me not. May I be strung up by the neck an it
have not been stolen from me!' 'Good lack!' cried Bruno. 'How can that
be? I saw it here but yesterday. Thinkest thou to make me believe that
it hath flown away?' Quoth Calandrino, 'It is as I tell thee.' 'Good
lack,' repeated Bruno, 'can it be?' 'Certes,' replied Calandrino, 'it
is so, more by token that I am undone and know not how I shall return
home. My wife will never believe me; or even if she do, I shall have
no peace with her this year to come.' Quoth Bruno, 'So God save me,
this is ill done, if it be true; but thou knowest, Calandrino, I
lessoned thee yesterday to say thus and I would not have thee at once
cozen thy wife and us.' Therewithal Calandrino fell to crying out and
saying, 'Alack, why will you drive me to desperation and make me
blaspheme God and the Saints? I tell you the pig was stolen from me
yesternight.'

Then said Buffalmacco, 'If it be so indeed, we must cast about for a
means of having it again, an we may contrive it.' 'But what means,'
asked Calandrino, 'can we find?' Quoth Buffalmacco, 'We may be sure
that there hath come none from the Indies to rob thee of thy pig; the
thief must have been some one of thy neighbors. An thou canst make
shift to assemble them, I know how to work the ordeal by bread and
cheese and we will presently see for certain who hath had it.' 'Ay,'
put in Bruno, 'thou wouldst make a fine thing of bread and cheese with
such gentry as we have about here, for one of them I am certain hath
had the pig, and he would smoke the trap and would not come.' 'How,
then, shall we do?' asked Buffalmacco, and Bruno said, 'We must e'en
do it with ginger boluses and good vernage[383] and invite them to
drink. They will suspect nothing and come, and the ginger boluses can
be blessed even as the bread and cheese.' Quoth Buffalmacco, 'Indeed,
thou sayst sooth. What sayst thou, Calandrino? Shall's do 't?' 'Nay,'
replied the gull, 'I pray you thereof for the love of God; for, did I
but know who hath had it, I should hold myself half consoled.' 'Marry,
then,' said Bruno, 'I am ready to go to Florence, to oblige thee, for
the things aforesaid, so thou wilt give me the money.' Now Calandrino
had maybe forty shillings, which he gave him, and Bruno accordingly
repaired to Florence to a friend of his, a druggist, of whom he bought
a pound of fine ginger boluses and caused compound a couple of
dogballs with fresh confect of hepatic aloes; after which he let cover
these latter with sugar, like the others, and set thereon a privy mark
by which he might very well know them, so he should not mistake them
nor change them. Then, buying a flask of good vernage, he returned to
Calandrino in the country and said to him, 'Do thou to-morrow morning
invite those whom thou suspectest to drink with thee; it is a holiday
and all will willingly come. Meanwhile, Buffalmacco and I will
to-night make the conjuration over the pills and bring them to thee
to-morrow morning at home; and for the love of thee I will administer
them myself and do and say that which is to be said and done.'

[Footnote 383: _i.e._ white wine, see p. 372, note.]

Calandrino did as he said and assembled on the following morning a
goodly company of such young Florentines as were presently about the
village and of husbandmen; whereupon Bruno and Buffalmacco came with a
box of pills and the flask of wine and made the folk stand in a ring.
Then said Bruno, 'Gentlemen, needs must I tell you the reason
wherefore you are here, so that, if aught betide that please you not,
you may have no cause to complain of me. Calandrino here was robbed
yesternight of a fine pig, nor can he find who hath had it; and for
that none other than some one of us who are here can have stolen it
from him, he proffereth each of you, that he may discover who hath had
it, one of these pills to eat and a draught of wine. Now you must know
that he who hath had the pig will not be able to swallow the pill;
nay, it will seem to him more bitter than poison and he will spit it
out; wherefore, rather than that shame be done him in the presence of
so many, he were better tell it to the parson by way of confession and
I will proceed no farther with this matter.'

All who were there declared that they would willingly eat of the
pills, whereupon Bruno ranged them in order and set Calandrino among
them; then, beginning at one end of the line, he proceeded to give
each his bolus, and whenas he came over against Calandrino, he took
one of the dogballs and put it into his hand. Calandrino clapped it
incontinent into his mouth and began to chew it; but no sooner did his
tongue taste the aloes, than he spat it out again, being unable to
brook the bitterness. Meanwhile, each was looking other in the face,
to see who should spit out his bolus, and whilst Bruno, not having
made an end of serving them out, went on to do so, feigning to pay no
heed to Calandrino's doing, he heard say behind him, 'How now,
Calandrino? What meaneth this?' Whereupon he turned suddenly round and
seeing that Calandrino had spat out his bolus, said, 'Stay, maybe
somewhat else hath caused him spit it out. Take another of them.'
Then, taking the other dogball, he thrust it into Calandrino's mouth
and went on to finish giving out the rest. If the first ball seemed
bitter to Calandrino, the second was bitterer yet; but, being ashamed
to spit it out, he kept it awhile in his mouth, chewing it and
shedding tears that seemed hazel-nuts so big they were, till at last,
unable to hold out longer, he cast it forth, like as he had the first.
Meanwhile Buffalmacco and Bruno gave the company to drink, and all,
seeing this, declared that Calandrino had certainly stolen the pig
from himself; nay, there were those there who rated him roundly.

After they were all gone, and the two rogues left alone with
Calandrino, Buffalmacco said to him, 'I still had it for certain that
it was thou tookst the pig thyself and wouldst fain make us believe
that it had been stolen from thee, to escape giving us one poor while
to drink of the monies thou hadst for it.' Calandrino, who was not yet
quit of the bitter taste of the aloes, began to swear that he had not
had it, and Buffalmacco said, 'But in good earnest, comrade, what
gottest thou for it? Was it six florins?' Calandrino, hearing this,
began to wax desperate, and Bruno said, 'Harkye, Calandrino, there was
such an one in the company that ate and drank with us, who told me
that thou hast a wench over yonder, whom thou keepest for thy pleasure
and to whom thou givest whatsoever thou canst scrape together, and
that he held it for certain that thou hadst sent her the pig. Thou
hast learned of late to play pranks of this kind; thou carriedst us
off t'other day down the Mugnone, picking up black stones, and whenas
thou hadst gotten us aboard ship without biscuit,[384] thou madest off
and wouldst after have us believe that thou hadst found the magic
stone; and now on like wise thou thinkest, by dint of oaths, to make
us believe that the pig, which thou hast given away or more like sold,
hath been stolen from thee. But we are used to thy tricks and know
them; thou shalt not avail to play us any more of them, and to be
plain with thee, since we have been at pains to make the conjuration,
we mean that thou shalt give us two pairs of capons; else will we
tell Mistress Tessa everything.' Calandrino, seeing that he was not
believed and himseeming he had had vexation enough, without having his
wife's scolding into the bargain, gave them two pairs of capons, which
they carried off to Florence, after they had salted the pig, leaving
Calandrino to digest the loss and the flouting as best he might."

[Footnote 384: _i.e._ embarked on a bootless quest.]




THE SEVENTH STORY

[Day the Eighth]

     A SCHOLAR LOVETH A WIDOW LADY, WHO, BEING ENAMOURED OF
     ANOTHER, CAUSETH HIM SPEND ONE WINTER'S NIGHT IN THE SNOW
     AWAITING HER, AND HE AFTER CONTRIVETH, BY HIS SLEIGHT, TO
     HAVE HER ABIDE NAKED, ALL ONE MID-JULY DAY, ON THE SUMMIT OF
     A TOWER, EXPOSED TO FLIES AND GADS AND SUN


The ladies laughed amain at the unhappy Calandrino and would have
laughed yet more, but that it irked them to see him fleeced of the
capons, to boot, by those who had already robbed him of the pig. But,
as soon as the end of the story was come, the queen charged Pampinea
tell hers, and she promptly began thus: "It chanceth oft, dearest
ladies, that craft is put to scorn by craft and it is therefore a sign
of little wit to delight in making mock of others. We have, for
several stories, laughed amain at tricks that have been played upon
folk and whereof no vengeance is recorded to have been taken; but I
purpose now to cause you have some compassion of a just retribution
wreaked upon a townswoman of ours, on whose head her own cheat
recoiled and was retorted well nigh unto death; and the hearing of
this will not be without profit unto you, for that henceforward you
will the better keep yourselves from making mock of others, and in
this you will show great good sense.

Not many years ago there was in Florence, a young lady, by name Elena,
fair of favour and haughty of humour, of very gentle lineage and
endowed with sufficient abundance of the goods of fortune, who, being
widowed of her husband, chose never to marry again, for that she was
enamoured of a handsome and agreeable youth of her own choice, and
with the aid of a maid of hers, in whom she put great trust, being
quit of every other care, she often with marvellous delight gave
herself a good time with him. In these days it chanced that a young
gentleman of our city, by name Rinieri, having long studied in Paris,
not for the sake of after selling his knowledge by retail, as many do,
but to know the nature of things and their causes, the which
excellently becometh a gentleman, returned thence to Florence and
there lived citizen-fashion, much honoured as well for his nobility as
for his learning. But, as it chanceth often that those, who have the
most experience of things profound, are the soonest snared of love,
even so it befell this Rinieri; for, having one day repaired, by way
of diversion, to an entertainment, there presented herself before his
eyes the aforesaid Elena, clad all in black, as our widows go, and
full, to his judgment, of such beauty and pleasantness as himseemed he
had never beheld in any other woman; and in his heart he deemed that
he might call himself blest whom God should vouchsafe to hold her
naked in his arms. Then, furtively considering her once and again and
knowing that great things and precious were not to be acquired without
travail, he altogether determined in himself to devote all his pains
and all his diligence to the pleasing her, to the end that thereby he
might gain her love and so avail to have his fill of her.

The young lady, (who kept not her eyes fixed upon the nether world,
but, conceiting herself as much and more than as much as she was,
moved them artfully hither and thither, gazing all about, and was
quick to note who delighted to look upon her,) soon became aware of
Rinieri and said, laughing, in herself, 'I have not come hither in
vain to-day; for, an I mistake not, I have caught a woodcock by the
bill.' Accordingly, she fell to ogling him from time to time with the
tail of her eye and studied, inasmuch as she might, to let him see
that she took note of him, thinking that the more men she allured and
ensnared with her charms, so much the more of price would her beauty
be, especially to him on whom she had bestowed it, together with her
love. The learned scholar, laying aside philosophical speculations,
turned all his thoughts to her and thinking to please her, enquired
where she lived and proceeded to pass to and fro before her house,
colouring his comings and goings with various pretexts, whilst the
lady, idly glorying in this, for the reason already set out, made
believe to take great pleasure in seeing him. Accordingly, he found
means to clap up an acquaintance with her maid and discovering to her
his love, prayed her make interest for him with her mistress, so he
might avail to have her favour. The maid promised freely and told the
lady, who hearkened with the heartiest laughter in the world and said,
'Seest thou where yonder man cometh to lose the wit he hath brought
back from Paris? Marry, we will give him that which he goeth seeking.
An he bespeak thee again, do thou tell him that I love him far more
than he loveth me; but that it behoveth me look to mine honour, so I
may hold up my head with the other ladies; whereof and he be as wise
as folk say, he will hold me so much the dearer.' Alack, poor silly
soul, she knew not aright, ladies mine, what it is to try conclusions
with scholars. The maid went in search of Rinieri and finding him, did
that which had been enjoined her of her mistress, whereat he was
overjoyed and proceeded to use more urgent entreaties, writing letters
and sending presents, all of which were accepted, but he got nothing
but vague and general answers; and on this wise she held him in play a
great while.

At last, to show her lover, to whom she had discovered everything and
who was whiles somewhat vexed with her for this and had conceived some
jealousy of Rinieri, that he did wrong to suspect her thereof, she
despatched to the scholar, now grown very pressing, her maid, who told
him, on her mistress's part, that she had never yet had an opportunity
to do aught that might pleasure him since he had certified her of his
love, but that on the occasion of the festival of the Nativity she
hoped to be able to be with him; wherefore, an it liked him, he was
on the evening of the feast to come by night to her courtyard, whither
she would go for him as first she might. At this the scholar was the
gladdest man alive and betook himself at the appointed time to his
mistress's house, where he was carried by the maid into a courtyard
and being there locked in, proceeded to wait the lady's coming. The
latter had that evening sent for her lover and after she had supped
merrily with him, she told him that which she purposed to do that
night, adding, 'And thou mayst see for thyself what and how great is
the love I have borne and bear him of whom thou hast taken a
jealousy.' The lover heard these words with great satisfaction and was
impatient to see by the fact that which the lady gave him to
understand with words.

It had by chance snowed hard during the day and everything was covered
with snow, wherefore the scholar had not long abidden in the courtyard
before he began to feel colder than he could have wished; but, looking
to recruit himself speedily, he was fain to endure it with patience.
Presently, the lady said to her lover, 'Let us go look from a lattice
what yonder fellow, of whom thou art waxed jealous, doth and hear what
he shall answer the maid, whom I have sent to parley with him.'
Accordingly, they betook themselves to a lattice and thence, seeing,
without being seen, they heard the maid from another lattice bespeak
the scholar and say, 'Rinieri, my lady is the woefullest woman that
was aye, for that there is one of her brothers come hither to-night,
who hath talked much with her and after must needs sup with her, nor
is yet gone away; but methinketh he will soon be gone; wherefore she
hath not been able to come to thee, but will soon come now and prayeth
thee not to take the waiting in ill part.' Rinieri, believing this to
be true, replied, 'Tell my lady to give herself no concern for me till
such time as she can at her commodity come to me, but bid her do this
as quickliest she may.' The maid turned back into the house and betook
herself to bed, whilst the lady said to her gallant, 'Well, how sayst
thou? Thinkest thou that, an I wished him such weal as thou fearest, I
would suffer him stand a-freezing down yonder?' So saying, she betook
herself to bed with her lover, who was now in part satisfied, and
there they abode a great while in joyance and liesse, laughing and
making mock of the wretched scholar, who fared to and fro the while in
the courtyard, making shift to warm himself with exercise, nor had
whereas he might seat himself or shelter from the night-damp. He
cursed her brother's long stay with the lady and took everything he
heard for the opening of a door to him by her, but hoped in vain.

The lady, having solaced herself with her lover till near upon
midnight, said to him, 'How deemest thou, my soul, of our scholar?
Whether seemeth to thee the greater, his wit or the love I bear him?
Will the cold which I presently cause him suffer do away from thy mind
the doubts which my pleasantries aroused therein the other day?'
Whereto he replied, 'Heart of my body, yes, I know right well that,
like as thou art my good and my peace and my delight and all my hope,
even so am I thine.' 'Then,' rejoined she, 'kiss me a thousand times,
so I may see if thou say sooth.' Whereupon he clipped her fast in his
arms and kissed her not a thousand, but more than an hundred thousand
times. Then, after they had abidden awhile in such discourse, the lady
said, 'Marry, let us arise a little and go see if the fire is anydele
spent, wherein this my new lover wrote me that he burnt all day long.'
Accordingly, they arose and getting them to the accustomed lattice,
looked out into the courtyard, where they saw the scholar dancing a
right merry jig on the snow, so fast and brisk that never had they
seen the like, to the sound of the chattering of the teeth that he
made for excess of cold; whereupon quoth the lady, 'How sayst thou,
sweet my hope? Seemeth to thee that I know how to make folk jig it
without sound of trump or bagpipe?' Whereto he answered, laughing, 'Ay
dost thou, my chief delight.' Quoth the lady, 'I will that we go down
to the door; thou shalt abide quiet, whilst I bespeak him, and we
shall hear what he will say; belike we shall have no less diversion
thereof than we had from seeing him.'

Accordingly, they softly opened the chamber and stole down to the
door, where, without opening it anydele, the lady called to the
scholar in a low voice by a little hole that was there. Rinieri
hearing himself called, praised God, taking it oversoon for granted
that he was to be presently admitted, and coming up to the door, said,
'Here am I, madam; open for God's sake, for I die of cold.' 'O ay,'
replied the lady, 'I know thou art a chilly one; is then the cold so
exceeding great, because, forsooth, there is a little snow about? I
wot the nights are much colder in Paris. I cannot open to thee yet,
for that accursed brother of mine, who came to sup with me to-night,
is not yet gone; but he will soon begone and I will come incontinent
to open to thee. I have but now very hardly stolen away from him, that
I might come to exhort thee not to wax weary of waiting.' 'Alack,
madam,' cried the scholar, 'I pray you for God's sake open to me, so I
may abide within under cover, for that this little while past there is
come on the thickest snow in the world and it yet snoweth, and I will
wait for you as long as it shall please you.' 'Woe's me, sweet my
treasure,' replied the lady, 'that cannot I; for this door maketh so
great a noise, whenas it is opened, that it would lightly be heard of
my brother, if I should open to thee; but I will go bid him begone, so
I may after come back and open to thee.' 'Then go quickly,' rejoined
he; 'and I prithee let make a good fire, so I may warm me as soon as I
come in, for that I am grown so cold I can scarce feel myself.' Quoth
the lady, 'That should not be possible, an that be true which thou
hast many a time written me, to wit, that thou burnest for the love of
me. Now, I must go, wait and be of good heart.' Then, with her lover,
who had heard all this with the utmost pleasure, she went back to bed,
and that night they slept little, nay, they spent it well nigh all in
dalliance and delight and in making mock of Rinieri.

Meanwhile, the unhappy scholar (now well nigh grown a stork, so sore
did his teeth chatter,) perceiving at last that he was befooled,
essayed again and again to open the door and sought an he might not
avail to issue thence by another way; but, finding no means
thereunto, he fell a-ranging to and fro like a lion, cursing the
foulness of the weather and the lady's malignity and the length of the
night, together with his own credulity; wherefore, being sore despited
against his mistress, the long and ardent love he had borne her was
suddenly changed to fierce and bitter hatred and he revolved in
himself many and various things, so he might find a means of revenge,
the which he now desired far more eagerly than he had before desired
to be with the lady. At last, after much long tarriance, the night
drew near unto day and the dawn began to appear; whereupon the maid,
who had been lessoned by the lady, coming down, opened the courtyard
door and feigning to have compassion of Rinieri, said, 'Bad luck may
he have who came hither yestereve! He hath kept us all night upon
thorns and hath caused thee freeze; but knowest thou what? Bear it
with patience, for that which could not be to-night shall be another
time. Indeed, I know nought could have happened that had been so
displeasing to my lady.'

The despiteful scholar, like a wise man as he was, who knew that
threats are but arms for the threatened, locked up in his breast that
which untempered will would fain have vented and said in a low voice,
without anywise showing himself vexed, 'In truth I have had the worst
night I ever had; but I have well apprehended that the lady is nowise
to blame for this, inasmuch as she herself of her compassion for me,
came down hither to excuse herself and to hearten me; and as thou
sayest, that which hath not been to-night shall be another time.
Commend me to her and God be with thee.' Therewithal, well nigh stark
with cold, he made his way, as best he might, back to his house,
where, being drowsed to death, he cast himself upon his bed to sleep
and awoke well nigh crippled of his arms and legs; wherefore, sending
for sundry physicians and acquainting them with the cold he had
suffered, he caused take order for his cure. The leaches, plying him
with prompt and very potent remedies, hardly, after some time, availed
to recover him of the shrinking of the sinews and cause them relax;
and but that he was young and that the warm season came on, he had
overmuch to suffer. However, being restored to health and lustihead,
he kept his hate to himself and feigned himself more than ever
enamoured of his widow.

Now it befell, after a certain space of time, that fortune furnished
him with an occasion of satisfying his desire [for vengeance], for
that the youth beloved of the widow being, without any regard for the
love she bore him, fallen enamoured of another lady, would have nor
little nor much to say to her nor do aught to pleasure her, wherefore
she pined in tears and bitterness. But her maid, who had great
compassion of her, finding no way of rousing her mistress from the
chagrin into which the loss of her lover had cast her and seeing the
scholar pass along the street, after the wonted manner, entered into a
fond conceit, to wit, that the lady's lover might be brought by some
necromantic operation or other to love her as he had been wont to do
and that the scholar should be a past master in this manner of thing,
and told her thought to her mistress. The latter, little wise, without
considering that, had the scholar been acquainted with the black art,
he would have practised it for himself, lent her mind to her maid's
words and bade her forthright learn from him if he would do it and
give him all assurance that, in requital thereof, she would do
whatsoever pleased him. The maid did her errand well and diligently,
which when the scholar heard, he was overjoyed and said in himself,
'Praised be Thou, my God! The time is come when with Thine aid I may
avail to make yonder wicked woman pay the penalty of the harm she did
me in requital of the great love I bore her.' Then to the maid, 'Tell
my lady,' quoth he, 'that she need be in no concern for this, for
that, were her lover in the Indies, I would speedily cause him come to
her and crave pardon of that which he hath done to displeasure her;
but the means she must take to this end I purpose to impart to
herself, when and where it shall most please her. So say to her and
hearten her on my part.'

The maid carried his answer to her mistress and it was agreed that
they should foregather at Santa Lucia del Prato, whither, accordingly,
the lady, and the scholar being come and speaking together alone, she,
remembering her not that she had aforetime brought him well nigh to
death's door, openly discovered to him her case and that which she
desired and besought him to succour her. 'Madam,' answered he, 'it is
true that amongst the other things I learned at Paris was necromancy,
whereof for certain I know that which is extant thereof; but for that
the thing is supremely displeasing unto God, I had sworn never to
practise it either for myself or for others. Nevertheless, the love I
bear you is of such potency that I know not how I may deny you aught
that you would have me do; wherefore, though it should behove me for
this alone go to the devil's stead, I am yet ready to do it, since it
is your pleasure. But I must forewarn you that the thing is more
uneath to do than you perchance imagine, especially whenas a woman
would recall a man to loving her or a man a woman, for that this
cannot be done save by the very person unto whom it pertaineth; and it
behoveth that whoso doth it be of an assured mind, seeing it must be
done anights and in solitary places without company; which things I
know not how you are disposed to do.' The lady, more enamoured than
discreet, replied, 'Love spurreth me on such wise that there is
nothing I would not do to have again him who hath wrongfully forsaken
me. Algates, an it please you, show me in what I must approve myself
assured of mind.' 'Madam,' replied the scholar, who had a patch of ill
hair to his tail,[385] 'I must make an image of pewter in his name
whom you desire to get again, which whenas I shall send you, it will
behove you seven times bathe yourself therewith, all naked, in a
running stream, at the hour of the first sleep, what time the moon is
far on the wane. Thereafter, naked as you are, you must get you up
into a tree or to the top of some uninhabited house and turning to the
north, with the image in your hand, seven times running say certain
words which I shall give you written; which when you shall have done,
there will come to you two of the fairest damsels you ever beheld, who
will salute you and ask you courteously what you would have done. Do
you well and throughly discover to them your desires and look it
betide you not to name one for another. As soon as you have told them,
they will depart and you may then come down to the place where you
shall have left your clothes and re-clothe yourself and return home;
and for certain, ere it be the middle of the ensuing night, your lover
will come, weeping, to crave you pardon and mercy; and know that from
that time forth he will never again leave you for any other.'

[Footnote 385: A proverbial way of saying that he bore malice and was
vindictive.]

The lady, hearing all this and lending entire faith thereto, was half
comforted, herseeming she already had her lover again in her arms, and
said, 'Never fear; I will very well do these things, and I have
therefor the finest commodity in the world; for I have, towards the
upper end of the Val d'Arno, a farm, which is very near the
river-bank, and it is now July, so that bathing will be pleasant; more
by token that I mind me there is, not far from the stream, a little
uninhabited tower, save that the shepherds climb up bytimes, by a
ladder of chestnut-wood that is there, to a sollar at the top, to look
for their strayed beasts: otherwise it is a very solitary
out-of-the-way[386] place. Thither will I betake myself and there I
hope to do that which you shall enjoin me the best in the world.' The
scholar, who very well knew both the place and the tower mentioned by
the lady, was rejoiced to be certified of her intent and said, 'Madam,
I was never in these part and therefore know neither the farm nor the
tower; but, an it be as you say, nothing in the world can be better.
Wherefore, whenas it shall be time, I will send you the image and the
conjuration; but I pray you instantly, whenas you shall have gotten
your desire and shall know I have served you well, that you be mindful
of me and remember to keep your promise to me.' She answered that she
would without fail do it and taking leave of him, returned to her
house; whilst the scholar, rejoiced for that himseemed his desire was
like to have effect, made an image with certain talismanic characters
of his own devising, and wrote a rigmarole of his fashion, by way of
conjuration; the which, whenas it seemed to him time, he despatched to
the lady and sent to tell her that she must that very night, without
more tarriance, do that which he had enjoined her; after which he
secretly betook himself, with a servant of his, to the house of one of
his friends who abode very near the tower, so he might give effect to
his design.

[Footnote 386: Lit. out of hand (_fuor di mano_).]

The lady, on her part, set out with her maid and repaired to her farm,
where, as soon as the night was come, she made a show of going to bed
and sent the maid away to sleep, but towards the hour of the first
sleep, she issued quietly forth of the house and betook herself to the
bank of the Arno hard by the tower, where, looking first well all
about and seeing nor hearing any, she put off her clothes and hiding
them under a bush, bathed seven times with the image; after which,
naked as she was, she made for the tower, image in hand. The scholar,
who had, at the coming on of the night, hidden himself with his
servant among the willows and other trees near the tower and had
witnessed all this, seeing her, as she passed thus naked close to
him, overcome the darkness of the night with the whiteness of her body
and after considering her breast and the other parts of her person and
seeing them fair, bethought himself what they should become in a
little while and felt some compassion of her; whilst, on the other
hand, the pricks of the flesh assailed him of a sudden and caused that
stand on end which erst lay prone, inciting him to issue forth of his
ambush and go take her and do his will of her. Between the one and the
other he was like to be overcome; but, calling to mind who he was and
what the injury he had suffered and wherefore and at whose hands and
he being thereby rekindled in despite and compassion and carnal
appetite banished, he abode firm in his purpose and let her go.

The lady, going up on to the tower and turning to the north, began to
repeat the words given her by the scholar, who, coming quietly into
the tower awhile after, little by little removed the ladder, which led
to the sollar where she was, and after awaited that which she should
do and say. Meanwhile, the lady, having seven times said her
conjuration, began to look for the two damsels and so long was her
waiting (more by token that she felt it cooler than she could have
wished) that she saw the dawn appear; whereupon, woeful that it had
not befallen as the scholar had told her, she said in herself, 'I fear
me yonder man hath had a mind to give me a night such as that which I
gave him; but, an that be his intent, he hath ill known to avenge
himself, for that this night hath not been as long by a third as was
his, forbye that the cold was of anothergates sort.' Then, so the day
might not surprise her there, she proceeded to seek to go down from
the tower, but found the ladder gone; whereupon her courage forsook
her, as it were the world had failed beneath her feet, and she fell
down aswoon upon the platform of the tower. As soon as her sense
returned to her, she fell to weeping piteously and bemoaning herself,
and perceiving but too well that this must have been the scholar's
doing, she went on to blame herself for having affronted others and
after for having overmuch trusted in him whom she had good reason to
believe her enemy; and on this wise she abode a great while. Then,
looking if there were no way of descending and seeing none, she fell
again to her lamentation and gave herself up to bitter thought, saying
in herself, 'Alas, unhappy woman! What will be said of thy brothers
and kinsfolk and neighbours and generally of all the people of
Florence, when it shall be known that thou has been found here naked?
Thy repute, that hath hitherto been so great, will be known to have
been false; and shouldst thou seek to frame lying excuses for thyself,
(if indeed there are any to be found) the accursed scholar, who
knoweth all thine affairs, will not suffer thee lie. Oh wretched
woman, that wilt at one stroke have lost the youth so ill-fatedly
beloved and thine own honour!'

Therewithal she fell into such a passion of woe that she was like to
cast herself down from the tower to the ground; but, the sun being now
risen and she drawing near to one side of the walls of the tower, to
look if any boy should pass with cattle, whom she might send for her
maid, it chanced that the scholar, who had slept awhile at the foot
of a bush, awaking, saw her and she him; whereupon quoth he to her,
'Good day, madam; are the damsels come yet?' The lady, seeing and
hearing him, began afresh to weep sore and besought him to come within
the tower, so she might speak with him. In this he was courteous
enough to comply with her and she laying herself prone on the platform
and showing only her head at the opening, said, weeping, 'Assuredly,
Rinieri, if I gave thee an ill night, thou hast well avenged thyself
of me, for that, albeit it is July, I have thought to freeze this
night, naked as I am, more by token that I have so sore bewept both
the trick I put upon thee and mine own folly in believing thee that it
is a wonder I have any eyes left in my head. Wherefore I entreat thee,
not for the love of me, whom thou hast no call to love, but for the
love of thyself, who are a gentleman, that thou be content, for
vengeance of the injury I did thee, with that which thou hast already
done and cause fetch me my clothes and suffer me come down hence, nor
seek to take from me that which thou couldst not after restore me, an
thou wouldst, to wit, my honour; for, if I took from thee the being
with me that night, I can render thee many nights for that one,
whenassoever it liketh thee. Let this, then, suffice and let it
content thee, as a man of honour, to have availed to avenge thyself
and to have caused me confess it. Seek not to use thy strength against
a woman; no glory is it for an eagle to have overcome a dove,
wherefore, for the love of God and thine own honour, have pity on me.'

The scholar, with stern mind revolving in himself the injury suffered
and seeing her weep and beseech, felt at once both pleasure and annoy;
pleasure in the revenge which he had desired more than aught else, and
annoy he felt, for that his humanity moved him to compassion of the
unhappy woman. However, humanity availing not to overcome the
fierceness of his appetite [for vengeance], 'Madam Elena,' answered
he, 'if my prayers (which, it is true, I knew not to bathe with tears
nor to make honeyed, as thou presently knowest to proffer thine,) had
availed, the night when I was dying of cold in thy snow-filled
courtyard, to procure me to be put of thee but a little under cover,
it were a light matter to me to hearken now unto thine; but, if thou
be presently so much more concerned for thine honour than in the past
and it be grievous to thee to abide up there naked, address these thy
prayers to him in whose arms thou didst not scruple, that night which
thou thyself recallest, to abide naked, hearing me the while go about
thy courtyard, chattering with my teeth and trampling the snow, and
get thee succour of him; cause him fetch thee thy clothes and set thee
the ladder, whereby thou mayest descend, and study to inform him with
tenderness for thine honour, the which thou hast not scrupled both now
and a thousand other times to imperil for him. Why dost thou not call
him to come help thee? To whom pertaineth it more than unto him? Thou
art his; and what should he regard or succour, an he regard not
neither succour thee? Call him, silly woman that thou art, and prove
if the love thou bearest him and thy wits and his together can avail
to deliver thee from my folly, whereof, dallying with him the while,
thou questionedst aforetime whether himseemed the greater, my folly or
the love thou borest him.[387] Thou canst not now be lavish to me of
that which I desire not, nor couldst thou deny it to me, an I desired
it; keep thy nights for thy lover, an it chance that thou come off
hence alive; be they thine and his. I had overmuch of one of them and
it sufficeth me to have been once befooled. Again, using thy craft and
wiliness in speech, thou studiest, by extolling me, to gain my
goodwill and callest me a gentleman and a man of honour, thinking thus
to cajole me into playing the magnanimous and forebearing to punish
thee for thy wickedness; but thy blandishments shall not now darken me
the eyes of the understanding, as did thy disloyal promises whilere. I
know myself, nor did I learn so much of myself what while I sojourned
at Paris as thou taughtest me in one single night of thine. But,
granted I were indeed magnanimous, thou art none of those towards whom
magnanimity should be shown; the issue of punishment, as likewise of
vengeance, in the case of wild beasts such as thou art, behoveth to be
death, whereas for human beings that should suffice whereof thou
speakest. Wherefore, albeit I am no eagle, knowing thee to be no dove,
but a venomous serpent, I mean to pursue thee, as an immemorial enemy,
with every hate and all my might, albeit this that I do to thee can
scarce properly be styled vengeance, but rather chastisement, inasmuch
as vengeance should overpass the offence and this will not attain
thereto; for that, an I sought to avenge myself, considering to what a
pass thou broughtest my soul, thy life, should I take it from thee,
would not suffice me, no, nor the lives of an hundred others such as
thou, since, slaying thee, I should but slay a vile, wicked and
worthless trull of a woman. And what a devil more account (setting
aside this thy scantling of fair favour,[388] which a few years will
mar, filling it with wrinkles,) art thou than whatsoever other sorry
serving-drab? Whereas it was no fault of thine that thou failedst of
causing the death of a man of honour, as thou styledst me but now,
whose life may yet in one day be of more service to the world than an
hundred thousand of thy like could be what while the world endureth. I
will teach thee, then, by means of this annoy that thou sufferest,
what it is to flout men of sense, and particularly scholars, and will
give thee cause never more, an thou comest off alive, to fall into
such a folly. But, an thou have so great a wish to descend, why dost
thou not cast thyself down? On this wise, with God's help, thou wilt,
by breaking thy neck, at once deliver thyself from the torment,
wherein it seemeth to thee thou art, and make me the joyfullest man in
the world. Now, I have no more to say to thee. I knew to contrive on
such wise that I caused thee go up thither; do thou now contrive to
come down thence, even as thou knewest to befool me.'

[Footnote 387: Boccaccio here misquotes himself. See p. 389, where the
lady says to her lover, "Whether seemeth to thee the greater, his wit
or the love I bear him?" This is only one of the numberless instances
of negligence and inconsistency which occur in the Decameron and which
make it evident to the student that it must have passed into the hands
of the public without the final revision and correction by the author,
that _limÃ¦ labor_ without which no book is complete and which is
especially necessary in the case of such a work as the present, where
Boccaccio figures as the virtual creator of Italian prose.]

[Footnote 388: Lit. face, aspect (_viso_).]

What while the scholar spoke thus, the wretched lady wept without
ceasing and the time lapsed by, the sun still rising high and higher;
but, when she saw that he was silent, she said, 'Alack, cruel man, if
the accursed night was so grievous to thee and if my default seem to
thee so heinous a thing that neither my young beauty nor my bitter
tears and humble prayers may avail to move thee to any pity, at least
let this act of mine alone some little move thee and abate the rigour
of thy rancour, to wit, that I but now trusted in thee and discovered
to thee mine every secret, opening withal to thy desire a way whereby
thou mightest avail to make me cognizant of my sin; more by token
that, except I had trusted in thee, thou hadst had no means of
availing to take of me that vengeance, which thou seemest to have so
ardently desired. For God's sake, leave thine anger and pardon me
henceforth; I am ready, so thou wilt but forgive me and bring me down
hence, altogether to renounce yonder faithless youth and to have thee
alone to lover and lord, albeit thou decriest my beauty, avouching it
short-lived and little worth; natheless, whatever it be, compared with
that of other women, yet this I know, that, if for nought else, it is
to be prized for that it is the desire and pastime and delight of
men's youth, and thou art not old. And albeit I am cruelly entreated
of thee, I cannot believe withal that thou wouldst fain see me die so
unseemly a death as were the casting myself down from this tower, as
in desperation, before thine eyes, wherein, an thou was not a liar as
thou are since become, I was erst so pleasing. Alack, have ruth on me
for God's sake and pity's! The sun beginneth to wax hot, and like as
the overmuch cold irked me this night, even so doth the heat begin to
do me sore annoy.'

The scholar, who held her in parley for his diversion, answered,
'Madam, thou hast not presently trusted thine honour in my hands for
any love that thou borest me, but to regain him whom thou hast lost,
wherefore it meriteth but greater severity, and if thou think that
this way alone was apt and opportune unto the vengeance desired of me,
thou thinkest foolishly; I had a thousand others; nay, whilst feigning
to love thee, I had spread a thousand snares about thy feet, and it
would not have been long, had this not chanced, ere thou must of
necessity have fallen into one of them, nor couldst thou have fallen
into any but it had caused thee greater torment and shame than this
present, the which I took, not to ease thee, but to be the quicklier
satisfied. And though all else should have failed me, the pen had
still been left me, wherewithal I would have written such and so many
things of thee and after such a fashion that, whenas thou camest (as
thou wouldst have come) to know of them, thou wouldst a thousand times
a day have wished thyself never born. The power of the pen is far
greater than they imagine who have not proved it with experience. I
swear to God (so may He gladden me to the end of this vengeance that I
take of thee, even as He hath made me glad thereof in the beginning!)
that I would have written such things of thee, that, being ashamed,
not to say before other folk, but before thine own self, thou shouldst
have put out thine own eyes, not to see thyself in the glass;
wherefore let not the little rivulet twit the sea with having caused
it wax. Of thy love or that thou be mine, I reck not, as I have
already said, a jot; be thou e'en his, an thou may, whose thou wast
erst and whom, as I once hated, so at this present I love, having
regard unto that which he hath wrought towards thee of late. You women
go falling enamoured of young springalds and covet their love, for
that you see them somewhat fresher of colour and blacker of beard and
they go erect and jaunty and dance and joust, all which things they
have had who are somewhat more in years, ay, and these know that which
those have yet to learn. Moreover, you hold them better cavaliers and
deem that they fare more miles in a day than men of riper age. Certes,
I confess that they jumble a wench's furbelows more briskly; but those
more in years, being men of experience, know better where the fleas
stick, and little meat and savoury is far and away rather to be chosen
than much and insipid, more by token that hard trotting undoth and
wearieth folk, how young soever they be, whereas easy going, though
belike it bring one somewhat later to the inn, at the least carrieth
him thither unfatigued. You women perceive not, animals without
understanding that you are, how much ill lieth hid under this
scantling of fair seeming. Young fellows are not content with one
woman; nay, as many as they see, so many do they covet and of so many
themseemeth they are worthy; wherefore their love cannot be stable,
and of this thou mayst presently of thine own experience bear very
true witness. Themseemeth they are worthy to be worshipped and
caressed of their mistresses and they have no greater glory than to
vaunt them of those whom they have had; the which default of theirs
hath aforetime cast many a woman into the arms of the monks, who tell
no tales. Albeit thou sayst that never did any know of thine amours,
save thy maid and myself, thou knowest it ill and believest awry, an
thou think thus. His[389] quarter talketh well nigh of nothing else,
and thine likewise; but most times the last to whose ears such things
come is he to whom they pertain. Young men, to boot, despoil you,
whereas it is given you[390] of men of riper years. Since, then, thou
hast ill chosen, be thou his to whom thou gavest thyself and leave me,
of whom thou madest mock, to others, for that I have found a mistress
of much more account than thou, who hath been wise enough to know me
better than thou didst. And that thou mayst carry into the other world
greater assurance of the desire of mine eyes than meseemeth thou
gatherest from my words, do but cast thyself down forthright and thy
soul, being, as I doubt not it will be, straightway received into the
arms of the devil, will be able to see if mine eyes be troubled or not
at seeing thee fall headlong. But, as medoubteth thou wilt not consent
to do me so much pleasure, I counsel thee, if the sun begin to scorch
thee, remember thee of the cold thou madest me suffer, which an thou
mingle with the heat aforesaid, thou wilt without fail feel the sun
attempered.'

[Footnote 389: _i.e._ thy lover's.]

[Footnote 390: _V'Ã¨ donato_, _i.e._ young lovers look to receive gifts
of their mistresses, whilst those of more mature age bestow them.]

The disconsolate lady, seeing that the scholar's words tended to a
cruel end, fell again to weeping and said, 'Harkye, since nothing I
can say availeth to move thee to pity of me, let the love move thee,
which thou bearest that lady whom thou hast found wiser than I and of
whom thou sayst thou art beloved, and for the love of her pardon me
and fetch me my clothes, so I may dress myself, and cause me descend
hence.' Therewith the scholar began to laugh and seeing that tierce
was now passed by a good hour, replied, 'Marry, I know not how to say
thee nay, since thou conjurest me by such a lady; tell me where thy
clothes are and I will go for them and help thee come down from up
yonder.' The lady, believing this, was somewhat comforted and showed
him where she had laid her clothes; whereupon he went forth of the
tower and bidding his servant not depart thence, but abide near at
hand and watch as most he might that none should enter there till such
time as he should return, went off to his friend's house, where he
dined at his ease and after, whenas himseemed time, betook himself to
sleep; whilst the lady, left upon the tower, albeit some little
heartened with fond hope, natheless beyond measure woebegone, sat up
and creeping close to that part of the wall where there was a little
shade, fell a-waiting, in company of very bitter thoughts. There she
abode, now hoping and now despairing of the scholar's return with her
clothes, and passing from one thought to another, she presently fell
asleep, as one who was overcome of dolour and who had slept no whit
the past night.

The sun, which was exceeding hot, being now risen to the meridian,
beat full and straight upon her tender and delicate body and upon her
head, which was all uncovered, with such force that not only did it
burn her flesh, wherever it touched it, but cracked and opened it all
over little by little, and such was the pain of the burning that it
constrained her to awake, albeit she slept fast. Feeling herself on
the roast and moving somewhat, it seemed as if all her scorched skin
cracked and clove asunder for the motion, as we see happen with a
scorched sheepskin, if any stretch it, and to boot her head irked her
so sore that it seemed it would burst, which was no wonder. And the
platform of the tower was so burning hot that she could find no
restingplace there either for her feet or for otherwhat; wherefore,
without standing fast, she still removed now hither and now thither,
weeping. Moreover, there being not a breath of wind, the flies and
gads flocked thither in swarms and settling upon her cracked flesh,
stung her so cruelly that each prick seemed to her a pike-stab;
wherefore she stinted not to fling her hands about, still cursing
herself, her life, her lover and the scholar.

Being thus by the inexpressible heat of the sun, by the flies and the
gads and likewise by hunger, but much more by thirst, and by a
thousand irksome thoughts, to boot, tortured and stung and pierced to
the quick, she started to her feet and addressed herself to look if
she might see or hear any one near at hand, resolved, whatever might
betide thereof, to call him and crave aid. But of this resource also
had her unfriendly fortune deprived her. The husbandmen were all
departed from the fields for the heat, more by token that none had
come that day to work therenigh, they being all engaged in threshing
out their sheaves beside their houses; wherefore she heard nought but
crickets and saw the Arno, which latter sight, provoking in her desire
of its waters, abated not her thirst, but rather increased it. In
several places also she saw thickets and shady places and houses here
and there, which were all alike to her an anguish for desire of them.
What more shall we say of the ill-starred lady? The sun overhead and
the heat of the platform underfoot and the stings of the flies and
gads on every side had so entreated her that, whereas with her
whiteness she had overcome the darkness of the foregoing night, she
was presently grown red as ruddle,[391] and all bescabbed as she was
with blood, had seemed to whoso saw her the foulest thing in the
world.

[Footnote 391: Lit. red as rabies (_rabbia_). Some commentators
suppose that Boccaccio meant to write _robbia_, madder.]

As she abode on this wise, without aught of hope or counsel,[392]
expecting death more than otherwhat, it being now past half none, the
scholar, arising from sleep and remembering him of his mistress,
returned to the tower, to see what was come of her, and sent his
servant, who was yet fasting, to eat. The lady, hearing him, came, all
weak and anguishful as she was for the grievous annoy she had
suffered, overagainst the trap-door and seating herself there, began,
weeping, to say, 'Indeed, Rinieri, thou hast beyond measure avenged
thyself, for, if I made thee freeze in my courtyard by night, thou
hast made me roast, nay burn, on this tower by day and die of hunger
and thirst to boot; wherefore I pray thee by the One only God that
thou come up hither and since my heart suffereth me not give myself
death with mine own hands, give it me thou, for that I desire it more
than aught else, such and so great are the torments I endure. Or, an
thou wilt not do me that favour, let bring me, at the least, a cup of
water, so I may wet my mouth, whereunto my tears suffice not; so sore
is the drouth and the burning that I have therein.'

[Footnote 392: _i.e._ resource (_consiglio_). See ante, passim.]

The scholar knew her weakness by her voice and eke saw, in part, her
body all burnt up of the sun; wherefore and for her humble prayers
there overcame him a little compassion of her; but none the less he
answered, 'Wicked woman, thou shalt not die by my hands; nay, by thine
own shalt thou die, an thou have a mind thereto; and thou shalt have
of me as much water for the allaying of thy heat as I had fire of thee
for the comforting of my cold. This much I sore regret that, whereas
it behoved me heal the infirmity of my cold with the heat of stinking
dung, that of thy heat will be healed with the coolth of odoriferous
rose-water; and whereas I was like to lose both limbs and life, thou,
flayed by this heat, wilt abide fair none otherwise than doth the
snake, casting its old skin.' 'Alack, wretch that I am,' cried the
lady, 'God give beauties on such wise acquired to those who wish me
ill! But thou, that are more cruel than any wild beast, how couldst
thou have the heart to torture me after this fashion? What more could
I expect from thee or any other, if I had done all thy kinsfolk to
death with the cruellest torments? Certes, meknoweth not what greater
cruelty could be wreaked upon a traitor who had brought a whole city
to slaughter than that whereto thou hast exposed me in causing me to
be roasted of the sun and devoured of the flies and withal denying me
a cup of water, whenas to murderers condemned of justice is
oftentimes, as they go to their death, given to drink of wine, so but
they ask it. Nay, since I see thee abide firm in thy savage cruelty
and that my sufferance availeth not anywise to move thee, I will
resign myself with patience to receive death, so God, whom I beseech
to look with equitable eyes upon this thy dealing, may have mercy upon
my soul.'

So saying, she dragged herself painfully to the midward of the
platform, despairing to escape alive from so fierce a heat; and not
once, but a thousand times, over and above her other torments, she
thought to swoon for thirst, still weeping and bemoaning her illhap.
However, it being now vespers and it seeming to the scholar he had
done enough, he caused his servant take up the unhappy lady's clothes
and wrap them in his cloak; then, betaking himself to her house, he
found her maid seated before the door, sad and disconsolate and
unknowing what to do, and said to her, 'Good woman, what is come of
thy mistress?' 'Sir,' replied she, 'I know not. I thought to find her
this morning in the bed whither meseemed I saw her betake herself
yesternight; but I can find her neither there nor otherwhere and know
not what is come of her; wherefore I suffer the utmost concern. But
you, sir, can you not tell me aught of her?' Quoth he, 'Would I had
had thee together with her whereas I have had her, so I might have
punished thee of thy default, like as I have punished her for hers!
But assuredly thou shalt not escape from my hands, ere I have so paid
thee for thy dealings that thou shalt never more make mock of any man,
without remembering thee of me.' Then to his servant, 'Give her the
clothes,' quoth he, 'and bid her go to her mistress, an she will.' The
man did his bidding and gave the clothes to the maid, who, knowing
them and hearing what Rinieri said, was sore afraid lest they should
have slain her mistress and scarce refrained from crying out; then,
the scholar being done, she set out with the clothes for the tower,
weeping the while.

Now it chanced that one of the lady's husbandmen had that day lost two
of his swine and going in search of them, came, a little after the
scholar's departure, to the tower. As he went spying about everywhere
if he should see his hogs, he heard the piteous lamentation made of
the miserable lady and climbing up as most he might, cried out, 'Who
maketh moan there aloft?' The lady knew her husbandman's voice and
calling him by name, said to him, 'For God's sake, fetch me my maid
and contrive so she may come up hither to me.' Whereupon quoth the
man, recognizing her, 'Alack, madam, who hath brought you up yonder?
Your maid hath gone seeking you all day; but who had ever thought you
could be here?' Then, taking the ladder-poles, he set them up in their
place and addressed himself to bind the cross-staves thereto with
withy bands.[393] Meanwhile, up came the maid, who no sooner entered
the tower than, unable any longer to hold her tongue, she fell to
crying out, buffeting herself the while with her hands, 'Alack, sweet
my lady, where are you?' The lady, hearing her, answered as loudliest
she might, 'O sister mine, I am here aloft. Weep not, but fetch me my
clothes quickly.' When the maid heard her speak, she was in a manner
all recomforted and with the husbandman's aid, mounting the ladder,
which was now well nigh repaired, reached the sollar, where, whenas
she saw her lady lying naked on the ground, all forspent and wan, more
as she were a half-burnt log than a human being, she thrust her nails
into her own face and fell a-weeping over her, no otherwise than as
she had been dead.

[Footnote 393: Boccaccio appears to have forgotten to mention that
Rinieri had broken the rounds of the ladder, when he withdrew it (as
stated, p. 394), apparently to place an additional obstacle in the way
of the lady's escape.]

The lady besought her for God's sake be silent and help her dress
herself, and learning from her that none knew where she had been save
those who had carried her the clothes and the husbandman there
present, was somewhat comforted and prayed them for God's sake never
to say aught of the matter to any one. Then, after much parley, the
husbandman, taking the lady in his arms, for that she could not walk,
brought her safely without the tower; but the unlucky maid, who had
remained behind, descending less circumspectly, made a slip of the
foot and falling from the ladder to the ground, broke her thigh,
whereupon she fell a-roaring for the pain, that it seemed a lion. The
husbandman, setting the lady down on a plot of grass, went to see what
ailed the maid and finding her with her thigh broken, carried her also
to the grass-plat and laid her beside her mistress, who, seeing this
befallen in addition to her other troubles and that she had broken her
thigh by whom she looked to have been succoured more than by any else,
was beyond measure woebegone and fell a-weeping afresh and so
piteously that not only could the husbandman not avail to comfort her,
but himself fell a-weeping like wise. But presently, the sun being now
low, he repaired, at the instance of the disconsolate lady, lest the
night should overtake them there, to his own house, and there called
his wife and two brothers of his, who returned to the tower with a
plank and setting the maid thereon, carried her home, whilst he
himself, having comforted the lady with a little cold water and kind
words, took her up in his arms and brought her to her own chamber.

His wife gave her a wine-sop to eat and after, undressing her, put her
to bed; and they contrived that night to have her and her maid carried
to Florence. There, the lady, who had shifts and devices great plenty,
framed a story of her fashion, altogether out of conformity with that
which had passed, and gave her brothers and sisters and every one else
to believe that this had befallen herself and her maid by dint of
diabolical bewitchments. Physicians were quickly at hand, who, not
without putting her to very great anguish and vexation, recovered the
lady of a sore fever, after she had once and again left her skin
sticking to the sheets, and on like wise healed the maid of her broken
thigh. Wherefore, forgetting her lover, from that time forth she
discreetly forbore both from making mock of others and from loving,
whilst the scholar, hearing that the maid had broken her thigh, held
himself fully avenged and passed on, content, without saying otherwhat
thereof. Thus, then, did it befall the foolish young lady of her
pranks, for that she thought to fool it with a scholar as she would
have done with another, unknowing that scholars,--I will not say all,
but the most part of them,--know where the devil keepeth his tail.
Wherefore, ladies, beware of making mock of folk, and especially of
scholars."




THE EIGHTH STORY

[Day the Eighth]

     TWO MEN CONSORTING TOGETHER, ONE LIETH WITH THE WIFE OF HIS
     COMRADE, WHO, BECOMING AWARE THEREOF, DOTH WITH HER ON SUCH
     WISE THAT THE OTHER IS SHUT UP IN A CHEST, UPON WHICH HE
     LIETH WITH HIS WIFE, HE BEING INSIDE THE WHILE


Elena's troubles had been irksome and grievous to the ladies to hear;
natheless, for that they deemed them in part justly befallen her, they
passed them over with more moderate compassion, albeit they held the
scholar to have been terribly stern and obdurate, nay, cruel. But,
Pampinea being now come to the end of her story, the queen charged
Fiammetta follow on, who, nothing loath to obey, said, "Charming
ladies, for that meseemeth the severity of the offended scholar hath
somedele distressed you, I deem it well to solace your ruffled spirits
with somewhat more diverting; wherefore I purpose to tell you a little
story of a young man who received an injury in a milder spirit and
avenged it after a more moderate fashion, by which you may understand
that, whenas a man goeth about to avenge an injury suffered, it should
suffice him to give as good as he hath gotten, without seeking to do
hurt overpassing the behoof of the feud.

You must know, then, that there were once in Siena, as I have
understood aforetime, two young men in easy enough case and of good
city families, whereof one was named Spinelloccio Tanena and the other
Zeppa di Mino, and they were next-door neighbours in Camollia.[394]
These two young men still companied together and loved each other, to
all appearance, as they had been brothers, or better; and each of them
had a very fair wife. It chanced that Spinelloccio, by dint of much
frequenting Zeppa's house, both when the latter was at home and when
he was abroad, grew so private with his wife that he ended by lying
with her, and on this wise they abode a pretty while, before any
became aware thereof. However, at last, one day, Zeppa being at home,
unknown to his wife, Spinelloccio came to call him and the lady said
that he was abroad; whereupon the other came straightway up into the
house and finding her in the saloon and seeing none else there, he
took her in his arms and fell to kissing her and she him. Zeppa, who
saw this, made no sign, but abode hidden to see in what the game
should result and presently saw his wife and Spinelloccio betake
themselves, thus embraced, to a chamber and there lock themselves in;
whereat he was sore angered. But, knowing that his injury would not
become less for making an outcry nor for otherwhat, nay, that shame
would but wax therefor, he set himself to think what revenge he should
take thereof, so his soul might abide content, without the thing being
known all about, and himseeming, after long consideration, he had
found the means, he abode hidden so long as Spinelloccio remained with
his wife.

[Footnote 394: _QuÃ¦re_, the street of that name?]

As soon as the other was gone away, he entered the chamber and there
finding the lady, who had not yet made an end of adjusting her
head-veils, which Spinelloccio had plucked down in dallying with her,
said to her, 'Wife, what dost thou?' Quoth she, 'Seest thou not?' And
Zeppa answered, 'Ay, indeed, I have seen more than I could wish.' So
saying, he taxed her with that which had passed and she, in sore
affright, confessed to him, after much parley, that which she could
not aptly deny of her familiarity with Spinelloccio. Then she began to
crave him pardon, weeping, and Zeppa said to her, 'Harkye, wife, thou
hast done ill, and if thou wilt have me pardon it to thee, bethink
thee punctually to do that which I shall enjoin thee, which is this; I
will have thee bid Spinelloccio find an occasion to part company with
me to-morrow morning, towards tierce, and come hither to thee. When he
is here I will come back and so soon as thou hearest me, do thou make
him enter this chest here and lock him therein. Then, when thou shalt
have done this, I will tell thee what else thou shalt do; and have
thou no fear of doing this, for that I promise thee I will do him no
manner of hurt.' The lady, to satisfy him, promised to do his bidding,
and so she did.

The morrow come and Zeppa and Spinelloccio being together towards
tierce, the latter, who had promised the lady to be with her at that
hour, said to the former, 'I am to dine this morning with a friend,
whom I would not keep waiting for me; wherefore God be with thee.'
Quoth Zeppa, 'It is not dinner-time yet awhile'; but Spinelloccio
answered, 'No matter; I am to speak with him also of an affair of
mine, so that needs must I be there betimes.' Accordingly, taking
leave of him, he fetched a compass and making for Zeppa's house,
entered a chamber with the latter's wife. He had not been there long
ere Zeppa returned, whom when the lady heard, feigning to be mightily
affrighted, she made him take refuge in the chest, as her husband had
bidden her, and locking him therein, went forth of the chamber. Zeppa,
coming up, said, 'Wife, is it dinner-time?' 'Ay,' answered she,
'forthright.' Quoth he, 'Spinelloccio is gone to dine this morning
with a friend of his and hath left his wife alone; get thee to the
window and call her and bid her come dine with us.' The lady, fearing
for herself and grown therefor mighty obedient, did as he bade her and
Spinelloccio's wife, being much pressed by her and hearing that her
own husband was to dine abroad, came hither.

Zeppa made much of her and whispering his wife begone into the
kitchen, took her familiarly by the hand and carried her into the
chamber, wherein no sooner were they come than, turning back, he
locked the door within. When the lady saw him do this, she said,
'Alack, Zeppa, what meaneth this? Have you then brought me hither for
this? Is this the love you bear Spinelloccio and the loyal
companionship you practise towards him?' Whereupon quoth Zeppa,
drawing near to the chest wherein was her husband locked up and
holding her fast, 'Madam, ere thou complainest, hearken to that which
I have to say to thee. I have loved and love Spinelloccio as a
brother, and yesterday, albeit he knoweth it not, I found that the
trust I had in him was come to this, that he lieth with my wife even
as with thee. Now, for that I love him, I purpose not to take
vengeance of him, save on such wise as the offence hath been; he hath
had my wife and I mean to have thee. An thou wilt not, needs must I
take him here and for that I mean not to let this affront go
unpunished, I will play him such a turn that neither thou nor he shall
ever again be glad.' The lady, hearing this and believing what Zeppa
said, after many affirmations made her of him, replied, 'Zeppa mine,
since this vengeance is to fall on me, I am content, so but thou wilt
contrive, notwithstanding what we are to do, that I may abide at peace
with thy wife, even as I intend to abide with her, notwithstanding
this that she hath done to me.' 'Assuredly,' rejoined Zeppa, 'I will
do it; and to boot, I will give thee a precious and fine jewel as none
other thou hast.' So saying, he embraced her; then, laying her flat on
the chest, there to his heart's content, he solaced himself with her,
and she with him.

Spinelloccio, hearing from within the chest all that Zeppa said his
wife's answer and feeling the morrisdance[395] that was toward over
his head, was at first so sore despited that himseemed he should die;
and but that he stood in fear of Zeppa, he had rated his wife finely,
shut up as he was. However, bethinking himself that the offence had
begun with him and that Zeppa was in his right to do as he did and had
indeed borne himself towards him humanely and like a comrade, he
presently resolved in himself to be, an he would, more than ever his
friend. Zeppa, having been with the lady so long as it pleased him,
dismounted from the chest, and she asking for the promised jewel, he
opened the chamber-door and called his wife, who said nought else than
'Madam, you have given me a loaf for my bannock'; and this she said
laughing. To her quoth Zeppa, 'Open this chest.' Accordingly she
opened it and therein Zeppa showed the lady her husband, saying, 'Here
is the jewel I promised thee.' It were hard to say which was the more
abashed of the twain, Spinelloccio, seeing Zeppa and knowing that he
knew what he had done, or his wife, seeing her husband and knowing
that he had both heard and felt that which she had done over his head.
But Spinelloccio, coming forth of the chest, said, without more
parley, 'Zeppa, we are quits; wherefore it is well, as thou saidst but
now to my wife, that we be still friends as we were, and that, since
there is nothing unshared between us two but our wives, we have these
also in common.' Zeppa was content and they all four dined together in
the utmost possible harmony; and thenceforward each of the two ladies
had two husbands and each of the latter two wives, without ever having
any strife or grudge anent the matter."

[Footnote 395: _Danza trivigiana_, lit. Trevisan dance, O.E. the
shaking of the sheets.]




THE NINTH STORY

[Day the Eighth]

     MASTER SIMONE THE PHYSICIAN, HAVING BEEN INDUCED BY BRUNO
     AND BUFFALMACCO TO REPAIR TO A CERTAIN PLACE BY NIGHT, THERE
     TO BE MADE A MEMBER OF A COMPANY THAT GOETH A-ROVING, IS
     CAST BY BUFFALMACCO INTO A TRENCH FULL OF ORDURE AND THERE
     LEFT


After the ladies had chatted awhile over the community of wives
practised by the two Siennese, the queen, with whom alone it rested to
tell, so she would not do Dioneo an unright, began on this wise:
"Right well, lovesome ladies, did Spinelloccio deserve the cheat put
upon him by Zeppa; wherefore meseemeth he is not severely to be blamed
(as Pampinea sought awhile ago to show), who putteth a cheat on those
who go seeking it or deserve it. Now Spinelloccio deserved it, and I
mean to tell you of one who went seeking it for himself. Those who
tricked him, I hold not to be blameworthy, but rather commendable, and
he to whom it was done was a physician, who, having set out for
Bologna a sheepshead, returned to Florence all covered with
miniver.[396]

[Footnote 396: _i.e._ with the doctor's hood of miniver.]

As we see daily, our townsmen return hither from Bologna, this a
judge, that a physician and a third a notary, tricked out with robes
long and large and scarlets and minivers and store of other fine
paraphernalia, and make a mighty brave show, to which how far the
effects conform we may still see all day long. Among the rest a
certain Master Simone da Villa, richer in inherited goods than in
learning, returned hither, no great while since, a doctor of medicine,
according to his own account, clad all in scarlet[397] and with a
great miniver hood, and took a house in the street which we call
nowadays the Via del Cocomero. This said Master Simone, being thus
newly returned, as hath been said, had, amongst other his notable
customs, a trick of asking whosoever was with him who was no matter
what man he saw pass in the street, and as if of the doings and
fashions of men he should compound the medicines he gave his
patients, he took note of all and laid them all up in his memory.
Amongst others on whom it occurred to him more particularly to cast
his eyes were two painters of whom it hath already twice to-day been
discoursed, namely, Bruno and Buffalmacco, who were neighbours of his
and still went in company. Himseeming they recked less of the world
and lived more merrily than other folk, as was indeed the case, he
questioned divers persons of their condition and hearing from all that
they were poor men and painters, he took it into his head that it
might not be they lived so blithely of their poverty, but concluded,
for that he had heard they were shrewd fellows, that they must needs
derive very great profits from some source unknown to the general;
wherefore he was taken with a desire to clap up an acquaintance, an he
might, with them both, or at least with one of them, and succeeded in
making friends with Bruno. The latter, perceiving, after he had been
with him a few times, that the physician was a very jackass, began to
give himself the finest time in the world with him and to be hugely
diverted with his extraordinary humours, whilst Master Simone in like
manner took a marvellous delight in his company.

[Footnote 397: The colour of the doctors' robes of that time.]

After a while, having sundry times bidden him to dinner and thinking
himself entitled in consequence to discourse familiarly with him, he
discovered to him the wonderment that he felt at him and Buffalmacco,
how, being poor men, they lived so merrily, and besought him to
apprise him how they did. Bruno, hearing this talk from the physician
and himseeing the question was one of his wonted witless
impertinences, fell a-laughing in his sleeve, and bethinking himself
to answer him according as his folly deserved, said, 'Doctor, there
are not many whom I would tell how we do; but you I shall not scruple
to tell, for that you are a friend and I know you will not repeat it
to any. It is true we live, my friend and I, as merrily and as well as
it appeareth to you, nay, more so, albeit neither of our craft nor of
revenues we derive from any possessions might we have enough to pay
for the very water we consume. Yet I would not, for all that, have you
think that we go steal; nay, we go a-roving, and thence, without hurt
unto any, we get us all to which we have a mind or for which we have
occasion; hence the merry life you see us lead.'

The physician, hearing this and believing it, without knowing what it
was, marvelled exceedingly and forthright conceiving an ardent desire
to know what manner of thing this going a-roving might be, besought
him very urgently to tell him, affirming that he would assuredly never
discover it to any. 'Alack, doctor,' cried Bruno, 'what is this you
ask me? This you would know is too great a secret and a thing to undo
me and drive me from the world, nay, to bring me into the mouth of the
Lucifer of San Gallo,[398] should any come to know it. But so great is
the love I bear your right worshipful pumpkinheadship of Legnaja[399]
and the confidence I have in you that I can deny you nothing you
would have; wherefore I will tell it you, on condition that you swear
to me by the cross at Montesone, never, as you have promised, to tell
it to any one.

[Footnote 398: The commentators note here that on the church door of
San Gallo was depicted an especially frightful Lucifer, with many
mouths.]

[Footnote 399: Legnaja is said to be famous for big pumpkins.]

The physician declared that he would never repeat what he should tell
him, and Bruno said, 'You must know, then, honey doctor mine, that not
long since there was in this city a great master in necromancy, who
was called Michael Scott, for that he was of Scotland, and who
received the greatest hospitality from many gentlemen, of whom few are
nowadays alive; wherefore, being minded to depart hence, he left them,
at their instant prayers, two of his ablest disciples, whom he
enjoined still to hold themselves in readiness to satisfy every wish
of the gentlemen who had so worshipfully entertained him. These two,
then, freely served the aforesaid gentlemen in certain amours of
theirs and other small matters, and afterward, the city and the usages
of the folk pleasing them, they determined to abide there always.
Accordingly, they contracted great and strait friendship with certain
of the townfolk, regarding not who they were, whether gentle or
simple, rich or poor, but solely if they were men comfortable to their
own usances; and to pleasure these who were thus become their friends,
they founded a company of maybe five-and-twenty men, who should
foregather twice at the least in the month in some place appointed of
them, where being assembled, each should tell them his desire, which
they would forthright accomplish unto him for that night. Buffalmacco
and I, having an especial friendship and intimacy with these two, were
put of them on the roll of the aforesaid company and are still
thereof. And I may tell you that, what time it chanceth that we
assemble together, it is a marvellous thing to see the hangings about
the saloon where we eat and the tables spread on royal wise and the
multitude of noble and goodly servants, as well female as male, at the
pleasure of each one who is of the company, and the basons and ewers
and flagons and goblets and the vessels of gold and silver, wherein we
eat and drink, more by token of the many and various viands that are
set before us, each in its season, according to that which each one
desireth. I could never avail to set out to you what and how many are
the sweet sounds of innumerable instruments and the songs full of
melody that are heard there; nor might I tell you how much wax is
burned at these suppers nor what and how many are the confections that
are consumed there nor how costly are the wines that are drunken. But
I would not have you believe, good saltless pumpkinhead mine, that we
abide there in this habit and with these clothes that you see us wear
every day; nay, there is none of us of so little account but would
seem to you an emperor, so richly are we adorned with vestments of
price and fine things. But, over all the other pleasures that be there
is that of fair ladies, who, so one but will it, are incontinent
brought thither from the four quarters of the world. There might you
see the Sovereign Lady of the Rascal-Roughs, the Queen of the Basques,
the wife of the Soldan, the Empress of the Usbeg Tartars, the
Driggledraggletail of Norroway, the Moll-a-green of Flapdoodleland and
the Madkate of Woolgathergreen. But why need I enumerate them to you?
There be all the queens in the world, even, I may say, to the
Sirreverence of Prester John, who hath his horns amiddleward his arse;
see you now? There, after we have drunken and eaten confections and
walked a dance or two, each lady betaketh herself to her bedchamber
with him at whose instance she hath been brought thither. And you must
know that these bedchambers are a very paradise to behold, so goodly
they are; ay, and they are no less odoriferous than are the
spice-boxes of your shop, whenas you let bray cummin-seed, and therein
are beds that would seem to you goodlier than that of the Doge of
Venice, and in these they betake themselves to rest. Marry, what a
working of the treadles, what a hauling-to of the battens to make the
cloth close, these weaveresses keep up, I will e'en leave you to
imagine; but of those who fare best, to my seeming, are Buffalmacco
and myself, for that he most times letteth come thither the Queen of
France for himself, whilst I send for her of England, the which are
two of the fairest ladies in the world, and we have known so to do
that they have none other eye in their head than us.[400] Wherefore
you may judge for yourself if we can and should live and go more
merrily than other men, seeing we have the love of two such queens,
more by token that, whenas we would have a thousand or two thousand
florins of them, we get them not. This, then, we commonly style going
a-roving, for that, like as the rovers take every man's good, even so
do we, save that we are in this much different from them that they
never restore that which they take, whereas we return it again, whenas
we have used it. Now, worthy doctor mine, you have heard what it is we
call going a-roving; but how strictly this requireth to be kept secret
you can see for yourself, and therefore I say no more to you nor pray
you thereof.'

[Footnote 400: _i.e._ they think of and cherish us alone, holding us
as dear as their very eyes.]

The physician, whose science reached no farther belike than the curing
children of the scald-head, gave as much credit to Bruno's story as
had been due to the most manifest truth and was inflamed with as great
desire to be received into that company as might be kindled in any for
the most desirable thing in the world; wherefore he made answer to him
that assuredly it was no marvel if they went merry and hardly
constrained himself to defer requesting him to bring him to be there
until such time as, having done him further hospitality, he might with
more confidence proffer his request to him. Accordingly, reserving
this unto a more favourable season, he proceeded to keep straiter
usance with Bruno, having him morning and evening to eat with him and
showing him an inordinate affection; and indeed so great and so
constant was this their commerce that it seemed as if the physician
could not nor knew how to live without the painter. The latter,
finding himself in good case, so he might not appear ungrateful for
the hospitality shown him, had painted Master Simone a picture of Lent
in his saloon, besides an Agnus Dei at the entering in of his chamber
and a chamber-pot over the street-door, so those who had occasion for
his advice might know how to distinguish him from the others; and in
a little gallery he had, he had depictured him the battle of the rats
and the cats, which appeared to the physician a very fine thing.
Moreover, he said whiles to him, whenas he had not supper with him
overnight, 'I was at the society yesternight and being a trifle tired
of the Queen of England, I caused fetch me the Dolladoxy of the Grand
Cham of Tartary.' 'What meaneth Dolladoxy?' asked Master Simone. 'I do
not understand these names.' 'Marry, doctor mine,' replied Bruno, 'I
marvel not thereat, for I have right well heard that Porcograsso and
Vannacena[401] say nought thereof.' Quoth the physician. 'Thou meanest
Ipocrasso and Avicenna.' 'I' faith,' answered Bruno, 'I know not; I
understand your names as ill as you do mine; but Dolladoxy in the
Grand Cham's lingo meaneth as much as to say Empress in our tongue.
Egad, you would think her a plaguy fine woman! I dare well say she
would make you forget your drugs and your clysters and all your
plasters.'

[Footnote 401: _i.e._ Fat-hog and Get-thee-to-supper, burlesque
perversions of the names Ipocrasso (Hippocrates) and Avicenna.]

On this wise he bespoke him at one time and another, to enkindle him
the more, till one night, what while it chanced my lord doctor held
the light to Bruno, who was in act to paint the battle of the rats and
the cats, the former, himseeming he had now well taken him with his
hospitalities, determined to open his mind to him, and accordingly,
they being alone together, he said to him, 'God knoweth, Bruno, there
is no one alive for whom I would do everything as I would for thee;
indeed, shouldst thou bid me go hence to Peretola, methinketh it would
take little to make me go thither; wherefore I would not have thee
marvel if I require thee of somewhat familiarly and with confidence.
As thou knowest, it is no great while since thou bespokest me of the
fashions of your merry company, wherefore so great a longing hath
taken me to be one of you that never did I desire aught so much. Nor
is this my desire without cause, as thou shalt see, if ever it chance
that I be of your company; for I give thee leave to make mock of me an
I cause not come thither the finest serving-wench thou ever setst eyes
on. I saw her but last year at Cacavincigli and wish her all my
weal;[402] and by the body of Christ, I had e'en given her half a
score Bolognese groats, so she would but have consented to me; but she
would not. Wherefore, as most I may, I prithee teach me what I must do
to avail to be of your company and do thou also do and contrive so I
may be thereof. Indeed, you will have in me a good and loyal comrade,
ay, and a worshipful. Thou seest, to begin with, what a fine man I am
and how well I am set up on my legs. Ay, and I have a face as it were
a rose, more by token that I am a doctor of medicine, such as I
believe you have none among you. Moreover, I know many fine things and
goodly canzonets; marry, I will sing you one.' And incontinent he fell
a-singing.

[Footnote 402: _i.e._ love her beyond anything in the world. For
former instances of this idiomatic expression, see ante, passim.]

Bruno had so great a mind to laugh that he was like to burst; however
he contained himself and the physician, having made an end of his
song, said, 'How deemedst thou thereof?' 'Certes,' answered Bruno,
'there's no Jew's harp but would lose with you, so archigothically do
you caterwarble it.' Quoth Master Simone, 'I tell thee thou wouldst
never have believed it, hadst thou not heard me.' 'Certes,' replied
Bruno, 'you say sooth!' and the physician went on, 'I know store of
others; but let that be for the present. Such as thou seest me, my
father was a gentleman, albeit he abode in the country, and I myself
come by my mother of the Vallecchio family. Moreover, as thou mayst
have seen, I have the finest books and gowns of any physician in
Florence. Cock's faith, I have a gown that stood me, all reckoned, in
nigh upon an hundred pounds of doits, more than half a score years
ago; wherefore I pray thee as most I may, to bring me to be of your
company, and by Cock's faith, an thou do it, thou mayst be as ill as
thou wilt, for I will never take a farthing of thee for my services.'

Bruno, hearing this and the physician seeming to him a greater
numskull than ever, said, 'Doctor, hold the light a thought more this
way and take patience till I have made these rats their tails, and
after I will answer you.' The tails being finished, Bruno made believe
that the physician's request was exceeding irksome to him and said,
'Doctor mine, these be great things you would do for me and I
acknowledge it; nevertheless, that which you ask of me, little as it
may be for the greatness of your brain, is yet to me a very grave
matter, nor know I any one in the world for whom, it being in my
power, I would do it, an I did it not for you, both because I love you
as it behoveth and on account of your words, which are seasoned with
so much wit that they would draw the straps out of a pair of boots,
much more me from my purpose; for the more I consort with you, the
wiser you appear to me. And I may tell you this, to boot, that, though
I had none other reason, yet do I wish you well, for that I see you
enamoured of so fair a creature as is she of whom you speak. But this
much I will say to you; I have no such power in this matter as you
suppose and cannot therefore do for you that which were behoving;
however, an you will promise me, upon your solemn and surbated[403]
faith, to keep it me secret, I will tell you the means you must use
and meseemeth certain that, with such fine books and other gear as you
tell me you have, you will gain your end.'

[Footnote 403: Syn. cauterized (_calterita_), a nonsensical word
employed by Bruno for the purpose of mystifying the credulous
physician.]

Quoth the doctor, 'Say on in all assurance; I see thou art not yet
well acquainted with me and knowest not how I can keep a secret. There
be few things indeed that Messer Guasparruolo da Saliceto did, whenas
he was judge of the Provostry at Forlimpopoli, but he sent to tell me,
for that he found me so good a secret-keeper.[404] And wilt thou judge
an I say sooth? I was the first man whom he told that he was to marry
Bergamina: seest thou now?' 'Marry, then,' rejoined Bruno, 'all is
well; if such a man trusted in you, I may well do so. The course you
must take is on this wise. You must know that we still have to this
our company a captain and two counsellors, who are changed from six
months to six months, and without fail, at the first of the month,
Buffalmacco will be captain and I shall be counsellor; for so it is
settled. Now whoso is captain can do much by way of procuring
whomsoever he will to be admitted into the company; wherefore
meseemeth you should seek, inasmuch as you may, to gain Buffalmacco's
friendship and do him honour. He is a man, seeing you so wise, to fall
in love with you incontinent, and whenas with your wit and with these
fine things you have you shall have somedele ingratiated yourself with
him, you can make your request to him; he will not know how to say you
nay. I have already bespoken him of you and he wisheth you all the
weal in the world; and whenas you shall have done this, leave me do
with him.' Quoth the physician, 'That which thou counsellest liketh me
well. Indeed, an he be a man who delighteth in men of learning and
talketh but with me a little, I will engage to make him go still
seeking my company, for that, as for wit, I have so much thereof that
I could stock a city withal and yet abide exceeding wise.'

[Footnote 404: Syn. secretary, confidant (_segretaro_).]

This being settled, Bruno imparted the whole matter to Buffalmacco,
wherefore it seemed to the latter a thousand years till they should
come to do that which this arch-zany went seeking. The physician, who
longed beyond measure to go a-roving, rested not till he made friends
with Buffalmacco, which he easily succeeded in doing, and therewithal
he fell to giving him, and Bruno with him, the finest suppers and
dinners in the world. The two painters, like the accommodating
gentlemen they were, were nothing loath to engage with him and having
once tasted the excellent wines and fat capons and other good things
galore, with which he plied them, stuck very close to him and ended by
quartering themselves upon him, without awaiting overmuch invitation,
still declaring that they would not do this for another. Presently,
whenas it seemed to him time, the physician made the same request to
Buffalmacco as he had made Bruno aforetime; whereupon Buffalmacco
feigned himself sore chagrined and made a great outcry against Bruno,
saying, 'I vow to the High God of Pasignano that I can scarce withhold
myself from giving thee such a clout over the head as should cause thy
nose drop to thy heels, traitor that thou art; for none other than
thou hath discovered these matters to the doctor.'

Master Simone did his utmost to excuse Bruno, saying and swearing that
he had learned the thing from another quarter, and after many of his
wise words, he succeeded in pacifying Buffalmacco; whereupon the
latter turned to him and said, 'Doctor mine, it is very evident that
you have been at Bologna and have brought back a close mouth to these
parts; and I tell you moreover that you have not learnt your A B C on
the apple as many blockheads are fain to do; nay, you have learned it
aright on the pumpkin, that is so long;[405] and if I mistake not,
you were baptized on a Sunday.[406] And albeit Bruno hath told me
that you told me that you studied medicine there, meseemeth you
studied rather to learn to catch men, the which you, with your wit and
your fine talk, know better to do than any man I ever set eyes on.'
Here the physician took the words out of his mouth and breaking in,
said to Bruno, 'What a thing it is to talk and consort with learned
men! Who would so have quickly apprehended every particular of my
intelligence as hath this worthy man? Thou didst not half so speedily
become aware of my value as he; but, at the least, that which I told
thee, whenas thou saidst to me that Buffalmacco delighted in learned
men, seemeth it to thee I have done it?' 'Ay hast thou,' replied
Bruno, 'and better.'

[Footnote 405: A play of words upon _mela_ (apple) and _mellone_
(pumpkin). _Mellone_ is strictly a water-melon; but I have rendered it
"pumpkin," to preserve the English idiom, "pumpkinhead" being our
equivalent for the Italian "melon," used in the sense of dullard,
noodle.]

[Footnote 406: According to the commentators, "baptized on a Sunday"
anciently signified a simpleton, because salt (which is constantly
used by the Italian classical writers as a synonym for wit or sense)
was not sold on Sundays.]

Then said the doctor to Buffalmacco, 'Thou wouldst have told another
tale, hadst thou seen me at Bologna, where there was none, great or
small, doctor or scholar, but wished me all the weal in the world, so
well did I know to content them all with my discourse and my wit. And
what is more, I never said a word there, but I made every one laugh,
so hugely did I please them; and whenas I departed thence, they all
set up the greatest lament in the world and would all have had me
remain there; nay, to such a pass came it for that I should abide
there, that they would have left it to me alone to lecture on medicine
to as many students as were there; but I would not, for that I was
e'en minded to come hither to certain very great heritages which I
have here and which have still been in my family; and so I did.' Quoth
Bruno to Buffalmacco, 'How deemest thou? Thou believedst me not,
whenas I told it thee. By the Evangels, there is not a leach in these
parts who is versed in asses' water to compare with this one, and
assuredly thou wouldst not find another of him from here to Paris
gates. Marry, hold yourself henceforth [if you can,] from doing that
which he will.' Quoth Master Simone, 'Bruno saith sooth; but I am not
understood here. You Florentines are somewhat dull of wit; but I would
have you see me among the doctors, as I am used to be.' 'Verily,
doctor,' said Buffalmacco, 'you are far wiser than I could ever have
believed; wherefore to speak to you as it should be spoken to scholars
such as you are, I tell you, cut-and-slash fashion,[407] I will
without fail procure you to be of our company.'

[Footnote 407: Syn. confusedly (_frastagliatamente_).]

After this promise the physician redoubled in his hospitalities to the
two rogues, who enjoyed themselves [at his expense,] what while they
crammed him with the greatest extravagances in the world and fooled
him to the top of his bent, promising him to give him to mistress the
Countess of Jakes,[408]who was the fairest creature to be found in
all the back-settlements of the human generation. The physician
enquired who this countess was, whereto quoth Buffalmacco, 'Good my
seed-pumpkin, she is a very great lady and there be few houses in the
world wherein she hath not some jurisdiction. To say nothing of
others, the Minor Friars themselves render her tribute, to the sound
of kettle-drums.[409] And I can assure you that, whenas she goeth
abroad, she maketh herself well felt,[410] albeit she abideth for the
most part shut up. Natheless, it is no great while since she passed by
your door, one night that she repaired to the Arno, to wash her feet
and take the air a little; but her most continual abiding-place is in
Draughthouseland.[411] There go ofttimes about store of her serjeants,
who all in token of her supremacy, bear the staff and the plummet, and
of her barons many are everywhere to be seen, such as Sirreverence of
the Gate, Goodman Turd, Hardcake,[412] Squitterbreech and others, who
methinketh are your familiars, albeit you call them not presently to
mind. In the soft arms, then, of this great lady, leaving be her of
Cacavincigli, we will, an expectation cheat us not, bestow you.'

[Footnote 408: _La Contessa di Civillari_, _i.e._ the public sewers.
Civillari, according to the commentators, was the name of an alley in
Florence, where all the ordure and filth of the neighbourhood was
deposited and stored in trenches for manure.]

[Footnote 409: _Nacchere_, syn. a loud crack of wind.]

[Footnote 410: Syn. smelt (_sentito_).]

[Footnote 411: _Laterina_, _i.e._ Latrina.]

[Footnote 412: Lit. Broom-handle (_Manico della Scopa_).]

The physician, who had been born and bred at Bologna, understood not
their canting terms and accordingly avouched himself well pleased with
the lady in question. Not long after this talk, the painters brought
him news that he was accepted to member of the company and the day
being come before the night appointed for their assembly, he had them
both to dinner. When they had dined, he asked them what means it
behoved him take to come thither; whereupon quoth Buffalmacco, 'Look
you, doctor, it behoveth you have plenty of assurance; for that, an
you be not mighty resolute, you may chance to suffer hindrance and do
us very great hurt; and in what it behoveth you to approve yourself
very stout-hearted you shall hear. You must find means to be this
evening, at the season of the first sleep, on one of the raised tombs
which have been lately made without Santa Maria Novella, with one of
your finest gowns on your back, so you may make an honourable figure
for your first appearance before the company and also because,
according to what was told us (we were not there after) the Countess
is minded, for that you are a man of gentle birth, to make you a
Knight of the Bath at her own proper costs and charges; and there you
must wait till there cometh for you he whom we shall send. And so you
may be apprised of everything, there will come for you a black horned
beast, not overbig, which will go capering about the piazza before you
and making a great whistling and bounding, to terrify you; but, when
he seeth that you are not to be daunted, he will come up to you
quietly. Then do you, without any fear, come down from the tomb and
mount the beast, naming neither God nor the Saints; and as soon as you
are settled on his back, you must cross your hands upon your breast,
in the attitude of obeisance, and touch him no more. He will then set
off softly and bring you to us; but if you call upon God or the
Saints or show fear, I must tell you that he may chance to cast you
off or strike you into some place where you are like to stink for it;
wherefore, an your heart misgive you and unless you can make sure of
being mighty resolute, come not thither, for you would but do us a
mischief, without doing yourself any good.'[413]

[Footnote 413: Lit. "do _yourself_ a mischief, without doing _us_ any
good"; but the sequel shows that the contrary is meant, as in the
text.]

Quoth the physician, 'I see you know me not yet; maybe you judge of me
by my gloves and long gown. If you knew what I did aforetimes at
Bologna anights, when I went a-wenching whiles with my comrades, you
would marvel. Cock's faith, there was such and such a night when, one
of them refusing to come with us, (more by token that she was a scurvy
little baggage, no higher than my fist,) I dealt her, to begin with,
good store of cuffs, then, taking her up bodily, I dare say I carried
her a crossbowshot and wrought so that needs must she come with us.
Another time I remember me that, without any other in my company than
a serving-man of mine, I passed yonder alongside the Cemetery of the
Minor Friars, a little after the Ave Maria, albeit there had been a
woman buried there that very day, and felt no whit of fear; wherefore
misdoubt you not of this, for I am but too stout of heart and lusty.
Moreover, I tell you that, to do you credit at my coming thither, I
will don my gown of scarlet, wherein I was admitted doctor, and we
shall see if the company rejoice not at my sight and an I be not made
captain out of hand. You shall e'en see how the thing will go, once I
am there, since, without having yet set eyes on me, this countess hath
fallen so enamoured of me that she is minded to make me a Knight of
the Bath. It may be knighthood will not sit so ill on me nor shall I
be at a loss to carry it off with worship! Marry, only leave me do.'
'You say very well,' answered Buffalmacco; 'but look you leave us not
in the lurch and not come or not be found at the trysting-place,
whenas we shall send for you; and this I say for that the weather is
cold and you gentlemen doctors are very careful of yourselves
thereanent.' 'God forbid!' cried Master Simone. 'I am none of your
chilly ones. I reck not of the cold; seldom or never, whenas I rise of
a night for my bodily occasions, as a man will bytimes, do I put me on
more than my fur gown over my doublet. Wherefore I will certainly be
there.'

Thereupon they took leave of him and whenas it began to grow towards
night, Master Simone contrived to make some excuse or other to his
wife and secretly got out his fine gown; then, whenas it seemed to him
time, he donned it and betook himself to Santa Maria Novella, where he
mounted one of the aforesaid tombs and huddling himself up on the
marble, for that the cold was great, he proceeded to wait the coming
of the beast. Meanwhile Buffalmacco, who was tall and robust of his
person, made shift to have one of those masks that were wont to be
used for certain games which are not held nowadays, and donning a
black fur pelisse, inside out, arrayed himself therein on such wise
that he seemed a very bear, save that his mask had a devil's face and
was horned. Thus accoutred, he betook himself to the new Piazza of
Santa Maria, Bruno following him to see how the thing should go. As
soon as he perceived that the physician was there, he fell a-capering
and caracoling and made a terrible great blustering about the piazza,
whistling and howling and bellowing as he were possessed of the devil.
When Master Simone, who was more fearful than a woman, heard and saw
this, every hair of his body stood on end and he fell a-trembling all
over, and it was now he had liefer been at home than there.
Nevertheless, since he was e'en there, he enforced himself to take
heart, so overcome was he with desire to see the marvels whereof the
painters had told him.

After Buffalmacco had raged about awhile, as hath been said, he made a
show of growing pacified and coming up to the tomb whereon was the
physician, stood stock-still. Master Simone, who was all a-tremble for
fear, knew not what to do, whether to mount or abide where he was.
However, at last, fearing that the beast should do him a mischief, an
he mounted him not, he did away the first fear with the second and
coming down from the tomb, mounted on his back, saying softly, 'God
aid me!' Then he settled himself as best he might and still trembling
in every limb, crossed his hands upon his breast, as it had been
enjoined him; whereupon Buffalmacco set off at an amble towards Santa
Maria della Scala and going on all fours, brought him hard by the
Nunnery of Ripole. In those days there were dykes in that quarter,
wherein the tillers of the neighbouring lands let empty the jakes, to
manure their fields withal; whereto whenas Buffalmacco came nigh, he
went up to the brink of one of them and taking the opportunity, laid
hold of one of the physician's legs and jerking him off his back,
pitched him clean in, head foremost. Then he fell a-snorting and
snarling and capering and raged about awhile; after which he made off
alongside Santa Maria della Scala till he came to Allhallows Fields.
There he found Bruno, who had taken to flight, for that he was unable
to restrain his laughter; and with him, after they had made merry
together at Master Simone's expense, he addressed himself to see from
afar what the bemoiled physician should do.

My lord leech, finding himself in that abominable place, struggled to
arise and strove as best he might to win forth thereof; and after
falling in again and again, now here and now there, and swallowing
some drachms of the filth, he at last succeeded in making his way out
of the dyke, in the woefullest of plights, bewrayed from head to foot
and leaving his bonnet behind him. Then, having wiped himself as best
he might with his hands and knowing not what other course to take, he
returned home and knocked till it was opened to him. Hardly was he
entered, stinking as he did, and the door shut again ere up came Bruno
and Buffalmacco, to hear how he should be received of his wife, and
standing hearkening, they heard the lady give him the foulest rating
was ever given poor devil, saying, 'Good lack, what a pickle thou art
in! Thou hast been gallanting it to some other woman and must needs
seek to cut a figure with thy gown of scarlet! What, was not I enough
for thee? Why, man alive, I could suffice to a whole people, let alone
thee. Would God they had choked thee, like as they cast thee whereas
thou deservedst to be thrown! Here's a fine physician for you, to have
a wife of his own and go a-gadding anights after other folk's
womankind!' And with these and many other words of the same fashion
she gave not over tormenting him till midnight, what while the
physician let wash himself from head to foot.

Next morning up came Bruno and Buffalmacco, who had painted all their
flesh under their clothes with livid blotches, such as beatings use to
make, and entering the physician's house, found him already arisen.
Accordingly they went in to him and found the whole place full of
stench, for that they had not yet been able so to clean everything
that it should not stink there. Master Simone, seeing them enter, came
to meet them and bade God give them good day; whereto the two rogues,
as they had agreed beforehand, replied with an angry air, saying,
'That say we not to you; nay, rather, we pray God give you so many ill
years that you may die a dog's death, as the most disloyal man and the
vilest traitor alive; for it was no thanks to you that, whereas we
studied to do you pleasure and worship, we were not slain like dogs.
As it is, thanks to your disloyalty, we have gotten so many buffets
this past night that an ass would go to Rome for less, without
reckoning that we have gone in danger of being expelled the company
into which we had taken order for having you received. An you believe
us not, look at our bodies and see how they have fared.' Then, opening
their clothes in front, they showed him, by an uncertain light, their
breasts all painted and covered them up again in haste.

The physician would have excused himself and told of his mishaps and
how and where he had been cast; but Buffalmacco said, 'Would he had
thrown you off the bridge into the Arno! Why did you call on God and
the Saints? Were you not forewarned of this?' 'By God His faith,'
replied the physician, 'I did it not.' 'How?' cried Buffalmacco. 'You
did not call on them? Egad, you did it again and again; for our
messenger told us that you shook like a reed and knew not where you
were. Marry, for the nonce you have befooled us finely; but never
again shall any one serve us thus, and we will yet do you such honour
thereof as you merit.' The physician fell to craving pardon and
conjuring them for God's sake not to dishonour him and studied to
appease them with the best words he could command. And if aforetime he
had entreated them with honour, from that time forth he honoured them
yet more and made much of them, entertaining them with banquets and
otherwhat, for fear lest they should publish his shame. Thus, then, as
you have heard, is sense taught to whoso hath learned no great store
thereof at Bologna."




THE TENTH STORY

[Day the Eighth]

     A CERTAIN WOMAN OF SICILY ARTFULLY DESPOILETH A MERCHANT OF
     THAT WHICH HE HAD BROUGHT TO PALERMO; BUT HE, MAKING BELIEVE
     TO HAVE RETURNED THITHER WITH MUCH GREATER PLENTY OF
     MERCHANDISE THAN BEFORE, BORROWETH MONEY OF HER AND LEAVETH
     HER WATER AND TOW IN PAYMENT


How much the queen's story in divers places made the ladies laugh, it
needed not to ask; suffice it to say that there was none of them to
whose eyes the tears had not come a dozen times for excess of
laughter: but, after it had an end, Dioneo, knowing that it was come
to his turn to tell, said, "Gracious ladies, it is a manifest thing
that sleights and devices are the more pleasing, the subtler the
trickster who is thereby artfully outwitted. Wherefore, albeit you
have related very fine stories, I mean to tell you one, which should
please you more than any other that hath been told upon the same
subject, inasmuch as she who was cheated was a greater mistress of the
art of cheating others than was any of the men or women who were
cozened by those of whom you have told.

There used to be, and belike is yet, a custom, in all maritime places
which have a port, that all merchants who come thither with
merchandise, having unloaded it, should carry it all into a warehouse,
which is in many places called a customhouse, kept by the commonality
or by the lord of the place. There they give unto those who are
deputed to that end a note in writing of all their merchandise and the
value thereof, and they thereupon make over to each merchant a
storehouse, wherein he layeth up his goods under lock and key.
Moreover, the said officers enter in the book of the Customs, to each
merchant's credit, all his merchandise, causing themselves after he
paid their dues of the merchants, whether for all his said merchandise
or for such part thereof as he withdraweth from the customhouse. By
this book of the Customs the brokers mostly inform themselves of the
quality and the quantity of the goods that are in bond there and also
who are the merchants that own them; and with these latter, as
occasion serveth them, they treat of exchanges and barters and sales
and other transactions. This usance, amongst many other places, was
current at Palermo in Sicily, where likewise there were and are yet
many women, very fair of their person, but sworn enemies to honesty,
who would be and are by those who know them not held great ladies and
passing virtuous and who, being given not to shave, but altogether to
flay men, no sooner espy a merchant there than they inform themselves
by the book of the Customs of that which he hath there and how much he
can do;[414] after which by their lovesome and engaging fashions and
with the most dulcet words, they study to allure the said merchants
and draw them into the snare of their love; and many an one have they
aforetime lured thereinto, from whom they have wiled great part of
their merchandise; nay, many have they despoiled of all, and of these
there be some who have left goods and ship and flesh and bones in
their hands, so sweetly hath the barberess known to ply the razor.

[Footnote 414: _i.e._ what he is worth.]

It chanced, not long since, that there came thither, sent by his
masters, one of our young Florentines, by name Niccolo da Cignano,
though more commonly called Salabaetto, with as many woollen cloths,
left on his hands from the Salerno fair, as might be worth some five
hundred gold florins, which having given the customhouse officers the
invoice thereof, he laid up in a magazine and began, without showing
overmuch haste to dispose of them, to go bytimes a-pleasuring about
the city. He being of a fair complexion and yellow-haired and withal
very sprightly and personable, it chanced that one of these same
barberesses, who styled herself Madam Biancofiore, having heard
somewhat of his affairs, cast her eyes on him; which he perceiving and
taking her for some great lady, concluded that he pleased her for his
good looks and bethought himself to order this amour with the utmost
secrecy; wherefore, without saying aught thereof to any, he fell to
passing and repassing before her house. She, noting this, after she
had for some days well enkindled him with her eyes, making believe to
languish for him, privily despatched to him one of her women, who was
a past mistress in the procuring art and who, after much parley, told
him, well nigh with tears in her eyes, that he had so taken her
mistress with his comeliness and his pleasing fashions that she could
find no rest day or night; wherefore, whenas it pleased him, she
desired, more than aught else, to avail to foregather with him privily
in a bagnio; then, pulling a ring from her pouch, she gave it to him
on the part of her mistress. Salabaetto, hearing this, was the
joyfullest man that was aye and taking the ring, rubbed it against his
eyes and kissed it; after which he set it on his finger and replied to
the good woman that, if Madam Biancofiore loved him, she was well
requited it, for that he loved her more than his proper life and was
ready to go whereassoever it should please her and at any hour. The
messenger returned to her mistress with this answer and it was
appointed Salabaetto out of hand at what bagnio he should expect her
on the ensuing day after vespers.

Accordingly, without saying aught of the matter to any, he punctually
repaired thither at the hour appointed him and found the bagnio taken
by the lady; nor had he waited long ere there came two slave-girls
laden with gear and bearing on their heads, the one a fine large
mattress of cotton wool and the other a great basket full of gear. The
mattress they set on a bedstead in one of the chambers of the bagnio
and spread thereon a pair of very fine sheets, laced with silk,
together with a counterpane of snow-white Cyprus buckram[415] and two
pillows wonder-curiously wrought.[416] Then, putting off their clothes
they entered the bath and swept it all and washed it excellent well.
Nor was it long ere the lady herself came thither, with other two
slave-girls, and accosted Salabaetto with the utmost joy; then, as
first she had commodity, after she had both clipped and kissed him
amain, heaving the heaviest sighs in the world, she said to him, 'I
know not who could have brought me to this pass, other than thou; thou
hast kindled a fire in my vitals, little dog of a Tuscan!' Then, at
her instance, they entered the bath, both naked, and with them two of
the slave-girls; and there, without letting any else lay a finger on
him, she with her own hands washed Salabaetto all wonder-well with
musk and clove-scented soap; after which she let herself be washed and
rubbed of the slave-girls. This done, the latter brought two very
white and fine sheets, whence came so great a scent of roses that
everything there seemed roses, in one of which they wrapped Salabaetto
and in the other the lady and taking them in their arms, carried them
both to the bed prepared for them. There, whenas they had left
sweating, the slave-girls did them loose from the sheets wherein they
were wrapped and they abode naked in the others, whilst the girls
brought out of the basket wonder-goodly casting-bottles of silver,
full of sweet waters, rose and jessamine and orange and citron-flower
scented, and sprinkled them all therewith; after which boxes of
succades and wines of great price were produced and they refreshed
themselves awhile.

[Footnote 415: _Bucherame._ The word "buckram" was anciently applied
to the finest linen cloth, as is apparently the case here; see
Ducange, voce _Boquerannus_, and Florio, voce _Bucherame_.]

[Footnote 416: _i.e._ in needlework.]

It seemed to Salabaetto as he were in Paradise and he cast a thousand
glances at the lady, who was certes very handsome, himseeming each
hour was an hundred years till the slave-girls should begone and he
should find himself in her arms. Presently, at her commandment, the
girls departed the chamber, leaving a flambeau alight there; whereupon
she embraced Salabaetto and he her, and they abode together a great
while, to the exceeding pleasure of the Florentine, to whom it seemed
she was all afire for love of him. Whenas it seemed to her time to
rise, she called the slave-girls and they clad themselves; then they
recruited themselves somedele with a second collation of wine and
sweetmeats and washed their hands and faces with odoriferous waters;
after which, being about to depart, the lady said to Salabaetto, 'So
it be agreeable to thee, it were doing me a very great favour an thou
camest this evening to sup and lie the night with me.' Salabaetto, who
was by this time altogether captivated by her beauty and the artful
pleasantness of her fashions and firmly believed himself to be loved
of her as he were the heart out of her body, replied, 'Madam, your
every pleasure is supremely agreeable to me, wherefore both to-night
and at all times I mean to do that which shall please you and that
which shall be commanded me of you.'

Accordingly the lady returned to her house, where she caused well
bedeck her bedchamber with her dresses and gear and letting make ready
a splendid supper, awaited Salabaetto, who, as soon as it was grown
somewhat dark, betook himself thither and being received with open
arms, supped with all cheer and commodity of service. Thereafter they
betook themselves into the bedchamber, where he smelt a marvellous
fragrance of aloes-wood and saw the bed very richly adorned with
Cyprian singing-birds[417] and store of fine dresses upon the pegs,
all which things together and each of itself made him conclude that
this must be some great and rich lady. And although he had heard some
whispers to the contrary anent her manner of life, he would not
anywise believe it; or, if he e'en gave so much credit thereto as to
allow that she might erst have cozened others, for nothing in the
world could he have believed that this might possibly happen to
himself. He lay that night with her in the utmost delight, still
waxing more enamoured, and in the morning she girt him on a quaint and
goodly girdle of silver, with a fine purse thereto, saying, 'Sweet my
Salabaetto, I commend myself to thy remembrance, and like as my person
is at thy pleasure, even so is all that is here and all that dependeth
upon me at thy service and commandment.' Salabaetto, rejoiced,
embraced and kissed her; then, going forth of her house, he betook
himself whereas the other merchants were used to resort.

[Footnote 417: "It was the custom in those days to attach to the
bedposts sundry small instruments in the form of birds, which, by
means of certain mechanical devices, gave forth sounds modulated like
the song of actual birds."--_Fanfani._]

On this wise consorting with her at one time and another, without its
costing him aught in the world, and growing every hour more entangled,
it befell that he sold his stuffs for ready money and made a good
profit thereby; of which the lady incontinent heard, not from him, but
from others, and Salabaetto being come one night to visit her, she
fell to prattling and wantoning with him, kissing and clipping him and
feigning herself so enamoured of him that it seemed she must die of
love in his arms. Moreover, she would fain have given him two very
fine hanaps of silver that she had; but he would not take them, for
that he had had of her, at one time and another, what was worth a good
thirty gold florins, without availing to have her take of him so much
as a groat's worth. At last, whenas she had well enkindled him by
showing herself so enamoured and freehanded, one of her slave-girls
called her, as she had ordained beforehand; whereupon she left the
chamber and coming back, after awhile, in tears cast herself face
downward on the bed and fell to making the woefullest lamentation ever
woman made. Salabaetto, marvelling at this, caught her in his arms and
fell a-weeping with her and saying, 'Alack, heart of my body, what
aileth thee thus suddenly? What is the cause of this grief? For God's
sake, tell it me, my soul.' The lady, after letting herself be long
entreated, answered, 'Woe's me, sweet my lord, I know not what to say
or to do; I have but now received letters from Messina and my brother
writeth me that, should I sell or pawn all that is here,[418] I must
without fail send him a thousand gold florins within eight days from
this time, else will his head be cut off; and I know not how I shall
do to get this sum so suddenly. Had I but fifteen days' grace, I would
find a means of procuring it from a certain quarter whence I am to
have much more, or I would sell one of our farms; but, as this may not
be, I had liefer be dead than that this ill news should have come to
me.'

[Footnote 418: Syn. that which belongeth to us (_ciÃ² che ci Ã¨_,) _ci_,
as I have before noted, signifying both "here" and "us," dative and
accusative.]

So saying, she made a show of being sore afflicted and stinted not
from weeping; whereupon quoth Salabaetto, whom the flames of love had
bereft of great part of his wonted good sense, so that he believed
her tears to be true and her words truer yet, 'Madam, I cannot oblige
you with a thousand florins, but five hundred I can very well advance
you, since you believe you will be able to return them to me within a
fortnight from this time; and this is of your good fortune that I
chanced but yesterday to sell my stuffs; for, had it not been so, I
could not have lent you a groat.' 'Alack,' cried the lady, 'hast thou
then been straitened for lack of money? Marry, why didst thou not
require me thereof? Though I have not a thousand, I had an hundred and
even two hundred to give thee. Thou hast deprived me of all heart to
accept of thee the service thou profferest me.' Salabaetto was more
than ever taken with these words and said, 'Madam, I would not have
you refrain on that account, for, had I had such an occasion therefor
as you presently have, I would assuredly have asked you.' 'Alack,
Salabaetto mine,' replied the lady, 'now know I aright that thine is a
true and perfect love for me, since, without waiting to be required,
thou freely succoureth me, in such a strait, with so great a sum of
money. Certes, I was all thine without this, but with this I shall be
far more so; nor shall I ever forget that I owe thee my brother's
life. But God knoweth I take it sore unwillingly, seeing that thou art
a merchant and that with money merchants transact all their affairs;
however, since need constraineth me, and I have certain assurance of
speedily restoring it to thee, I will e'en take it; and for the rest,
an I find no readier means, I will pawn all these my possessions.' So
saying, she let herself fall, weeping, on Salabaetto's neck. He fell
to comforting her and after abiding the night with her, he, next
morning, to approve himself her most liberal servant, without waiting
to be asked by her, carried her five hundred right gold florins, which
she received with tears in her eyes, but laughter in her heart,
Salabaetto contenting himself with her simple promise.

As soon as the lady had the money, the signs began to change, and
whereas before he had free access to her whenassoever it pleased him,
reasons now began to crop up, whereby it betided him not to win
admission there once out of seven times, nor was he received with the
same countenance nor the same caresses and rejoicings as before. And
the term at which he was to have had his monies again being, not to
say come, but past by a month or two and he requiring them, words were
given him in payment. Thereupon his eyes were opened to the wicked
woman's arts and his own lack of wit, wherefore, feeling that he could
say nought of her beyond that which might please her concerning the
matter, since he had neither script nor other evidence thereof, and
being ashamed to complain to any, as well for that he had been
forewarned thereof as for fear of the scoffs which he might reasonably
expect for his folly, he was beyond measure woeful and inwardly
bewailed his credulity.

At last, having had divers letters from his masters, requiring him to
change[419] the monies in question and remit them to them, he
determined to depart, lest, an he did it not, his default should be
discovered there, and accordingly, going aboard a little ship, he
betook himself, not to Pisa, as he should have done, but to Naples.
There at that time was our gossip Pietro dello Canigiano, treasurer to
the Empress of Constantinople, a man of great understanding and subtle
wit and a fast friend of Salabaetto and his family; and to him, as to
a very discreet man, the disconsolate Florentine recounted that which
he had done and the mischance that had befallen him, requiring him of
aid and counsel, so he might contrive to gain his living there, and
avouching his intention nevermore to return to Florence. Canigiano was
concerned for this and said, 'Ill hast thou done and ill hast thou
carried thyself; thou hast disobeyed thy masters and hast, at one
cast, spent a great sum of money in wantonness; but, since it is done,
we must look for otherwhat.'[420] Accordingly, like a shrewd man as he
was, he speedily bethought himself what was to be done and told it to
Salabaetto, who was pleased with the device and set about putting it
in execution. He had some money and Canigiano having lent him other
some, he made up a number of bales well packed and corded; then,
buying a score of oil-casks and filling them, he embarked the whole
and returned to Palermo, where, having given the customhouse officers
the bill of lading and the value of the casks and let enter everything
to his account, he laid the whole up in the magazines, saying that he
meant not to touch them till such time as certain other merchandise
which he expected should be come.

[Footnote 419: _i.e._ procure bills of exchange for.]

[Footnote 420: _i.e._ we must see what is to be done.]

Biancofiore, getting wind of this and hearing that the merchandise he
had presently brought with him was worth good two thousand florins,
without reckoning what he looked for, which was valued at more than
three thousand, bethought herself that she had flown at too small game
and determined to restore him the five hundred florins, so she might
avail to have the greater part of the five thousand. Accordingly, she
sent for him and Salabaetto, grown cunning, went to her; whereupon,
making believe to know nothing of that which he had brought with him,
she received him with a great show of fondness and said to him,
'Harkye, if thou wast vexed with me, for that I repaid thee not thy
monies on the very day....' Salabaetto fell a-laughing and answered;
'In truth, madam, it did somewhat displease me, seeing I would have
torn out my very heart to give it you, an I thought to pleasure you
withal; but I will have you hear how I am vexed with you. Such and so
great is the love I bear you, that I have sold the most part of my
possessions and have presently brought hither merchandise to the value
of more than two thousand florins and expect from the westward as much
more as will be worth over three thousand, with which I mean to stock
me a warehouse in this city and take up my sojourn here, so I may
still be near you, meseeming I fare better of your love than ever
lover of his lady.'

'Look you, Salabaetto,' answered the lady, 'every commodity of thine
is mighty pleasing to me, as that of him whom I love more than my
life, and it pleaseth me amain that thou art returned hither with
intent to sojourn here, for that I hope yet to have good time galore
with thee; but I would fain excuse myself somedele to thee for that,
whenas thou wast about to depart, thou wouldst bytimes have come
hither and couldst not, and whiles thou camest and wast not so gladly
seen as thou wast used to be, more by token that I returned thee not
thy monies at the time promised. Thou must know that I was then in
very great concern and sore affliction, and whoso is in such case, how
much soever he may love another, cannot always show him so cheerful a
countenance or pay him such attention as he might wish. Moreover, thou
must know that it is mighty uneasy for a woman to avail to find a
thousand gold florins; all day long we are put off with lies and that
which is promised us is not performed unto us; wherefore needs must we
in our turn lie unto others. Hence cometh it, and not of my default,
that I gave thee not back thy monies. However, I had them a little
after thy departure, and had I known whither to send them, thou mayst
be assured that I would have remitted them to thee; but, not knowing
this, I kept them for thee.' Then, letting fetch a purse wherein were
the very monies he had brought her, she put it into his hand, saying,
'Count them if there be five hundred.' Never was Salabaetto so glad;
he counted them and finding them five hundred, put them up and said,
'Madam, I am assured that you say sooth; but you have done enough [to
convince me of your love for me,] and I tell you that, for this and
for the love I bear you, you could never require me, for any your
occasion, of whatsoever sum I might command, but I would oblige you
therewith; and whenas I am established here, you may put this to the
proof.'

Having again on this wise renewed his loves with her in words, he fell
again to using amically with her, whilst she made much of him and
showed him the greatest goodwill and honour in the world, feigning the
utmost love for him. But he, having a mind to return her cheat for
cheat, being one day sent for by her to sup and sleep with her, went
thither so chapfallen and so woebegone that it seemed as he would die.
Biancofiore, embracing him and kissing him, began to question him of
what ailed him to be thus melancholy, and he, after letting himself be
importuned a good while, answered, 'I am a ruined man, for that the
ship, wherein is the merchandise I expected, hath been taken by the
corsairs of Monaco and held to ransom in ten thousand gold florins,
whereof it falleth to me to pay a thousand, and I have not a farthing,
for that the five hundred pieces thou returnedst to me I sent
incontinent to Naples to lay out in cloths to be brought hither; and
should I go about at this present to sell the merchandise I have here,
I should scarce get a penny for two pennyworth, for that it is no time
for selling. Nor am I yet so well known that I could find any here to
help me to this, wherefore I know not what to do or to say; for, if I
send not the monies speedily, the merchandise will be carried off to
Monaco and I shall never again have aught thereof.'

The lady was mightily concerned at this, fearing to lose him
altogether, and considering how she should do, so he might not go to
Monaco, said, 'God knoweth I am sore concerned for the love of thee;
but what availeth it to afflict oneself thus? If I had the monies, God
knoweth I would lend them to thee incontinent; but I have them not.
True, there is a certain person here who obliged me the other day
with the five hundred florins that I lacked; but he will have heavy
usance for his monies; nay, he requireth no less than thirty in the
hundred, and if thou wilt borrow of him, needs must he be made secure
with a good pledge. For my part, I am ready to engage for thee all
these my goods and my person, to boot, for as much as he will lend
thereon; but how wilt thou assure him of the rest?' Salabaetto readily
apprehended the reason that moved her to do him this service and
divined that it was she herself who was to lend him the money;
wherewith he was well pleased and thanking her, answered that he would
not be put off for exorbitant usance, need constraining him. Moreover,
he said that he would give assurance of the merchandise he had in the
customhouse, letting inscribe it to him who should lend him the money;
but that needs must be kept the key of the magazines, as well that he
might be able to show his wares, an it were required of him, as that
nothing might be touched or changed or tampered withal.

The lady answered that it was well said and that this was good enough
assurance; wherefore, as soon as the day was come, she sent for a
broker, in whom she trusted greatly, and taking order with him of the
matter, gave him a thousand gold florins, which he lent to Salabaetto,
letting inscribe in his own name at the customhouse that which the
latter had there; then, having made their writings and counter-writings
together and being come to an accord,[421] they occupied themselves
with their other affairs. Salabaetto, as soonest he might, embarked,
with the fifteen hundred gold florins, on board a little ship and
returned to Pietro dello Canigiano at Naples, whence he remitted to
his masters, who had despatched him with the stuffs, a good and entire
account thereof. Then, having repaid Pietro and every other to whom he
owed aught, he made merry several days with Canigiano over the cheat
he had put upon the Sicilian trickstress; after which, resolved to be
no more a merchant, he betook himself to Ferrara.

[Footnote 421: _i.e._ having executed and exchanged the necessary
legal documents for the proper carrying out of the transaction and
completed the matter to their mutual satisfaction.]

Meanwhile, Biancofiore, finding that Salabaetto had left Palermo,
began to marvel and wax misdoubtful and after having awaited him good
two months, seeing that he came not, she caused the broker force open
the magazines. Trying first the casks, which she believed to be filled
with oil, she found them full of seawater, save that there was in each
maybe a runlet of oil at the top near the bunghole. Then, undoing the
bales, she found them all full of tow, with the exception of two,
which were stuffs; and in brief, with all that was there, there was
not more than two hundred florins' worth. Wherefore Biancofiore,
confessing herself outwitted, long lamented the five hundred florins
repaid and yet more the thousand lent, saying often, 'Who with a
Tuscan hath to do, Must nor be blind nor see askew.' On this wise,
having gotten nothing for her pains but loss and scorn, she found, to
her cost, that some folk know as much as others."



No sooner had Dioneo made an end of his story than Lauretta, knowing
the term to be come beyond which she was not to reign and having
commended Canigiano's counsel (which was approved good by its effect)
and Salabaetto's shrewdness (which was no less commendable) in
carrying it into execution, lifted the laurel from her own head and
set it on that of Emilia, saying, with womanly grace, "Madam, I know
not how pleasant a queen we shall have of you; but, at the least, we
shall have a fair one. Look, then, that your actions be conformable to
your beauties." So saying, she returned to her seat, whilst Emilia, a
thought abashed, not so much at being made queen as to see herself
publicly commended of that which women use most to covet, waxed such
in face as are the new-blown roses in the dawning. However, after she
had kept her eyes awhile lowered, till the redness had given place,
she took order with the seneschal of that which concerned the general
entertainment and presently said, "Delightsome ladies, it is common,
after oxen have toiled some part of the day, confined under the yoke,
to see them loosed and eased thereof and freely suffered to go
a-pasturing, where most it liketh them, about the woods; and it is
manifest also that leafy gardens, embowered with various plants, are
not less, but much more fair than groves wherein one seeth only oaks.
Wherefore, seeing how many days we have discoursed, under the
restraint of a fixed law, I opine that, as well unto us as to those
whom need constraineth to labour for their daily bread, it is not only
useful, but necessary, to play the truant awhile and wandering thus
afield, to regain strength to enter anew under the yoke. Wherefore,
for that which is to be related to-morrow, ensuing your delectable
usance of discourse, I purpose not to restrict you to any special
subject, but will have each discourse according as it pleaseth him,
holding it for certain that the variety of the things which will be
said will afford us no less entertainment than to have discoursed of
one alone; and having done thus, whoso shall come after me in the
sovranty may, as stronger than I, avail with greater assurance to
restrict us within the limits of the wonted laws." So saying, she set
every one at liberty till supper-time.

All commended the queen of that which she had said, holding it sagely
spoken, and rising to their feet, addressed themselves, this to one
kind of diversion and that to another, the ladies to weaving garlands
and to gambolling and the young men to gaming and singing. On this
wise they passed the time until the supper-hour, which being come,
they supped with mirth and good cheer about the fair fountain and
after diverted themselves with singing and dancing according to the
wonted usance. At last, the queen, to ensue the fashion of her
predecessors, commanded Pamfilo to sing a song, notwithstanding those
which sundry of the company had already sung of their freewill; and he
readily began thus:

         Such is thy pleasure, Love
     And such the allegresse I feel thereby
     That happy, burning in thy fire, am I.

     The abounding gladness in my heart that glows,
       For the high joy and dear
         Whereto thou hast me led,
     Unable to contain there, overflows
       And in my face's cheer
         Displays my happihead;
         For being enamourÃ©d
     In such a worship-worthy place and high
     Makes eath to me the burning I aby.

     I cannot with my finger what I feel
       Limn, Love, nor do I know
         My bliss in song to vent;
     Nay, though I knew it, needs must I conceal,
       For, once divulged, I trow
         'Twould turn to dreariment.
         Yet am I so content,
     All speech were halt and feeble, did I try
     The least thereof with words to signify.

     Who might conceive it that these arms of mine
       Should anywise attain
         Whereas I've held them aye,
     Or that my face should reach so fair a shrine
       As that, of favour fain
         And grace, I've won to? Nay,
         Such fortune ne'er a day
     Believed me were; whence all afire am I,
     Hiding the source of my liesse thereby.

This was the end of Pamfilo's song, whereto albeit it had been
completely responded of all, there was none but noted the words
thereof with more attent solicitude than pertained unto him, studying
to divine that which, as he sang, it behoved him to keep hidden from
them; and although sundry went imagining various things, nevertheless
none happened upon the truth of the case.[422] But the queen, seeing
that the song was ended and that both young ladies and men would
gladly rest themselves, commanded that all should betake themselves to
bed.

[Footnote 422: The song sung by Pamfilo (under which name, as I have
before pointed out, the author appears to represent himself)
apparently alludes to Boccaccio's amours with the Princess Maria of
Naples (Fiammetta), by whom his passion was returned in kind.]


HERE ENDETH THE EIGHTH DAY
OF THE DECAMERON




_Day the Ninth_

     HERE BEGINNETH THE NINTH DAY OF THE DECAMERON WHEREIN UNDER
     THE GOVERNANCE OF EMILIA EACH DISCOURSETH ACCORDING AS IT
     PLEASETH HIM AND OF THAT WHICH IS MOST TO HIS LIKING


The light, from whose resplendence the night fleeth, had already
changed all the eighth heaven[423] from azure to watchet-colour[424]
and the flowerets began to lift their heads along the meads, when
Emilia, uprising, let call the ladies her comrades and on like wise
the young men, who, being come, fared forth, ensuing the slow steps of
the queen, and betook themselves to a coppice but little distant from
the palace. Therein entering, they saw the animals, wild goats and
deer and others, as if assured of security from the hunters by reason
of the prevailing pestilence, stand awaiting them no otherwise than as
they were grown without fear or tame, and diverted themselves awhile
with them, drawing near, now to this one and now to that, as if they
would fain lay hands on them, and making them run and skip. But, the
sun now waxing high, they deemed it well to turn back. They were all
garlanded with oak leaves, with their hands full of flowers and
sweet-scented herbs, and whoso encountered them had said no otherwhat
than "Or these shall not be overcome of death or it will slay them
merry." On this wise, then, they fared on, step by step, singing and
chatting and laughing, till they came to the palace, where they found
everything orderly disposed and their servants full of mirth and
joyous cheer. There having rested awhile, they went not to dinner till
half a dozen canzonets, each merrier than other, had been carolled by
the young men and the ladies; then, water being given to their hands,
the seneschal seated them all at table, according to the queen's
pleasure, and the viands being brought, they all ate blithely. Rising
thence, they gave themselves awhile to dancing and music-making, and
after, by the queen's commandment, whoso would betook himself to rest.
But presently, the wonted hour being come, all in the accustomed place
assembled to discourse, whereupon the queen, looking at Filomena, bade
her give commencement to the stories of that day, and she, smiling,
began on this wise:

[Footnote 423: According to the Ptolemaic system, the earth is
encompassed by eight celestial zones or heavens; the first or highest,
above which is the empyrean, (otherwise called the ninth heaven,) is
that of the Moon, the second that of Mercury, the third that of Venus,
the fourth that of the Sun, the fifth that of Mars, the sixth that of
Jupiter, the seventh that of Saturn and the eighth or lowest that of
the fixed stars and of the Earth.]

[Footnote 424: _D'azzurrino in color cilestro._ This is one of the
many passages in which Boccaccio has imitated Dante (cf. Purgatorio,
c. xxvi. II. 4-6, "... il sole.... Che giÃ , raggiando, tutto
l'occidente Mutava in bianco aspetto di cilestro,") and also one of
the innumerable instances in which former translators (who all agree
in making the advent of the light change the colour of the sky from
azure to a darker colour, instead of, as Boccaccio intended, to
watchet, _i.e._ a paler or greyish blue,) have misrendered the text,
for sheer ignorance of the author's meaning.]




THE FIRST STORY

[Day the Ninth]

     MADAM FRANCESCA, BEING COURTED BY ONE RINUCCIO PALERMINI AND
     ONE ALESSANDRO CHIARMONTESI AND LOVING NEITHER THE ONE NOR
     THE OTHER, ADROITLY RIDDETH HERSELF OF BOTH BY CAUSING ONE
     ENTER FOR DEAD INTO A SEPULCHRE AND THE OTHER BRING HIM
     FORTH THEREOF FOR DEAD, ON SUCH WISE THAT THEY CANNOT AVAIL
     TO ACCOMPLISH THE CONDITION IMPOSED


"Since it is your pleasure, madam, I am well pleased to be she who
shall run the first ring in this open and free field of story-telling,
wherein your magnificence hath set us; the which an I do well, I doubt
not but that those who shall come after will do well and better. Many
a time, charming ladies, hath it been shown in our discourses what
and how great is the power of love; natheless, for that medeemeth not
it hath been fully spoken thereof (no, nor would be, though we should
speak of nothing else for a year to come,) and that not only doth love
bring lovers into divers dangers of death, but causeth them even to
enter for dead into the abiding-places of the dead, it is my pleasure
to relate to you a story thereof, over and above those which have been
told, whereby not only will you apprehend the puissance of love, but
will know the wit used by a worthy lady in ridding herself of two who
loved her against her will.

You must know, then, that there was once in the city of Pistoia a very
fair widow lady, of whom two of our townsmen, called the one Rinuccio
Palermini and the other Alessandro Chiarmontesi, there abiding by
reason of banishment from Florence, were, without knowing one of
other, passionately enamoured, having by chance fallen in love with
her and doing privily each his utmost endeavour to win her favour. The
gentlewoman in question, whose name was Madam Francesca de' Lazzari,
being still importuned of the one and the other with messages and
entreaties, to which she had whiles somewhat unwisely given ear, and
desiring, but in vain, discreetly to retract, bethought herself how
she might avail to rid herself of their importunity by requiring them
of a service, which, albeit it was possible, she conceived that
neither of them would render her, to the intent that, they not doing
that which she required, she might have a fair and colourable occasion
of refusing to hearken more to their messages; and the device which
occurred to her was on this wise.

There had died that very day at Pistoia, one, who, albeit his
ancestors were gentlemen, was reputed the worst man that was, not only
in Pistoia, but in all the world; more by token that he was in his
lifetime so misshapen and of so monstrous a favour that whoso knew him
not, seeing him for the first time, had been affeared of him; and he
had been buried in a tomb without the church of the Minor Friars. This
circumstance she bethought herself would in part be very apt to her
purpose and accordingly she said to a maid of hers, 'Thou knowest the
annoy and the vexation I suffer all day long by the messages of yonder
two Florentines, Rinuccio and Alessandro. Now I am not disposed to
gratify [either of] them with my love, and to rid myself of them, I
have bethought myself, for the great proffers that they make, to seek
to make proof of them in somewhat which I am certain they will not do;
so shall I do away from me this their importunity, and thou shalt see
how. Thou knowest that Scannadio,[425] for so was the wicked man
called of whom we have already spoken, 'was this morning buried in the
burial-place of the Minor Brethren, Scannadio, of whom, whenas they
saw him alive, let alone dead, the doughtiest men of this city went in
fear; wherefore go thou privily first to Alessandro and bespeak him,
saying, "Madam Francesca giveth thee to know that now is the time
come whenas thou mayst have her love, which thou hast so much
desired, and be with her, an thou wilt, on this wise. This night, for
a reason which thou shalt know after, the body of Scannadio, who was
this morning buried, is to be brought to her house by a kinsman of
hers, and she, being in great fear of him, dead though he be, would
fain not have him there; wherefore she prayeth thee that it please
thee, by way of doing her a great service, go this evening, at the
time of the first sleep, to the tomb wherein he is buried, and donning
the dead man's clothes, abide as thou wert he until such time as they
shall come for thee. Then, without moving or speaking, thou must
suffer thyself be taken up out of the tomb and carried to her house,
where she will receive thee, and thou mayst after abide with her and
depart at thy leisure, leaving to her the care of the rest." An he say
that he will do it, well and good; but, should he refuse, bid him on
my part, never more show himself whereas I may be and look, as he
valueth his life, that he send me no more letters or messages. Then
shalt thou betake thee to Rinuccio Palermini and say to him, "Madam
Francesca saith that she is ready to do thine every pleasure, an thou
wilt render her a great service, to wit, that to-night, towards the
middle hour, thou get thee to the tomb wherein Scannadio was this
morning buried and take him up softly thence and bring him to her at
her house, without saying a word of aught thou mayst hear or feel.
There shalt thou learn what she would with him and have of her thy
pleasure; but, an it please thee not to do this, she chargeth thee
never more send her writ nor message."'

[Footnote 425: _Scannadio_ signifies "Murder-God" and was no doubt a
nickname bestowed upon the dead man, on account of his wicked and
reprobate way of life.]

The maid betook herself to the two lovers and did her errand
punctually to each, saying as it had been enjoined her; whereto each
made answer that, an it pleased her, they would go, not only into a
tomb, but into hell itself. The maid carried their reply to the lady
and she waited to see if they would be mad enough to do it. The night
come, whenas it was the season of the first sleep, Alessandro
Chiarmontesi, having stripped himself to his doublet, went forth of
his house to take Scannadio's place in the tomb; but, by the way,
there came a very frightful thought into his head and he fell a-saying
in himself, 'Good lack, what a fool I am! Whither go I? How know I but
yonder woman's kinsfolk, having maybe perceived that I love her and
believing that which is not, have caused me do this, so they may
slaughter me in yonder tomb? An it should happen thus, I should suffer
for it nor would aught in the world be ever known thereof to their
detriment. Or what know I but maybe some enemy of mine hath procured
me this, whom she belike loveth and seeketh to oblige therein?' Then
said he, 'But, grant that neither of these things be and that her
kinsfolk are e'en for carrying me to her house, I must believe that
they want not Scannadio's body to hold it in their arms or to put it
in hers; nay, it is rather to be conceived that they mean to do it
some mischief, as the body of one who maybe disobliged them in
somewhat aforetime. She saith that I am not to say a word for aught
that I may feel. But, should they put out mine eyes or draw my teeth
or lop off my hands or play me any other such trick, how shall I do?
How could I abide quiet? And if I speak, they will know me and mayhap
do me a mischief, or, though they do me no hurt, yet shall I have
accomplished nothing, for that they will not leave me with the lady;
whereupon she will say that I have broken her commandment and will
never do aught to pleasure me.' So saying, he had well nigh returned
home; but, nevertheless, his great love urged him on with counter
arguments of such potency that they brought him to the tomb, which he
opened and entering therein, stripped Scannadio of his clothes; then,
donning them and shutting the tomb upon himself, he laid himself in
the dead man's place. Thereupon he began to call to mind what manner
of man the latter had been and remembering him of all the things
whereof he had aforetime heard tell as having befallen by night, not
to say in the sepulchres of the dead, but even otherwhere, his every
hair began to stand on end and himseemed each moment as if Scannadio
should rise upright and butcher him then and there. However, aided by
his ardent love, he got the better of these and the other fearful
thoughts that beset him and abiding as he were the dead man, he fell
to awaiting that which should betide him.

Meanwhile, Rinuccio, midnight being now at hand, departed his house,
to do that which had been enjoined him of his mistress, and as he
went, he entered into many and various thoughts of the things which
might possibly betide him; as, to wit, that he might fall into the
hands of the police, with Scannadio's body on his shoulders, and be
doomed to the fire as a sorcerer, and that he should, an the thing
came to be known, incur the ill-will of his kinsfolk, and other like
thoughts, whereby he was like to have been deterred. But after,
bethinking himself again, 'Alack,' quoth he, 'shall I deny this
gentlewoman, whom I have so loved and love, the first thing she
requireth of me, especially as I am thereby to gain her favour? God
forbid, though I were certainly to die thereof, but I should set
myself to do that which I have promised!' Accordingly, he went on and
presently coming to the sepulchre, opened it easily; which Alessandro
hearing, abode still, albeit he was in great fear. Rinuccio, entering
in and thinking to take Scannadio's body, laid hold of Alessandro's
feet and drew him forth of the tomb; then, hoisting him on his
shoulders, he made off towards the lady's house.

Going thus and taking no manner of heed to his burden, he jolted it
many a time now against one corner and now another of certain benches
that were beside the way, more by token that the night was so cloudy
and so dark he could not see whither he went. He was already well nigh
at the door of the gentlewoman, who had posted herself at the window
with her maid, to see if he would bring Alessandro, and was ready
armed with an excuse to send them both away, when it chanced that the
officers of the watch, who were ambushed in the street and abode
silently on the watch to lay hands upon a certain outlaw, hearing the
scuffling that Rinuccio made with his feet, suddenly put out a light,
to see what was to do and whither to go, and rattled their targets and
halberds, crying, 'Who goeth there?' Rinuccio, seeing this and having
scant time for deliberation, let fall his burden and made off as fast
as his legs would carry him; whereupon Alessandro arose in haste and
made off in his turn, for all he was hampered with the dead man's
clothes, which were very long. The lady, by the light of the lantern
put out by the police, had plainly recognized Rinuccio, with
Alessandro on his shoulders, and perceiving the latter to be clad in
Scannadio's clothes, marvelled amain at the exceeding hardihood of
both; but, for all her wonderment, she laughed heartily to see
Alessandro cast down on the ground and to see him after take to
flight. Then, rejoiced at this accident and praising God that He had
rid her of the annoy of these twain, she turned back into the house
and betook herself to her chamber, avouching to her maid that without
doubt they both loved her greatly, since, as it appeared, they had
done that which she had enjoined them.

Meanwhile Rinuccio, woeful and cursing his ill fortune, for all that
returned not home, but, as soon as the watch had departed the
neighbourhood, he came back whereas he had dropped Alessandro and
groped about, to see if he could find him again, so he might make an
end of his service; but, finding him not and concluding that the
police had carried him off, he returned to his own house, woebegone,
whilst Alessandro, unknowing what else to do, made off home on like
wise, chagrined at such a misadventure and without having recognized
him who had borne him thither. On the morrow, Scannadio's tomb being
found open and his body not to be seen, for that Alessandro had rolled
it to the bottom of the vault, all Pistoia was busy with various
conjectures anent the matter, and the simpler sort concluded that he
had been carried off by the devils. Nevertheless, each of the two
lovers signified to the lady that which he had done and what had
befallen and excusing himself withal for not having full accomplished
her commandment, claimed her favour and her love; but she, making
believe to credit neither of this, rid herself of them with a curt
response to the effect that she would never consent to do aught for
them, since they had not done that which she had required of them."




THE SECOND STORY

[Day the Ninth]

     AN ABBESS, ARISING IN HASTE AND IN THE DARK TO FIND ONE OF
     HER NUNS, WHO HAD BEEN DENOUNCED TO HER, IN BED WITH HER
     LOVER AND THINKING TO COVER HER HEAD WITH HER COIF, DONNETH
     INSTEAD THEREOF THE BREECHES OF A PRIEST WHO IS ABED WITH
     HER; THE WHICH THE ACCUSED NUN OBSERVING AND MAKING HER
     AWARE THEREOF, SHE IS ACQUITTED AND HATH LEISURE TO BE WITH
     HER LOVER


Filomena was now silent and the lady's address in ridding herself of
those whom she chose not to love having been commended of all, whilst,
on the other hand, the presumptuous hardihood of the two gallants was
held of them to be not love, but madness, the queen said gaily to
Elisa, "Elisa, follow on." Accordingly, she promptly began,
"Adroitly, indeed, dearest ladies, did Madam Francesca contrive to rid
herself of her annoy, as hath been told; but a young nun, fortune
aiding her, delivered herself with an apt speech from an imminent
peril. As you know, there be many very dull folk, who set up for
teachers and censors of others, but whom, as you may apprehend from my
story, fortune bytimes deservedly putteth to shame, as befell the
abbess, under whose governance was the nun of whom I have to tell.

You must know, then, that there was once in Lombardy a convent, very
famous for sanctity and religion, wherein, amongst the other nuns who
were there, was a young lady of noble birth and gifted with marvellous
beauty, who was called Isabetta and who, coming one day to the grate
to speak with a kinsman of hers, fell in love with a handsome young
man who accompanied him. The latter, seeing her very fair and divining
her wishes with his eyes, became on like wise enamoured of her, and
this love they suffered a great while without fruit, to the no small
unease of each. At last, each being solicited by a like desire, the
young man hit upon a means of coming at his nun in all secrecy, and
she consenting thereto, he visited her, not once, but many times, to
the great contentment of both. But, this continuing, it chanced one
night that he was, without the knowledge of himself or his mistress,
seen of one of the ladies of the convent to take leave of Isabetta and
go his ways. The nun communicated her discovery to divers others and
they were minded at first to denounce Isabetta to the abbess, who was
called Madam Usimbalda and who, in the opinion of the nuns and of
whosoever knew her, was a good and pious lady; but, on consideration,
they bethought themselves to seek to have the abbess take her with the
young man, so there might be no room for denial. Accordingly, they
held their peace and kept watch by turns in secret to surprise her.

Now it chanced that Isabetta, suspecting nothing of this nor being on
her guard, caused her lover come thither one night, which was
forthright known to those who were on the watch for this and who,
whenas it seemed to them time, a good part of the night being spent,
divided themselves into two parties, whereof one abode on guard at the
door of her cell, whilst the other ran to the abbess's chamber and
knocking at the door, till she answered, said to her, 'Up, madam;
arise quickly, for we have discovered that Isabetta hath a young man
in her cell.' Now the abbess was that night in company with a priest,
whom she ofttimes let come to her in a chest; but, hearing the nuns'
outcry and fearing lest, of their overhaste and eagerness, they should
push open the door, she hurriedly arose and dressed herself as best
she might in the dark. Thinking to take certain plaited veils, which
nuns wear on their heads and call a psalter, she caught up by chance
the priest's breeches, and such was her haste that, without remarking
what she did, she threw them over her head, in lieu of the psalter,
and going forth, hurriedly locked the door after her, saying, 'Where
is this accursed one of God?' Then, in company with the others, who
were so ardent and so intent upon having Isabetta taken in default
that they noted not that which the abbess had on her head, she came
to the cell-door and breaking it open, with the aid of the others,
entered and found the two lovers abed in each other's arms, who, all
confounded at such a surprise, abode fast, unknowing what to do.

The young lady was incontinent seized by the other nuns and haled off,
by command of the abbess, to the chapter-house, whilst her gallant
dressed himself and abode await to see what should be the issue of the
adventure, resolved, if any hurt were offered to his mistress, to do a
mischief to as many nuns as he could come at and carry her off. The
abbess, sitting in chapter, proceeded, in the presence of all the
nuns, who had no eyes but for the culprit, to give the latter the
foulest rating that ever woman had, as having by her lewd and filthy
practices (an the thing should come to be known without the walls)
sullied the sanctity, the honour and the fair fame of the convent; and
to this she added very grievous menaces. The young lady, shamefast and
fearful, as feeling herself guilty, knew not what to answer and
keeping silence, possessed the other nuns with compassion for her.
However, after a while, the abbess multiplying words, she chanced to
raise her eyes and espied that which the former had on her head and
the hose-points that hung down therefrom on either side; whereupon,
guessing how the matter stood, she was all reassured and said, 'Madam,
God aid you, tie up your coif and after say what you will to me.'

The abbess, taking not her meaning, answered, 'What coif, vile woman
that thou art? Hast thou the face to bandy pleasantries at such a
time? Thinkest thou this that thou hast done is a jesting matter?'
'Prithee, madam,' answered Isabetta, 'tie up your coif and after say
what you will to me.' Thereupon many of the nuns raised their eyes to
the abbess's head and she also, putting her hand thereto, perceived,
as did the others, why Isabetta spoke thus; wherefore the abbess,
becoming aware of her own default and perceiving that it was seen of
all, past hope of recoverance, changed her note and proceeding to
speak after a fashion altogether different from her beginning, came to
the conclusion that it is impossible to withstand the pricks of the
flesh, wherefore she said that each should, whenas she might, privily
give herself a good time, even as it had been done until that day.
Accordingly, setting the young lady free, she went back to sleep with
her priest and Isabetta returned to her lover, whom many a time
thereafter she let come thither, in despite of those who envied her,
whilst those of the others who were loverless pushed their fortunes in
secret, as best they knew."




THE THIRD STORY

[Day the Ninth]

     MASTER SIMONE, AT THE INSTANCE OF BRUNO AND BUFFALMACCO AND
     NELLO, MAKETH CALANDRINO BELIEVE THAT HE IS WITH CHILD;
     WHEREFORE HE GIVETH THEM CAPONS AND MONEY FOR MEDICINES AND
     RECOVERETH WITHOUT BRINGING FORTH


After Elisa had finished her story and all the ladies had returned
thanks to God, who had with a happy issue delivered the young nun from
the claws of her envious companions, the queen bade Filostrato follow
on, and he, without awaiting further commandment, began, "Fairest
ladies, the unmannerly lout of a Marchegan judge, of whom I told you
yesterday, took out of my mouth a story of Calandrino and his
companions, which I was about to relate; and for that, albeit it hath
been much discoursed of him and them, aught that is told of him cannot
do otherwise than add to our merriment, I will e'en tell you that
which I had then in mind.

It hath already been clearly enough shown who Calandrino was and who
were the others of whom I am to speak in this story, wherefore,
without further preface, I shall tell you that an aunt of his chanced
to die and left him two hundred crowns in small coin; whereupon he
fell a-talking of wishing to buy an estate and entered into treaty
with all the brokers in Florence, as if he had ten thousand gold
florins to expend; but the matter still fell through, when they came
to the price of the estate in question. Bruno and Buffalmacco, knowing
all this, had told him once and again that he were better spend the
money in making merry together with them than go buy land, as if he
had had to make pellets;[426] but, far from this, they had never even
availed to bring him to give them once to eat. One day, as they were
complaining of this, there came up a comrade of theirs, a painter by
name Nello, and they all three took counsel together how they might
find a means of greasing their gullets at Calandrino's expense;
wherefore, without more delay, having agreed among themselves of that
which was to do, they watched next morning for his coming forth of his
house, nor had he gone far when Nello accosted him, saying, 'Good-day,
Calandrino.' Calandrino answered God give him good day and good year,
and Nello, halting awhile, fell to looking him in the face; whereupon
Calandrino asked him, 'At what lookest thou?' Quoth the painter, 'Hath
aught ailed thee this night? Meseemeth thou are not thyself this
morning.' Calandrino incontinent began to quake and said, 'Alack, how
so? What deemest thou aileth me?' 'Egad,' answered Nello, 'as for that
I can't say; but thou seemest to me all changed; belike it is
nothing.' So saying, he let him pass, and Calandrino fared on, all
misdoubtful, albeit he felt no whit ailing; but Buffalmacco, who was
not far off, seeing him quit of Nello, made for him and saluting him,
enquired if aught ailed him. Quoth Calandrino, 'I know not; nay, Nello
told me but now that I seemed to him all changed. Can it be that aught
aileth me?' 'Ay,' rejoined Buffalmacco, 'there must e'en be something
or other amiss with thee, for thou appearest half dead.'

[Footnote 426: _i.e._ balls for a pellet bow, usually made out of
clay. Bruno and Buffalmacco were punning upon the double meaning, land
and earth (or clay), of the word _terra_.]

By this time it seemed to Calandrino that he had the fevers, when, lo,
up came Bruno and the first thing he said was, 'Calandrino, what
manner of face is this?' Calandrino, hearing them all in the same
tale, held it for certain that he was in an ill way and asked them,
all aghast, 'what shall I do?' Quoth Bruno, 'Methinketh thou wert best
return home and get thee to bed and cover thyself well and send thy
water to Master Simone the doctor, who is, as thou knowest, as our
very creature and will tell thee incontinent what thou must do. We
will go with thee and if it behoveth to do aught, we will do it.'
Accordingly, Nello having joined himself to them, they returned home
with Calandrino, who betook himself, all dejected, into the bedchamber
and said to his wife, 'Come, cover me well, for I feel myself sore
disordered.' Then, laying himself down, he despatched his water by a
little maid to Master Simone, who then kept shop in the Old Market, at
the sign of the Pumpkin, whilst Bruno said to his comrades, 'Abide you
here with him, whilst I go hear what the doctor saith and bring him
hither, if need be.' 'Ay, for God's sake, comrade mine,' cried
Calandrino, 'go thither and bring me back word how the case standeth,
for I feel I know not what within me.'

Accordingly, Bruno posted off to Master Simone and coming thither
before the girl who brought the water, acquainted him with the case;
wherefore, the maid being come and the physician, having seen the
water, he said to her, 'Begone and bid Calandrino keep himself well
warm, and I will come to him incontinent and tell him that which
aileth him and what he must do.' The maid reported this to her master
nor was it long before the physician and Bruno came, whereupon the
former, seating himself beside Calandrino, fell to feeling his pulse
and presently, the patient's wife being there present, he said,
'Harkye, Calandrino, to speak to thee as a friend, there aileth thee
nought but that thou art with child.' When Calandrino heard this, he
fell a-roaring for dolour and said, 'Woe's me! Tessa, this is thy
doing, for that thou wilt still be uppermost; I told thee how it would
be.' The lady, who was a very modest person, hearing her husband speak
thus, blushed all red for shamefastness and hanging her head, went out
of the room, without answering a word; whilst Calandrino, pursuing his
complaint, said, 'Alack, wretch that I am! How shall I do? How shall I
bring forth this child? Whence shall he issue? I see plainly I am a
dead man, through the mad lust of yonder wife of mine, whom God make
as woeful as I would fain be glad! Were I as well as I am not, I would
arise and deal her so many and such buffets that I would break every
bone in her body; albeit it e'en serveth me right, for that I should
never have suffered her get the upper hand; but, for certain, an I
come off alive this time, she may die of desire ere she do it again.'

Bruno and Buffalmacco and Nello were like to burst with laughter,
hearing Calandrino's words; however, they contained themselves, but
Doctor Simple-Simon[427] laughed so immoderately that you might have
drawn every tooth in his head. Finally, Calandrino commending himself
to the physician and praying him give him aid and counsel in this his
strait, the latter said to him, 'Calandrino, I will not have thee lose
heart; for, praised be God, we have taken the case so betimes that, in
a few days and with a little trouble, I will deliver thee thereof; but
it will cost thee some little expense.' 'Alack, doctor mine,' cried
Calandrino, 'ay, for the love of God, do it! I have here two hundred
crowns, wherewith I was minded to buy me an estate; take them all, if
need be, so I be not brought to bed; for I know not how I should do,
seeing I hear women make such a terrible outcry, whereas they are
about to bear child, for all they have ample commodity therefor, that
methinketh, if I had that pain to suffer, I should die ere I came to
the bringing forth.' Quoth the doctor, 'Have no fear of that; I will
let make thee a certain ptisan of distilled waters, very good and
pleasant to drink, which will in three mornings' time carry off
everything and leave thee sounder than a fish; but look thou be more
discreet for the future and suffer not thyself fall again into these
follies. Now for this water it behoveth us have three pairs of fine
fat capons, and for other things that are required thereanent, do thou
give one of these (thy comrades) five silver crowns, so he may buy
them, and let carry everything to my shop; and to-morrow, in God's
name, I will send thee the distilled water aforesaid, whereof thou
shalt proceed to drink a good beakerful at a time.' 'Doctor mine,'
replied Calandrino, 'I put myself in your hands'; and giving Bruno
five crowns and money for three pairs of capons, he besought him to
oblige him by taking the pains to buy these things.

[Footnote 427: _Scimmione_ (lit. ape), a contemptuous distortion of
_Simone_.]

The physician then took his leave and letting make a little
clary,[428] despatched it to Calandrino, whilst Bruno, buying the
capons and other things necessary for making good cheer, ate them in
company with his comrades and Master Simone. Calandrino drank of his
clary three mornings, after which the doctor came to him, together
with his comrades, and feeling his pulse, said to him, 'Calandrino,
thou art certainly cured; wherefore henceforth thou mayst safely go
about thine every business nor abide longer at home for this.'
Accordingly, Calandrino arose, overjoyed, and went about his
occasions, mightily extolling, as often as he happened to speak with
any one, the fine cure that Master Simone had wrought of him, in that
he had unbegotten him with child in three days' time, without any
pain; whilst Bruno and Buffalmacco and Nello abode well pleased at
having contrived with this device to overreach his niggardliness,
albeit Dame Tessa, smoking the cheat, rated her husband amain
thereanent."

[Footnote 428: _Chiarea._ According to the commentators, the
composition of this drink is unknown, but that of clary, a sort of
hippocras or spiced wine _clear-strained_ (whence the name), offers no
difficulty to the student of old English literature.]




THE FOURTH STORY

[Day the Ninth]

     CECCO FORTARRIGO GAMETH AWAY AT BUONCONVENTO ALL HIS GOOD
     AND THE MONIES OF CECCO ANGIOLIERI [HIS MASTER;] MOREOVER,
     RUNNING AFTER THE LATTER, IN HIS SHIRT, AND AVOUCHING THAT
     HE HATH ROBBED HIM, HE CAUSETH HIM BE TAKEN OF THE
     COUNTRYFOLK; THEN, DONNING ANGIOLIERI'S CLOTHES AND MOUNTING
     HIS PALFREY, HE MAKETH OFF AND LEAVETH THE OTHER IN HIS
     SHIRT


Calandrino's speech concerning his wife had been hearkened of all the
company with the utmost laughter; then, Filostrato being silent,
Neifile, as the queen willed it, began, "Noble ladies, were it not
uneather for men to show forth unto others their wit and their worth
than it is for them to exhibit their folly and their vice, many would
weary themselves in vain to put a bridle on their tongues; and this
hath right well been made manifest to you by the folly of Calandrino,
who had no call, in seeking to be made whole of the ailment in which
his simplicity caused him believe, to publish the privy diversions of
his wife; and this hath brought to my mind somewhat of contrary
purport to itself, to wit, a story of how one man's knavery got the
better of another's wit, to the grievous hurt and confusion of the
over-reached one, the which it pleaseth me to relate to you.

There were, then, in Siena, not many years ago, two (as far as age
went) full-grown men, each of whom was called Cecco. One was the son
of Messer Angiolieri and the other of Messer Fortarrigo, and albeit in
most other things they sorted ill of fashions one with the other, they
were natheless so far of accord in one particular, to wit, that they
were both hated of their fathers, that they were by reason thereof
grown friends and companied often together. After awhile, Angiolieri,
who was both a handsome man and a well-mannered, himseeming he could
ill live at Siena of the provision assigned him of his father and
hearing that a certain cardinal, a great patron of his, was come into
the Marches of Ancona as the Pope's Legate, determined to betake
himself to him, thinking thus to better his condition. Accordingly,
acquainting his father with his purpose, he took order with him to
have at once that which he was to give him in six months, so he might
clothe and horse himself and make an honourable figure. As he went
seeking some one whom he might carry with him for his service, the
thing came to Fortarrigo's knowledge, whereupon he presently repaired
to Angiolieri and besought him, as best he knew, to carry him with
him, offering himself to be to him lackey and serving-man and all,
without any wage beyond his expenses paid. Angiolieri answered that he
would nowise take him, not but he knew him to be right well sufficient
unto every manner of service, but for that he was a gambler and
bytimes a drunkard, to boot. But the other replied that he would
without fail keep himself from both of these defaults and affirmed it
unto him with oaths galore, adding so many prayers that Angiolieri was
prevailed upon and said that he was content.

Accordingly, they both set out one morning and went to dine at
Buonconvento, where, after dinner, the heat being great, Angiolieri
let make ready a bed at the inn and undressing himself, with
Fortarrigo's aid, went to sleep, charging the latter call him at the
stroke of none. As soon as his master was asleep, Fortarrigo betook
himself to the tavern and there, after drinking awhile, he fell to
gaming with certain men, who in a trice won of him some money he had
and after, the very clothes he had on his back; whereupon, desirous of
retrieving himself, he repaired, in his shirt as he was, to
Angiolieri's chamber and seeing him fast asleep, took from his purse
what monies he had and returning to play, lost these as he had lost
the others. Presently, Angiolieri awoke and arising, dressed himself
and enquired for Fortarrigo. The latter was not to be found and
Angiolieri, concluding him to be asleep, drunken, somewhere, as was
bytimes his wont, determined to leave him be and get himself another
servant at Corsignano. Accordingly, he caused put his saddle and his
valise on a palfrey he had and thinking to pay the reckoning, so he
might get him gone, found himself without a penny; whereupon great was
the outcry and all the hostelry was in an uproar, Angiolieri declaring
that he had been robbed there and threatening to have the host and all
his household carried prisoners to Siena.

At this moment up came Fortarrigo in his shirt, thinking to take his
master's clothes, as he had taken his money, and seeing the latter
ready to mount, said, 'What is this, Angiolieri? Must we needs be gone
already? Good lack, wait awhile; there will be one here forthwith who
hath my doublet in pawn for eight-and-thirty shillings; and I am
certain that he will render it up for five-and-thirty, money down.' As
he spoke, there came one who certified Angiolieri that it was
Fortarrigo who had robbed him of his monies, by showing him the sum of
those which the latter had lost at play; wherefore he was sore
incensed and loaded Fortarrigo with reproaches; and had he not feared
others more than he feared God, he had done him a mischief; then,
threatening to have him strung up by the neck or outlawed from Siena,
he mounted to horse. Fortarrigo, as if he spoke not to him, but to
another, said, 'Good lack, Angiolieri, let be for the nonce this talk
that skilleth not a straw, and have regard unto this; by redeeming
it[429] forthright, we may have it again for five-and-thirty
shillings; whereas, if we tarry but till to-morrow, he will not take
less than the eight-and-thirty he lent me thereon; and this favour he
doth me for that I staked it after his counsel. Marry, why should we
not better ourselves by these three shillings?'

[Footnote 429: _i.e._ the doublet.]

Angiolieri, hearing him talk thus, lost all patience (more by token
that he saw himself eyed askance by the bystanders, who manifestly
believed, not that Fortarrigo had gamed away his monies, but that he
had yet monies of Fortarrigo's in hand) and said to him, 'What have I
to do with thy doublet? Mayst thou be strung up by the neck, since not
only hast thou robbed me and gambled away my money, but hinderest me
to boot in my journey, and now thou makest mock of me.' However,
Fortarrigo still stood to it, as it were not spoken to him and said,
'Ecod, why wilt thou not better me these three shillings? Thinkest
thou I shall not be able to oblige thee therewith another time?
Prithee, do it, an thou have any regard for me. Why all this haste? We
shall yet reach Torrenieri betimes this evening. Come, find the purse;
thou knowest I might ransack all Siena and not find a doublet to suit
me so well as this; and to think I should let yonder fellow have it
for eight-and-thirty shillings! It is worth yet forty shillings or
more, so that thou wouldst worsen me in two ways.'[430]

[Footnote 430: _i.e._ do me a double injury.]

Angiolieri, beyond measure exasperated to see himself first robbed and
now held in parley after this fashion, made him no further answer,
but, turning his palfrey's head, took the road to Torrenieri, whilst
Fortarrigo, bethinking himself of a subtle piece of knavery, proceeded
to trot after him in his shirt good two miles, still requiring him of
his doublet. Presently, Angiolieri pricking on amain, to rid his ears
of the annoy, Fortarrigo espied some husbandmen in a field, adjoining
the highway in advance of him, and cried out to them, saying, 'Stop
him, stop him!' Accordingly, they ran up, some with spades and others
with mattocks, and presenting themselves in the road before
Angiolieri, concluding that he had robbed him who came crying after
him in his shirt, stopped and took him. It availed him little to tell
them who he was and how the case stood, and Fortarrigo, coming up,
said with an angry air, 'I know not what hindereth me from slaying
thee, disloyal thief that thou wast to make off with my gear!' Then,
turning to the countrymen, 'See, gentlemen,' quoth he, 'in what a
plight he left me at the inn, having first gamed away all his own! I
may well say by God and by you have I gotten back this much, and
thereof I shall still be beholden to you.'

Angiolieri told them his own story, but his words were not heeded;
nay, Fortarrigo, with the aid of the countrymen, pulled him off his
palfrey and stripping him, clad himself in his clothes; then, mounting
to horse, he left him in his shirt and barefoot and returned to Siena,
avouching everywhere that he had won the horse and clothes of
Angiolieri, whilst the latter, who had thought to go, as a rich man,
to the cardinal in the Marches, returned to Buonconvento, poor and in
his shirt, nor dared for shamefastness go straight back to Siena, but,
some clothes being lent him, he mounted the rouncey that Fortarrigo
had ridden and betook himself to his kinsfolk at Corsignano, with whom
he abode till such time as he was furnished anew by his father. On
this wise Fortarrigo's knavery baffled Angiolieri's fair
advisement,[431] albeit his villainy was not left by the latter
unpunished in due time and place."

[Footnote 431: Syn. goodly design of foresight (_buono avviso_).]




THE FIFTH STORY

[Day the Ninth]

     CALANDRINO FALLETH IN LOVE WITH A WENCH AND BRUNO WRITETH
     HIM A TALISMAN, WHEREWITH WHEN HE TOUCHETH HER, SHE GOETH
     WITH HIM; AND HIS WIFE FINDING THEM TOGETHER, THERE BETIDETH
     HIM GRIEVOUS TROUBLE AND ANNOY


Neifile's short story being finished and the company having passed it
over without overmuch talk or laughter, the queen turned to Fiammetta
and bade her follow on, to which she replied all blithely that she
would well and began, "Gentlest ladies, there is, as methinketh you
may know, nothing, how much soever it may have been talked thereof,
but will still please, provided whoso is minded to speak of it know
duly to choose the time and the place that befit it. Wherefore, having
regard to our intent in being here (for that we are here to make merry
and divert ourselves and not for otherwhat), meseemeth that everything
which may afford mirth and pleasance hath here both due place and due
time; and albeit it may have been a thousand times discoursed thereof,
it should natheless be none the less pleasing, though one speak of it
as much again. Wherefore, notwithstanding it hath been many times
spoken among us of the sayings and doings of Calandrino, I will make
bold, considering, as Filostrato said awhile ago, that these are all
diverting, to tell you yet another story thereof, wherein were I
minded to swerve from the fact, I had very well known to disguise and
recount it under other names; but, for that, in the telling of a
story, to depart from the truth of things betided detracteth greatly
from the listener's pleasure, I will e'en tell it you in its true
shape, moved by the reason aforesaid.

Niccolo Cornacchini was a townsman of ours and a rich man and had,
among his other possessions, a fine estate at Camerata, whereon he let
build a magnificent mansion and agreed with Bruno and Buffalmacco to
paint it all for him; and they, for that the work was great, joined to
themselves Nello and Calandrino and fell to work. Thither, for that
there was none of the family in the house, although there were one or
two chambers furnished with beds and other things needful and an old
serving-woman abode there, as guardian of the place, a son of the said
Niccolo, by name Filippo, being young and without a wife, was wont
bytimes to bring some wench or other for his diversion and keep her
there a day or two and after send her away. It chanced once, among
other times, that he brought thither one called Niccolosa, whom a lewd
fellow, by name Mangione, kept at his disposal in a house at Camaldoli
and let out on hire. She was a woman of a fine person and well clad
and for her kind well enough mannered and spoken.

One day at noontide, she having come forth her chamber in a white
petticoat, with her hair twisted about her head, and being in act to
wash her hands and face at a well that was in the courtyard of the
mansion, it chanced that Calandrino came thither for water and saluted
her familiarly. She returned him his greeting and fell to eying him,
more because he seemed to her an odd sort of fellow than for any fancy
she had for him; whereupon he likewise fell a-considering her and
himseeming she was handsome, he began to find his occasions for
abiding there and returned not to his comrades with the water, but,
knowing her not, dared not say aught to her. She, who had noted his
looking, glanced at him from time to time, to make game of him,
heaving some small matter of sighs the while; wherefore Calandrino
fell suddenly over head and ears in love with her and left not the
courtyard till she was recalled by Filippo into the chamber.
Therewithal he returned to work, but did nought but sigh, which Bruno,
who had still an eye to his doings, for that he took great delight in
his fashions, remarking, 'What a devil aileth thee, friend
Calandrino?' quoth he. 'Thou dost nought but sigh.' 'Comrade,'
answered Calandrino, 'had I but some one to help me, I should fare
well.' 'How so?' enquired Bruno; and Calandrino replied, 'It must not
be told to any; but there is a lass down yonder, fairer than a fairy,
who hath fallen so mightily in love with me that 'twould seem to thee
a grave matter. I noted it but now, whenas I went for the water.'
'Ecod,' cried Bruno, 'look she be not Filippo's wife.' Quoth
Calandrino, 'Methinketh it is she, for that he called her and she went
to him in the chamber; but what of that? In matters of this kind I
would jockey Christ himself, let alone Filippo; and to tell thee the
truth, comrade, she pleaseth me more than I can tell thee.' 'Comrade,'
answered Bruno, 'I will spy thee out who she is, and if she be
Filippo's wife, I will order thine affairs for thee in a brace of
words, for she is a great friend of mine. But how shall we do, so
Buffalmacco may not know? I can never get a word with her, but he is
with me.' Quoth Calandrino, 'Of Buffalmacco I reck not; but we must
beware of Nello, for that he is Tessa's kinsman and would mar us
everything.' And Bruno said, 'True.'

Now he knew very well who the wench was, for that he had seen her come
and moreover Filippo had told him. Accordingly, Calandrino having left
work awhile and gone to get a sight of her, Bruno told Nello and
Buffalmacco everything and they took order together in secret what
they should do with him in the matter of this his enamourment. When he
came back, Bruno said to him softly, 'Hast seen her?' 'Alack, yes,'
replied Calandrino; 'she hath slain me.' Quoth Bruno, 'I must go see
an it be she I suppose; and if it be so, leave me do.' Accordingly, he
went down into the courtyard and finding Filippo and Niccolosa there,
told them precisely what manner of man Calandrino was and took order
with them of that which each of them should do and say, so they might
divert themselves with the lovesick gull and make merry over his
passion. Then, returning to Calandrino, he said, 'It is indeed she;
wherefore needs must the thing be very discreetly managed, for, should
Filippo get wind of it, all the water in the Arno would not wash us.
But what wouldst thou have me say to her on thy part, if I should
chance to get speech of her?' 'Faith,' answered Calandrino, 'thou
shalt tell her, to begin with, that I will her a thousand measures of
that good stuff that getteth with child, and after, that I am her
servant and if she would have aught.... Thou takest me?' 'Ay,' said
Bruno, 'leave me do.'

Presently, supper-time being come, the painters left work and went
down into the courtyard, where they found Filippo and Niccolosa and
tarried there awhile, to oblige Calandrino. The latter fell to ogling
Niccolosa and making the oddest grimaces in the world, such and so
many that a blind man would have remarked them. She on her side did
everything that she thought apt to inflame him, and Filippo, in
accordance with the instructions he had of Bruno, made believe to talk
with Buffalmacco and the others and to have no heed of this, whilst
taking the utmost diversion in Calandrino's fashions. However, after a
while, to the latter's exceeding chagrin, they took their leave and as
they returned to Florence, Bruno said to Calandrino, 'I can tell thee
thou makest her melt like ice in the sun. Cock's body, wert thou to
fetch thy rebeck and warble thereto some of those amorous ditties of
thine, thou wouldst cause her cast herself out of window to come to
thee.' Quoth Calandrino, 'Deemest thou, gossip? Deemest thou I should
do well to fetch it?' 'Ay, do I,' answered Bruno; and Calandrino went
on, 'Thou wouldst not credit me this morning, whenas I told it thee;
but, for certain, gossip, methinketh I know better than any man alive
to do what I will. Who, other than I, had known to make such a lady so
quickly in love with me? Not your trumpeting young braggarts,[432] I
warrant you, who are up and down all day long and could not make
shift, in a thousand years, to get together three handsful of cherry
stones. I would fain have thee see me with the rebeck; 'twould be fine
sport for thee. I will have thee to understand once for all that I am
no dotard, as thou deemest me, and this she hath right well perceived,
she; but I will make her feel it othergates fashion, so once I get my
claw into her back; by the very body of Christ, I will lead her such a
dance that she will run after me, as the madwoman after her child.'
'Ay,' rejoined Bruno, 'I warrant me thou wilt rummage her; methinketh
I see thee, with those teeth of thine that were made for virginal
jacks,[433] bite that little vermeil mouth of hers and those her
cheeks, that show like two roses, and after eat her all up.'

[Footnote 432: _Giovani di tromba marina._ The sense seems as above;
the commentators say that _giovani di tromba marina_ is a name given
to those youths who go trumpeting about everywhere the favours
accorded them by women; but the _tromba marina_ is a _stringed_ (not a
wind) _instrument_, a sort of primitive violoncello with one string.]

[Footnote 433: "Your teeth did dance like virginal jacks."--_Ben
Jonson._]

Calandrino, hearing this, fancied himself already at it and went
singing and skipping, so overjoyed that he was like to jump out of his
skin. On the morrow, having brought the rebeck, he, to the great
diversion of all the company, sang sundry songs thereto; and in brief,
he was taken with such an itch for the frequent seeing of her that he
wrought not a whit, but ran a thousand times a day, now to the window,
now to the door and anon into the courtyard, to get a look at her,
whereof she, adroitly carrying out Bruno's instructions, afforded him
ample occasion. Bruno, on his side, answered his messages in her name
and bytimes brought him others as from her; and whenas she was not
there, which was mostly the case, he carried him letters from her,
wherein she gave him great hopes of compassing his desire, feigning
herself at home with her kinsfolk, where he might not presently see
her. On this wise, Bruno, with the aid of Buffalmacco, who had a hand
in the matter, kept the game afoot and had the greatest sport in the
world with Calandrino's antics, causing him give them bytimes, as at
his mistress's request, now an ivory comb, now a purse and anon a
knife and such like toys, for which they brought him in return divers
paltry counterfeit rings of no value, with which he was vastly
delighted; and to boot, they had of him, for their pains, store of
dainty collations and other small matters of entertainment, so they
might be diligent about his affairs.

On this wise they kept him in play good two months, without getting a
step farther, at the end of which time, seeing the work draw to an end
and bethinking himself that, an he brought not his amours to an issue
in the meantime, he might never have another chance thereof, he began
to urge and importune Bruno amain; wherefore, when next the girl came
to the mansion, Bruno, having first taken order with her and Filippo
of what was to be done, said to Calandrino, 'Harkye, gossip, yonder
lady hath promised me a good thousand times to do that which thou
wouldst have and yet doth nought thereof, and meseemeth she leadeth
thee by the nose; wherefore, since she doth it not as she promiseth,
we will an it like thee, make her do it, will she, nill she.' 'Ecod,
ay!' answered Calandrino. 'For the love of God let it be done
speedily.' Quoth Bruno, 'Will thy heart serve thee to touch her with a
script I shall give thee?' 'Ay, sure,' replied Calandrino; and the
other, 'Then do thou make shift to bring me a piece of virgin
parchment and a live bat, together with three grains of frankincense
and a candle that hath been blessed by the priest, and leave me do.'
Accordingly, Calandrino lay in wait all the next night with his
engines to catch a bat and having at last taken one, carried it to
Bruno, with the other things required; whereupon the latter,
withdrawing to a chamber, scribbled divers toys of his fashion upon
the parchment, in characters of his own devising, and brought it to
him, saying, 'Know, Calandrino, that, if thou touch her with this
script, she will incontinent follow thee and do what thou wilt.
Wherefore, if Filippo should go abroad anywhither to-day, do thou
contrive to accost her on some pretext or other and touch her; then
betake thyself to the barn yonder, which is the best place here for
thy purpose, for that no one ever frequenteth there. Thou wilt find
she will come thither, and when she is there, thou knowest well what
thou hast to do.' Calandrino was the joyfullest man alive and took the
script, saying, 'Gossip, leave me do.'

Now Nello, whom Calandrino mistrusted, had as much diversion of the
matter as the others and bore a hand with them in making sport of him:
wherefore, of accord with Bruno, he betook himself to Florence to
Calandrino's wife and said to her, 'Tessa, thou knowest what a
beating Calandrino gave thee without cause the day he came back, laden
with stones from the Mugnone; wherefore I mean to have thee avenge
thyself on him; and if thou do it not, hold me no more for kinsman or
for friend. He hath fallen in love with a woman over yonder, and she
is lewd enough to go very often closeting herself with him. A little
while agone, they appointed each other to foregather together this
very day; wherefore I would have thee come thither and lie in wait for
him and chastise him well.' When the lady heard this, it seemed to her
no jesting matter, but, starting to her feet, she fell a-saying,
'Alack, common thief that thou art, is it thus that thou usest me? By
Christ His Cross, it shall not pass thus, but I will pay thee
therefor!' Then, taking her mantle and a little maid to bear her
company, she started off at a good round pace for the mansion,
together with Nello.

As soon as Bruno saw the latter afar off, he said to Filippo, 'Here
cometh our friend'; whereupon the latter, betaking himself whereas
Calandrino and the others were at work, said, 'Masters, needs must I
go presently to Florence; work with a will.' Then, going away, he hid
himself in a place when he could, without being seen, see what
Calandrino should do. The latter, as soon as he deemed Filippo
somewhat removed, came down into the courtyard and finding Niccolosa
there alone, entered into talk with her, whilst she, who knew well
enough what she had to do, drew near him and entreated him somewhat
more familiarly than of wont. Thereupon he touched her with the script
and no sooner had he done so than he turned, without saying a word,
and made for the barn, whither she followed him. As soon as she was
within, she shut the door and taking him in her arms, threw him down
on the straw that was on the floor; then, mounting astride of him and
holding him with her hands on his shoulders, without letting him draw
near her face, she gazed at him, as he were her utmost desire, and
said, 'O sweet my Calandrino, heart of my body, my soul, my treasure,
my comfort, how long have I desired to have thee and to be able to
hold thee at my wish! Thou hast drawn all the thread out of my shift
with thy gentilesse; thou hast tickled my heart with thy rebeck. Can
it be true that I hold thee?' Calandrino, who could scarce stir, said,
'For God's sake, sweet my soul, let me buss thee.' 'Marry,' answered
she, 'thou art in a mighty hurry. Let me first take my fill of looking
upon thee; let me sate mine eyes with that sweet face of thine.'

Now Bruno and Buffalmacco were come to join Filippo and all three
heard and saw all this. As Calandrino was now offering to kiss
Niccolosa perforce, up came Nello with Dame Tessa and said, as soon as
he reached the place, 'I vow to God they are together.' Then, coming
up to the door of the barn, the lady, who was all a-fume with rage,
dealt it such a push with her hands that she sent it flying, and
entering, saw Niccolosa astride of Calandrino. The former, seeing the
lady, started up in haste and taking to flight, made off to join
Filippo, whilst Dame Tessa fell tooth and nail upon Calandrino, who
was still on his back, and clawed all his face; then, clutching him
by the hair and haling him hither and thither, 'Thou sorry shitten
cur,' quoth she, 'dost thou then use me thus? Besotted dotard that
thou art, accursed be the weal I have willed thee! Marry, seemeth it
to thee thou hast not enough to do at home, that thou must go
wantoning it in other folk's preserves? A fine gallant, i'faith! Dost
thou not know thyself, losel that thou art? Dost thou not know
thyself, good for nought? Wert thou to be squeezed dry, there would
not come as much juice from thee as might suffice for a sauce. Cock's
faith, thou canst not say it was Tessa that was presently in act to
get thee with child, God make her sorry, who ever she is, for a scurvy
trull as she must be to have a mind to so fine a jewel as thou!'

Calandrino, seeing his wife come, abode neither dead nor alive and had
not the hardihood to make any defence against her; but, rising, all
scratched and flayed and baffled as he was, and picking up his bonnet,
he fell to humbly beseeching her leave crying out, an she would not
have him cut in pieces, for that she who had been with him was the
wife of the master of the house; whereupon quoth she, 'So be it, God
give her an ill year.' At this moment, Bruno and Buffalmacco, having
laughed their fill at all this, in company with Filippo and Niccolosa,
came up, feigning to be attracted by the clamour, and having with no
little ado appeased the lady, counselled Calandrino betake himself to
Florence and return thither no more, lest Filippo should get wind of
the matter and do him a mischief. Accordingly he returned to Florence,
chapfallen and woebegone, all flayed and scratched, and never ventured
to go thither again; but, being plagued and harassed night and day
with his wife's reproaches, he made an end of his fervent love, having
given much cause for laughter to his companions, no less than to
Niccolosa and Filippo."




THE SIXTH STORY

[Day the Ninth]

     TWO YOUNG GENTLEMEN LODGE THE NIGHT WITH AN INNKEEPER,
     WHEREOF ONE GOETH TO LIE WITH THE HOST'S DAUGHTER, WHILST
     HIS WIFE UNWITTINGLY COUCHETH WITH THE OTHER; AFTER WHICH HE
     WHO LAY WITH THE GIRL GETTETH HIM TO BED WITH HER FATHER AND
     TELLETH HIM ALL, THINKING TO BESPEAK HIS COMRADE.
     THEREWITHAL THEY COME TO WORDS, BUT THE WIFE, PERCEIVING HER
     MISTAKE, ENTERETH HER DAUGHTER'S BED AND THENCE WITH CERTAIN
     WORDS APPEASETH EVERYTHING


Calandrino, who had otherwhiles afforded the company matter for
laughter, made them laugh this time also, and whenas the ladies had
left devising of his fashions, the queen bade Pamfilo tell, whereupon
quoth he, "Laudable ladies, the name of Niccolosa, Calandrino's
mistress, hath brought me back to mind a story of another Niccolosa,
which it pleaseth me to tell you, for that therein you shall see how a
goodwife's ready wit did away a great scandal.

In the plain of Mugnone there was not long since a good man who gave
wayfarers to eat and drink for their money, and although he was poor
and had but a small house, he bytimes at a pinch gave, not every one,
but sundry acquaintances, a night's lodging. He had a wife, a very
handsome woman, by whom he had two children, whereof one was a fine
buxom lass of some fifteen or sixteen years of age, who was not yet
married, and the other a little child, not yet a year old, whom his
mother herself suckled. Now a young gentleman of our city, a sprightly
and pleasant youth, who was often in those parts, had cast his eyes on
the girl and loved her ardently; and she, who gloried greatly in being
beloved of a youth of his quality, whilst studying with pleasing
fashions to maintain him in her love, became no less enamoured of him,
and more than once, by mutual accord, this their love had had the
desired effect, but that Pinuccio (for such was the young man's name)
feared to bring reproach upon his mistress and himself. However, his
ardour waxing from day to day, he could no longer master his desire to
foregather with her and bethought himself to find a means of
harbouring with her father, doubting not, from his acquaintance with
the ordinance of the latter's house, but he might in that event
contrive to pass the night in her company, without any being the
wiser; and no sooner had he conceived this design than he proceeded
without delay to carry it into execution.

Accordingly, in company with a trusty friend of his called Adriano,
who knew his love, he late one evening hired a couple of hackneys and
set thereon two pairs of saddle-bags, filled belike with straw, with
which they set out from Florence and fetching a compass, rode till
they came overagainst the plain of Mugnone, it being by this night;
then, turning about, as they were on their way back from Romagna, they
made for the good man's house and knocked at the door. The host, being
very familiar with both of them, promptly opened the door and Pinuccio
said to him, 'Look you, thou must needs harbour us this night. We
thought to reach Florence before dark, but have not availed to make
such haste but that we find ourselves here, as thou seest at this
hour.' 'Pinuccio,' answered the host, 'thou well knowest how little
commodity I have to lodge such men as you are; however, since the
night hath e'en overtaken you here and there is no time for you to go
otherwhere, I will gladly harbour you as I may.' The two young men
accordingly alighted and entered the inn, where they first eased[434]
their hackneys and after supper with the host, having taken good care
to bring provision with them.

[Footnote 434: _Adagiarono_, _i.e._ unsaddled and stabled and fed
them.]

Now the good man had but one very small bedchamber, wherein were three
pallet-beds set as best he knew, two at one end of the room and the
third overagainst them at the other end; nor for all that was there so
much space left that one could go there otherwise than straitly. The
least ill of the three the host let make ready for the two friends and
put them to lie there; then, after a while neither of the gentlemen
being asleep, though both made a show thereof, he caused his daughter
betake herself to bed in one of the two others and lay down himself
in the third, with his wife, who set by the bedside the cradle wherein
she had her little son. Things being ordered after this fashion and
Pinuccio having seen everything, after a while, himseeming that every
one was asleep, he arose softly and going to the bed where slept the
girl beloved of him, laid himself beside the latter, by whom, for all
she did it timorously, he was joyfully received, and with her he
proceeded to take of that pleasure which both most desired. Whilst
Pinuccio abode thus with his mistress, it chanced that a cat caused
certain things fall, which the good wife, awaking, heard; whereupon,
fearing lest it were otherwhat, she arose, as she was, in the dark and
betook herself whereas she had heard the noise.

Meanwhile, Adriano, without intent aforethought, arose by chance for
some natural occasion and going to despatch this, came upon the
cradle, whereas it had been set by the good wife, and unable to pass
without moving it, took it up and set it down beside his own bed;
then, having accomplished that for which he had arisen, he returned
and betook himself to bed again, without recking of the cradle. The
good wife, having searched and found the thing which had fallen was
not what she thought, never troubled herself to kindle a light, to see
it, but, chiding the cat, returned to the chamber and groped her way
to the bed where her husband lay. Finding the cradle not there, 'Mercy
o' me!' quoth she in herself. 'See what I was about to do! As I am a
Christian, I had well nigh gone straight to our guest's bed.' Then,
going a little farther and finding the cradle, she entered the bed
whereby it stood and laid herself down beside Adriano, thinking to
couch with her husband. Adriano, who was not yet asleep, feeling this,
received her well and joyously and laying her aboard in a trice,
clapped on all sail, to the no small contentment of the lady.

Meanwhile, Pinuccio, fearing lest sleep should surprise him with his
lass and having taken of her his fill of pleasure, arose from her, to
return to his own bed, to sleep, and finding the cradle in his way,
took the adjoining bed for that of his host; wherefore, going a little
farther, he lay down with the latter, who awoke at his coming.
Pinuccio, deeming himself beside Adriano, said, 'I tell thee there
never was so sweet a creature as is Niccolosa. Cock's body, I have had
with her the rarest sport ever man had with woman, more by token that
I have gone upwards of six times into the country, since I left thee.'
The host, hearing this talk and being not overwell pleased therewith,
said first in himself, 'What a devil doth this fellow here?' Then,
more angered than well-advised, 'Pinuccio,' quoth he, 'this hath been
a great piece of villainy of thine, and I know not why thou shouldst
have used me thus; but, by the body of God, I will pay thee for it!!'
Pinuccio, who was not the wisest lad in the world, seeing his mistake,
addressed not himself to mend it as best he might, but said, 'Of what
wilt thou pay me? What canst thou do to me?' Therewithal the hostess,
who thought herself with her husband, said to Adriano, 'Good lack,
hark to our guests how they are at I know not what words together!'
Quoth Adriano, laughing, 'Leave them do, God land them in an ill
year! They drank overmuch yesternight.'

The good wife, herseeming she had heard her husband scold and hearing
Adriano speak, incontinent perceived where and with whom she had been;
whereupon, like a wise woman as she was, she arose forthright, without
saying a word, and taking her little son's cradle, carried it at a
guess, for that there was no jot of light to be seen in the chamber,
to the side of the bed where her daughter slept and lay down with the
latter; then, as if she had been aroused by her husband's clamour, she
called him and enquired what was to do between himself and Pinuccio.
He answered, 'Hearest thou not what he saith he hath done this night
unto Niccolosa?' 'Marry,' quoth she, 'he lieth in his throat, for he
was never abed with Niccolosa, seeing that I have lain here all night;
more by token that I have not been able to sleep a wink; and thou art
an ass to believe him. You men drink so much of an evening that you do
nothing but dream all night and fare hither and thither, without
knowing it, and fancy you do wonders. 'Tis a thousand pities you don't
break your necks. But what doth Pinuccio yonder? Why bideth he not in
his own bed?' Adriano, on his part, seeing how adroitly the good wife
went about to cover her own shame and that of her daughter, chimed in
with, 'Pinuccio, I have told thee an hundred times not to go abroad,
for that this thy trick of arising in thy sleep and telling for true
the extravagances thou dreamest will bring thee into trouble some day
or other. Come back here, God give thee an ill night!'

The host, hearing what his wife and Adriano said, began to believe in
good earnest that Pinuccio was dreaming; and accordingly, taking him
by the shoulders, he fell to shaking and calling him, saying,
'Pinuccio, awake; return to thine own bed.' Pinuccio having
apprehended all that had been said began to wander off into other
extravagances, after the fashion of a man a-dream; whereat the host
set up the heartiest laughter in the world. At last, he made believe
to awake for stress of shaking, and calling to Adriano, said, 'Is it
already day, that thou callest me?' 'Ay,' answered the other, 'come
hither.' Accordingly, Pinuccio, dissembling and making a show of being
sleepy-eyed, arose at last from beside the host and went back to bed
with Adriano. The day come and they being risen, the host fell to
laughing and mocking at Pinuccio and his dreams; and so they passed
from one jest to another, till the young men, having saddled their
rounceys and strapped on their valises and drunken with the host,
remounted to horse and rode away to Florence, no less content with the
manner in which the thing had betided than with the effect itself
thereof. Thereafter Pinuccio found other means of foregathering with
Niccolosa, who vowed to her mother that he had certainly dreamt the
thing; wherefore the goodwife, remembering her of Adriano's
embracements, inwardly avouched herself alone to have waked."




THE SEVENTH STORY

[Day the Ninth]

     TALANO DI MOLESE DREAMETH THAT A WOLF MANGLETH ALL HIS
     WIFE'S NECK AND FACE AND BIDDETH HER BEWARE THEREOF; BUT SHE
     PAYETH NO HEED TO HIS WARNING AND IT BEFALLETH HER EVEN AS
     HE HAD DREAMED


Pamfilo's story being ended and the goodwife's presence of mind having
been commended of all, the queen bade Pampinea tell hers and she
thereupon began, "It hath been otherwhile discoursed among us,
charming ladies, of the truths foreshown by dreams, the which many of
our sex scoff at; wherefore, notwithstanding that which hath been said
thereof, I shall not scruple to tell you, in a very few words, that
which no great while ago befell a she-neighbour of mine for not giving
credit to a dream of herself seen by her husband.

I know not if you were acquainted with Talano di Molese, a very
worshipful man, who took to wife a young lady called Margarita, fair
over all others, but so humoursome, ill-conditioned and froward that
she would do nought of other folk's judgment, nor could others do
aught to her liking; the which, irksome as it was to Talano to endure,
natheless, as he could no otherwise, needs must he put up with. It
chanced one night that, being with this Margarita of his at an estate
he had in the country, himseemed in his sleep he saw his wife go
walking in a very fair wood which they had not far from their house,
and as she went, himseemed there came forth of a thicket a great and
fierce wolf, which sprang straight at her throat and pulling her to
the ground, enforced himself to carry her off, whilst she screamed for
aid; and after, she winning free of his fangs, it seemed he had marred
all her throat and face. Accordingly, when he arose in the morning, he
said to the lady, 'Wife, albeit thy frowardness hath never suffered me
to have a good day with thee, yet it would grieve me should ill betide
thee; wherefore, an thou wilt hearken to my counsel, thou wilt not go
forth the house to-day'; and being asked of her why, he orderly
recounted to her his dream.

The lady shook her head and said, 'Who willeth thee ill, dreameth thee
ill. Thou feignest thyself mighty careful of me; but thou dreamest of
me that which thou wouldst fain see come to pass; and thou mayst be
assured that I will be careful both to-day and always not to gladden
thee with this or other mischance of mine.' Quoth Talano, 'I knew thou
wouldst say thus; for that such thanks still hath he who combeth a
scald-head; but, believe as thou listeth, I for my part tell it to
thee for good, and once more I counsel thee abide at home to-day or at
least beware of going into our wood.' 'Good,' answered the lady, 'I
will do it'; and after fell a-saying to herself, 'Sawest thou how
artfully yonder man thinketh to have feared me from going to our wood
to-day? Doubtless he hath given some trull or other tryst there and
would not have me find him with her. Marry, it were fine eating for
him with blind folk and I should be a right simpleton an I saw not his
drift and if I believed him! But certes he shall not have his will;
nay, though I abide there all day, needs must I see what traffic is
this that he hath in hand to-day.'

Accordingly, her husband being gone out at one door, she went out at
the other and betook herself as most secretly she might straight to
the wood and hid herself in the thickest part thereof, standing attent
and looking now here and now there, an she should see any one come. As
she abode on this wise, without any thought of danger, behold, there
sallied forth of a thick coppice hard by a terrible great wolf, and
scarce could she say, 'Lord, aid me!' when it flew at her throat and
laying fast hold of her, proceeded to carry her off, as she were a
lambkin. She could neither cry nor aid herself on other wise, so sore
was her gullet straitened; wherefore the wolf, carrying her off, would
assuredly have throttled her, had he not encountered certain
shepherds, who shouted at him and constrained him to loose her. The
shepherds knew her and carried her home, in a piteous plight, where,
after long tending by the physicians, she was healed, yet not so
wholly but she had all her throat and a part of her face marred on
such wise that, whereas before she was fair, she ever after appeared
misfeatured and very foul of favour; wherefore, being ashamed to
appear whereas she might be seen, she many a time bitterly repented
her of her frowardness and her perverse denial to put faith, in a
matter which cost her nothing, in her husband's true dream."




THE EIGHTH STORY

[Day the Ninth]

     BIONDELLO CHEATETH CIACCO OF A DINNER, WHEREOF THE OTHER
     CRAFTILY AVENGETH HIMSELF, PROCURING HIM TO BE SHAMEFULLY
     BEATEN


The merry company with one accord avouched that which Talano had seen
in sleep to have been no dream, but a vision, so punctually, without
there failing aught thereof, had it come to pass. But, all being
silent the queen charged Lauretta follow on, who said, "Like as those,
most discreet ladies, who have to-day foregone me in speech, have been
well nigh all moved to discourse by something already said, even so
the stern vengeance wreaked by the scholar, of whom Pampinea told us
yesterday, moveth me to tell of a piece of revenge, which, without
being so barbarous as the former, was nevertheless grievous unto him
who brooked it.

I must tell you, then, that there was once in Florence a man whom all
called Ciacco,[435] as great a glutton as ever lived. His means
sufficing him not to support the expense that his gluttony required
and he being, for the rest, a very well-mannered man and full of
goodly and pleasant sayings, he addressed himself to be, not
altogether a buffoon, but a spunger[436] and to company with those
who were rich and delighted to eat of good things; and with these he
went often to dine and sup, albeit he was not always bidden. There was
likewise at Florence, in those days, a man called Biondello, a little
dapper fellow of his person, very quaint of his dress and sprucer than
a fly, with his coif on his head and his yellow periwig still drest to
a nicety, without a hair awry, who plied the same trade as Ciacco.
Going one morning in Lent whereas they sell the fish and cheapening
two very fine lampreys for Messer Vieri de' Cerchj, he was seen by
Ciacco, who accosted him and said, 'What meaneth this?' Whereto
Biondello made answer, 'Yestereve there were sent unto Messer Corso
Donati three lampreys, much finer than these, and a sturgeon; to which
sufficing him not for a dinner he is minded to give certain gentlemen,
he would have me buy these other two. Wilt thou not come thither,
thou?' Quoth Ciacco, 'Thou knowest well that I shall be there.'

[Footnote 435: _i.e._ hog.]

[Footnote 436: Lit. a backbiter (_morditore_)].

Accordingly, whenas it seemed to him time, he betook himself to Messer
Corso's house, where he found him with sundry neighbours of his, not
yet gone to dinner, and being asked of him what he went doing,
answered, 'Sir, I am come to dine with you and your company.' Quoth
Messer Corso, 'Thou art welcome; and as it is time, let us to table.'
Thereupon they seated themselves at table and had, to begin with,
chickpease and pickled tunny, and after a dish of fried fish from the
Arno, and no more, Ciacco, perceiving the cheat that Biondello had put
upon him, was inwardly no little angered thereat and resolved to pay
him for it; nor had many days passed ere he again encountered the
other, who had by this time made many folk merry with the trick he had
played him. Biondello, seeing him, saluted him and asked him,
laughing, how he had found Messer Corso's lampreys; to which Ciacco
answered, 'That shalt thou know much better than I, ere eight days be
past.'

Then, without wasting time over the matter, he took leave of Biondello
and agreeing for a price with a shrewd huckster, carried him near to
the Cavicciuoli Gallery and showing him a gentleman there, called
Messer Filippo Argenti, a big burly rawboned fellow and the most
despiteful, choleric and humoursome man alive, gave him a great glass
flagon and said to him, 'Go to yonder gentleman with this flask in
hand and say to him, "Sir Biondello sendeth me to you and prayeth you
be pleased to rubify him this flask with your good red wine, for that
he would fain make merry somedele with his minions." But take good
care he lay not his hands on thee; else will he give thee an ill
morrow and thou wilt have marred my plans.' 'Have I aught else to
say,' asked the huckster; and Ciacco answered, 'No; do but go and say
this and after come back to me here with the flask and I will pay
thee.' The huckster accordingly set off and did his errand to Messer
Filippo, who, hearing the message and being lightly ruffled, concluded
that Biondello, whom he knew, had a mind to make mock of him, and
waxing all red in the face, said, 'What "rubify me" and what "minions"
be these? God land thee and him an ill year!' Then, starting to his
feet, he put out his hand to lay hold of the huckster; but the latter,
who was on his guard, promptly took to his heels and returning by
another way to Ciacco, who had seen all that had passed, told him what
Messer Filippo had said to him. Ciacco, well pleased, paid him and
rested not till he found Biondello, to whom quoth he, 'Hast thou been
late at the Cavicciuoli Gallery?' 'Nay,' answered the other. 'Why dost
thou ask me?' 'Because,' replied Ciacco, 'I must tell thee that Messer
Filippo enquireth for thee; I know not what he would have.' 'Good,'
rejoined Biondello; 'I am going that way and will speak with him.'
Accordingly, he made off, and Ciacco followed him, to see how the
thing should pass.

Meanwhile Messer Filippo, having failed to come at the huckster, abode
sore disordered and was inwardly all a-fume with rage, being unable to
make anything in the world of the huckster's words, if not that
Biondello, at whosesoever instance, was minded to make mock of him. As
he fretted himself thus, up came Biondello, whom no sooner did he espy
than he made for him and dealt him a sore buffet in the face. 'Alack,
sir,' cried Biondello, 'what is this?' Whereupon Messer Filippo,
clutching him by the hair and tearing his coif, cast his bonnet to the
ground and said, laying on to him amain the while, 'Knave that thou
art, thou shalt soon see what it is! What is this thou sendest to say
to me with thy "rubify me" and thy "minions"? Deemest thou me a child,
to be flouted on this wise?' So saying, he battered his whole face
with his fists, which were like very iron, nor left him a hair on his
head unruffled; then, rolling him in the mire, he tore all the clothes
off his back; and to this he applied himself with such a will that
Biondello could not avail to say a word to him nor ask why he served
him thus. He had heard him indeed speak of 'rubify me' and 'minions,'
but knew not what this meant.

At last, Messer Filippo having beaten him soundly, the bystanders,
whereof many had by this time gathered about them, dragged him, with
the utmost difficulty, out of the other's clutches, all bruised and
battered as he was, and told him why the gentleman had done this,
blaming him for that which he had sent to say to him and telling him
that he should by that time have known Messer Filippo better and that
he was not a man to jest withal. Biondello, all in tears protested his
innocence, declaring that he had never sent to Messer Filippo for
wine, and as soon as he was somewhat recovered, he returned home, sick
and sorry, divining that this must have been Ciacco's doing. When,
after many days, the bruises being gone, he began to go abroad again,
it chanced that Ciacco encountered him and asked him, laughing,
'Harkye, Biondello, how deemest thou of Messer Filippo's wine?' 'Even
as thou of Messer Corso's lampreys,' replied the other; and Ciacco
said, 'The thing resteth with thee henceforth. Whenever thou goest
about to give me to eat as thou didst, I will give thee in return to
drink after t'other day's fashion.' Biondello, knowing full well that
it was easier to wish Ciacco ill than to put it in practise, besought
God of his peace[437] and thenceforth was careful to affront him no
more."

[Footnote 437: _i.e._ conjured him by God to make peace with him.]




THE NINTH STORY

[Day the Ninth]

     TWO YOUNG MEN SEEK COUNSEL OF SOLOMON, ONE HOW HE MAY BE
     LOVED AND THE OTHER HOW HE MAY AMEND HIS FROWARD WIFE, AND
     IN ANSWER HE BIDDETH THE ONE LOVE AND THE OTHER GET HIM TO
     GOOSEBRIDGE


None other than the queen remaining to tell, so she would maintain
Dioneo his privilege, she, after the ladies had laughed at the unlucky
Biondello, began blithely to speak thus: "Lovesome ladies, if the
ordinance of created things be considered with a whole mind, it will
lightly enough be seen that the general multitude of women are by
nature, by custom and by law subjected unto men and that it behoveth
them order and govern themselves according to the discretion of these
latter; wherefore each woman, who would have quiet and ease and solace
with those men to whom she pertaineth, should be humble, patient and
obedient, besides being virtuous, which latter is the supreme and
especial treasure of every wise woman. Nay, though the laws, which in
all things regard the general weal, and usance or (let us say) custom,
whose puissance is both great and worship-worth, taught us not this,
nature very manifestly showeth it unto us, inasmuch as she hath made
us women tender and delicate of body and timid and fearful of spirit
and hath given us little bodily strength, sweet voices and soft and
graceful movements, all things testifying that we have need of the
governance of others. Now, those who have need to be helped and
governed, all reason requireth that they be obedient and submissive
and reverent to their governors; and whom have we to governors and
helpers, if not men? To men, therefore, it behoveth us submit
ourselves, honouring them supremely; and whoso departeth from this, I
hold her deserving, not only of grave reprehension, but of severe
punishment. To these considerations I was lead, though not for the
first time, by that which Pampinea told us a while ago of Talano's
froward wife, upon whom God sent that chastisement which her husband
had not known to give her; wherefore, as I have already said, all
those women who depart from being loving, compliant and amenable, as
nature, usance and law will it, are, in my judgment, worthy of stern
and severe chastisement. It pleaseth me, therefore, to recount to you
a counsel given by Solomon, as a salutary medicine for curing women
who are thus made of that malady; which counsel let none, who meriteth
not such treatment, repute to have been said for her, albeit men have
a byword which saith, 'Good horse and bad horse both the spur need
still, And women need the stick, both good and ill.' Which words, an
one seek to interpret them by way of pleasantry, all women will
lightly allow to be true; nay, but considering them morally,[438] I
say that the same must be conceded of them; for that women are all
naturally unstable and prone [to frailty,] wherefore, to correct the
iniquity of those who allow themselves too far to overpass the limits
appointed them, there needeth the stick which punisheth them, and to
support the virtue of others who suffer not themselves to transgress,
there needeth the stick which sustaineth and affeareth them. But, to
leave be preaching for the nonce and come to that which I have it in
mind to tell.

[Footnote 438: _i.e._ from a serious or moral point of view.]

You must know that, the high renown of Solomon's miraculous wisdom
being bruited abroad well nigh throughout the whole world, no less
than the liberality with which he dispensed it unto whoso would fain
be certified thereof by experience, there flocked many to him from
divers parts of the world for counsel in their straitest and most
urgent occasions. Amongst others who thus resorted to him was a young
man, Melisso by name, a gentleman of noble birth and great wealth, who
set out from the city of Lajazzo,[439] whence he was and where he
dwelt; and as he journeyed towards Jerusalem, it chanced that, coming
forth of Antioch, he rode for some distance with a young man called
Giosefo, who held the same course as himself. As the custom is of
wayfarers, he entered into discourse with him and having learned from
him what and whence he was, he asked him whither he went and upon what
occasion; to which Giosefo replied that he was on his way to Solomon,
to have counsel of him what course he should take with a wife he had,
the most froward and perverse woman alive, whom neither with prayers
nor with blandishments nor on any other wise could he avail to correct
of her waywardness. Then he in his turn questioned Melisso whence he
was and whither he went and on what errand, and he answered, 'I am of
Lajazzo, and like as thou hast a grievance, even so have I one; I am
young and rich and spend my substance in keeping open house and
entertaining my fellow-townsmen, and yet, strange to say, I cannot for
all that find one who wisheth me well; wherefore I go whither thou
goest, to have counsel how I may win to be beloved.'

[Footnote 439: Apparently Laodicea (_hod._ Eskihissar) in Anatolia,
from which a traveller, taking the direct land route, would
necessarily pass Antioch (_hod._ Antakhia) on his way to Jerusalem.]

Accordingly, they joined company and journeyed till they came to
Jerusalem, where, by the introduction of one of Solomon's barons, they
were admitted to the presence of the king, to whom Melisso briefly set
forth his occasion. Solomon answered him, 'Love'; and this said,
Melisso was straightway put forth and Giosefo told that for which he
was there. Solomon made him no other answer than 'Get thee to
Goosebridge'; which said, Giosefo was on like wise removed, without
delay, from the king's presence and finding Melisso awaiting him
without, told him that which he had had for answer. Thereupon,
pondering Solomon's words and availing to apprehend therefrom neither
significance nor profit whatsoever for their occasions, they set out
to return home, as deeming themselves flouted. After journeying for
some days, they came to a river, over which was a fine bridge, and a
caravan of pack-mules and sumpter-horses being in act to pass, it
behoved them tarry till such time as these should be crossed over.
Presently, the beasts having well nigh all crossed, it chanced that
one of the mules took umbrage, as oftentimes we see them do, and
would by no means pass on; whereupon a muleteer, taking a stick, began
to beat it at first moderately enough to make it go on; but the mule
shied now to this and now to that side of the road and whiles turned
back altogether, but would on no wise pass on; whereupon the man,
incensed beyond measure, fell to dealing it with the stick the
heaviest blows in the world, now on the head, now on the flanks and
anon on the crupper, but all to no purpose.

Melisso and Giosefo stood watching this and said often to the
muleteer, 'Alack, wretch that thou art, what dost thou? Wilt thou kill
the beast? Why studiest thou not to manage him by fair means and
gentle dealing? He will come quicklier than for cudgeling him as thou
dost.' To which the man answered, 'You know your horses and I know my
mule; leave me do with him.' So saying, he fell again to cudgelling
him and belaboured him to such purpose on one side and on the other,
that the mule passed on and the muleteer won the bout. Then, the two
young men being now about to depart, Giosefo asked a poor man, who sat
at the bridge-head, how the place was called, and he answered, 'Sir,
this is called Goosebridge.' When Giosefo heard this, he straightway
called to mind Solomon's words and said to Melisso, 'Marry, I tell
thee, comrade, that the counsel given me by Solomon may well prove
good and true, for I perceive very plainly that I knew not how to beat
my wife; but this muleteer hath shown me what I have to do.'

Accordingly, they fared on and came, after some days, to Antioch,
where Giosefo kept Melisso with him, that he might rest himself a day
or two, and being scurvily enough received of his wife, he bade her
prepare supper according as Melisso should ordain; whereof the latter,
seeing that it was his friend's pleasure, acquitted himself in a few
words. The lady, as her usance had been in the past, did not as
Melisso had ordained, but well nigh altogether the contrary; which
Giosefo seeing, he was vexed and said, 'Was it not told thee on what
wise thou shouldst prepare the supper?' The lady, turning round
haughtily, answered, 'What meaneth this? Good lack, why dost thou not
sup, an thou have a mind to sup? An if it were told me otherwise, it
seemed good to me to do thus. If it please thee, so be it; if not,
leave it be.' Melisso marvelled at the lady's answer and blamed her
exceedingly; whilst Giosefo, hearing this, said, 'Wife, thou art still
what thou wast wont to be; but, trust me, I will make thee change thy
fashion.' Then turning to Melisso, 'Friend,' said he, 'we shall soon
see what manner of counsel was Solomon's; but I prithee let it not irk
thee to stand to see it and hold that which I shall do for a sport.
And that thou mayest not hinder me, bethink thee of the answer the
muleteer made us, when we pitied his mule.' Quoth Melisso, 'I am in
thy house, where I purpose not to depart from thy good pleasure.'

Giosefo then took a round stick, made of a young oak, and repaired a
chamber, whither the lady, having arisen from table for despite, had
betaken herself, grumbling; then, laying hold of her by the hair, he
threw her down at his feet and proceeded to give her a sore beating
with the stick. The lady at first cried out and after fell to
threats; but, seeing that Giosefo for all that stinted not and being
by this time all bruised, she began to cry him mercy for God's sake
and besought him not to kill her, declaring that she would never more
depart from his pleasure. Nevertheless, he held not his hand; nay, he
continued to baste her more furiously than ever on all her seams,
belabouring her amain now on the ribs, now on the haunches and now
about the shoulder, nor stinted till he was weary and there was not a
place left unbruised on the good lady's back. This done, he returned
to his friend and said to him, 'To-morrow we shall see what will be
the issue of the counsel to go to Goosebridge.' Then, after he had
rested awhile and they had washed their hands, he supped with Melisso
and in due season they betook themselves to bed.

Meanwhile the wretched lady arose with great pain from the ground and
casting herself on the bed, there rested as best she might until the
morning, when she arose betimes and let ask Giosefo what he would have
dressed for dinner. The latter, making merry over this with Melisso,
appointed it in due course, and after, whenas it was time, returning,
they found everything excellently well done and in accordance with the
ordinance given; wherefore they mightily commended the counsel at
first so ill apprehended of them. After some days, Melisso took leave
of Giosefo and returning to his own house, told one, who was a man of
understanding, the answer he had had from Solomon; whereupon quoth the
other, 'He could have given thee no truer nor better counsel. Thou
knowest thou lovest no one, and the honours and services thou
renderest others, thou dost not for love that thou bearest them, but
for pomp and ostentation. Love, then, as Solomon bade thee, and thou
shalt be loved.' On this wise, then, was the froward wife corrected
and the young man, loving, was beloved."




THE TENTH STORY

[Day the Ninth]

     DOM GIANNI, AT THE INSTANCE OF HIS GOSSIP PIETRO, PERFORMETH
     A CONJURATION FOR THE PURPOSE OF CAUSING THE LATTER'S WIFE
     TO BECOME A MARE; BUT, WHENAS HE COMETH TO PUT ON THE TAIL,
     PIETRO MARRETH THE WHOLE CONJURATION, SAYING THAT HE WILL
     NOT HAVE A TAIL


The queen's story made the young men laugh and gave rise to some
murmurs on the part of the ladies; then, as soon as the latter were
quiet, Dioneo began to speak thus, "Sprightly ladies, a black crow
amongst a multitude of white doves addeth more beauty than would a
snow-white swan, and in like manner among many sages one less wise is
not only an augmentation of splendour and goodliness to their
maturity, but eke a source of diversion and solace. Wherefore, you
ladies being all exceeding discreet and modest, I, who savour somewhat
of the scatterbrain, should be dearer to you, causing, as I do, your
worth to shine the brightlier for my default, than if with my greater
merit I made this of yours wax dimmer; and consequently, I should have
larger license to show you myself such as I am and should more
patiently be suffered of you, in saying that which I shall say, than
if I were wiser. I will, therefore, tell you a story not overlong,
whereby you may apprehend how diligently it behoveth to observe the
conditions imposed by those who do aught by means of enchantment and
how slight a default thereof sufficeth to mar everything done by the
magician.

A year or two agone there was at Barletta a priest called Dom Gianni
di Barolo, who, for that he had but a poor cure, took to eking out his
livelihood by hawking merchandise hither and thither about the fairs
of Apulia with a mare of his and buying and selling. In the course of
his travels he contracted a strait friendship with one who styled
himself Pietro da Tresanti and plied the same trade with the aid of an
ass he had. In token of friendship and affection, he called him still
Gossip Pietro, after the Apulian fashion, and whenassoever he visited
Barletta, he carried him to his parsonage and there lodged him with
himself and entertained him to the best of his power. Gossip Pietro,
on his part, albeit he was very poor and had but a sorry little house
at Tresanti, scarce sufficing for himself and a young and buxom wife
he had and his ass, as often as Dom Gianni came to Tresanti, carried
him home with him and entertained him as best he might, in requital of
the hospitality received from him at Barletta. Nevertheless, in the
matter of lodging, having but one sorry little bed, in which he slept
with his handsome wife, he could not entertain him as he would, but,
Dom Gianni's mare being lodged with Pietro's ass in a little stable he
had, needs must the priest himself lie by her side on a truss of
straw.

The goodwife, knowing the hospitality which the latter did her husband
at Barletta, would more than once, whenas the priest came thither,
have gone to lie with a neighbor of hers, by name Zita Caraprese,
[daughter] of Giudice Leo, so he might sleep in the bed with her
husband, and had many a time proposed it to Dom Gianni, but he would
never hear of it; and once, amongst other times, he said to her,
'Gossip Gemmata, fret not thyself for me; I fare very well, for that,
whenas it pleaseth me, I cause this mare of mine become a handsome
wench and couch with her, and after, when I will, I change her into a
mare again; wherefore I care not to part from her.'

The young woman marvelled, but believed his tale and told her husband,
saying, 'If he is so much thy friend as thou sayest, why dost thou not
make him teach thee his charm, so thou mayst avail to make of me a
mare and do thine affairs with the ass and the mare? So should we gain
two for one; and when we were back at home, thou couldst make me a
woman again, as I am.' Pietro, who was somewhat dull of wit, believed
what she said and falling in with her counsel, began, as best he knew,
to importune Dom Gianni to teach him the trick. The latter did his
best to cure him of that folly, but availing not thereto, he said,
'Harkye, since you will e'en have it so, we will arise to-morrow
morning before day, as of our wont, and I will show you how it is
done. To tell thee the truth, the uneathest part of the matter is the
putting on of the tail, as thou shalt see.'

Accordingly, whenas it drew near unto day, Goodman Pietro and Gossip
Gemmata, who had scarce slept that night, with such impatience did
they await the accomplishment of the matter, arose and called Dom
Gianni, who, arising in his shirt, betook himself to Pietro's little
chamber and said to him, 'I know none in the world, except you, for
whom I would do this; wherefore since it pleaseth you, I will e'en do
it; but needs must you do as I shall bid you, an you would have the
thing succeed.' They answered that they would do that which he should
say; whereupon, taking the light, he put it into Pietro's hand and
said to him, 'Mark how I shall do and keep well in mind that which I
shall say. Above all, have a care, an thou wouldst not mar everything,
that, whatsoever thou hearest or seest, thou say not a single word,
and pray God that the tail may stick fast.' Pietro took the light,
promising to do exactly as he said, whereupon Dom Gianni let strip
Gemmata naked as she was born and caused her stand on all fours,
mare-fashion, enjoining herself likewise not to utter a word for aught
that should betide. Then, passing his hand over her face and her head,
he proceeded to say, 'Be this a fine mare's head,' and touching her
hair, said, 'Be this a fine mare's mane'; after which he touched her
arms, saying, 'Be these fine mare's legs and feet,' and coming
presently to her breast and finding it round and firm, such an one
awoke that was not called and started up on end,[440] whereupon quoth
he, 'Be this a fine mare's chest.' And on like wise he did with her
back and belly and crupper and thighs and legs. Ultimately, nothing
remaining to do but the tail, he pulled up his shirt and taking the
dibble with which he planted men, he thrust it hastily into the furrow
made therefor and said, 'And be this a fine mare's tail.'

[Footnote 440: _i.e._ arrectus est penis ejus.]

Pietro, who had thitherto watched everything intently, seeing this
last proceeding and himseeming it was ill done, said, 'Ho there, Dom
Gianni, I won't have a tail there, I won't have a tail there!' The
radical moisture, wherewith all plants are made fast, was by this
come, and Dom Gianni drew it forth, saying, 'Alack, gossip Pietro,
what hast thou done? Did I not bid thee say not a word for aught that
thou shouldst see? The mare was all made; but thou hast marred
everything by talking, nor is there any means of doing it over again
henceforth.' Quoth Pietro, 'Marry, I did not want that tail there. Why
did you not say to me, "Make it thou"? More by token that you were for
setting it too low.' 'Because,' answered Dom Gianni, 'thou hadst not
known for the first time to set it on so well as I.' The young woman,
hearing all this, stood up and said to her husband, in all good faith,
'Dolt that thou art, why hast thou marred thine affairs and mine? What
mare sawest thou ever without a tail? So God aid me, thou art poor,
but it would serve thee right, wert thou much poorer.' Then, there
being now, by reason of the words that Pietro had spoken, no longer
any means of making a mare of the young woman, she donned her clothes,
woebegone and disconsolate, and Pietro, continuing to ply his old
trade with an ass, as he was used, betook himself, in company with Dom
Gianni, to the Bitonto fair, nor ever again required him of such a
service."



How much the company laughed at this story, which was better
understood of the ladies than Dioneo willed, let her who shall yet
laugh thereat imagine for herself. But, the day's stories being now
ended and the sun beginning to abate of its heat, the queen, knowing
the end of her seignory to be come, rose to her feet and putting off
the crown, set it on the head of Pamfilo, whom alone it remained to
honour after such a fashion, and said, smiling, "My lord, there
devolveth on thee a great burden, inasmuch as with thee it resteth,
thou being the last, to make amends for my default and that of those
who have foregone me in the dignity which thou presently holdest;
whereof God lend thee grace, even as He hath vouchsafed it unto me to
make thee king." Pamfilo blithely received the honour done him and
answered, "Your merit and that of my other subjects will do on such
wise that I shall be adjudged deserving of commendation, even as the
others have been." Then, having, according to the usance of his
predecessors, taken order with the seneschal of the things that were
needful, he turned to the expectant ladies and said to them, "Lovesome
ladies, it was the pleasure of Emilia, who hath this day been our
queen, to give you, for the purpose of affording some rest to your
powers, license to discourse of that which should most please you;
wherefore, you being now rested, I hold it well to return to the
wonted ordinance, and accordingly I will that each of you bethink
herself to discourse to-morrow of this, to wit, OF WHOSO HATH ANYWISE
WROUGHT GENEROUSLY OR MAGNIFICENTLY IN MATTERS OF LOVE OR OTHERWHAT.
The telling and doing of these things will doubtless fire your
well-disposed minds to do worthily; so will our life, which may not be
other than brief in this mortal body, be made perpetual in laudatory
renown; a thing which all, who serve not the belly only, as do the
beasts, should not only desire, but with all diligence seek and
endeavour after."

The theme pleased the joyous company, who having all, with the new
king's license, arisen from session, gave themselves to their wonted
diversions, according to that unto which each was most drawn by
desire; and on this wise they did until the hour of supper, whereunto
they came joyously and were served with diligence and fair ordinance.
Supper at an end, they arose to the wonted dances, and after they had
sung a thousand canzonets, more diverting of words than masterly of
music, the king bade Neifile sing one in her own name; whereupon, with
clear and blithesome voice, she cheerfully and without delay began
thus:

       A youngling maid am I and full of glee,
         Am fain to carol in the new-blown May,
       Love and sweet thoughts-a-mercy, blithe and free.

       I go about the meads, considering
           The vermeil flowers and golden and the white,
           Roses thorn-set and lilies snowy-bright,
         And one and all I fare a-likening
         Unto his face who hath with love-liking
       Ta'en and will hold me ever, having aye
     None other wish than as his pleasures be;

       Whereof when one I find me that doth show,
           Unto my seeming, likest him, full fain
           I cull and kiss and talk with it amain
         And all my heart to it, as best I know,
         Discover, with its store of wish and woe,
       Then it with others in a wreath I lay,
     Bound with my hair so golden-bright of blee.

       Ay, and that pleasure which the eye doth prove,
           By nature, of the flower's view, like delight
           Doth give me as I saw the very wight
         Who hath inflamed me of his dulcet love,
         And what its scent thereover and above
       Worketh in me, no words indeed can say;
     But sighs thereof bear witness true for me,

       The which from out my bosom day nor night
           Ne'er, as with other ladies, fierce and wild,
           Storm up; nay, thence they issue warm and mild
         And straight betake them to my loved one's sight,
         Who, hearing, moveth of himself, delight
       To give me; ay, and when I'm like to say
     "Ah come, lest I despair," still cometh he.

Neifile's canzonet was much commended both of the king and of the
other ladies; after which, for that a great part of the night was now
spent, the king commanded that all should betake themselves to rest
until the day.


HERE ENDETH THE NINTH DAY
OF THE DECAMERON




_Day the Tenth_

     HERE BEGINNETH THE TENTH AND LAST DAY OF THE DECAMERON
     WHEREIN UNDER THE GOVERNANCE OF PAMFILO IS DISCOURSED OF
     WHOSO HATH ANYWISE WROUGHT GENEROUSLY OR MAGNIFICENTLY IN
     MATTERS OF LOVE OR OTHERWHAT


Certain cloudlets in the West were yet vermeil, what time those of the
East were already at their marges grown lucent like unto very gold,
when Pamfilo, arising, let call his comrades and the ladies, who being
all come, he took counsel with them of whither they should go for
their diversion and fared forth with slow step, accompanied by
Filomena and Fiammetta, whilst all the others followed after. On this
wise, devising and telling and answering many things of their future
life together, they went a great while a-pleasuring; then, having made
a pretty long circuit and the sun beginning to wax overhot, they
returned to the palace. There they let rinse the beakers in the clear
fountain and whoso would drank somewhat; after which they went
frolicking among the pleasant shades of the garden until the
eating-hour. Then, having eaten and slept, as of their wont, they
assembled whereas it pleased the king and there he called upon Neifile
for the first discourse, who blithely began thus:




THE FIRST STORY

[Day the Tenth]

     A KNIGHT IN THE KING'S SERVICE OF SPAIN THINKING HIMSELF ILL
     GUERDONED, THE KING BY VERY CERTAIN PROOF SHOWETH HIM THAT
     THIS IS NOT HIS FAULT, BUT THAT OF HIS OWN PERVERSE FORTUNE,
     AND AFTER LARGESSETH HIM MAGNIFICENTLY


"Needs, honourable ladies, must I repute it a singular favour to
myself that our king hath preferred me unto such an honour as it is to
be the first to tell of magnificence, the which, even as the sun is
the glory and adornment of all the heaven, is the light and lustre of
every other virtue. I will, therefore, tell you a little story
thereof, quaint and pleasant enough to my thinking, which to recall
can certes be none other than useful.

You must know, then, that, among the other gallant gentlemen who have
from time immemorial graced our city, there was one (and maybe the
most of worth) by name Messer Ruggieri de' Figiovanni, who, being both
rich and high-spirited and seeing that, in view of the way of living
and of the usages of Tuscany, he might, if he tarried there, avail to
display little or nothing of his merit, resolved to seek service
awhile with Alfonso, King of Spain, the renown of whose valiance
transcended that of every other prince of his time; wherefore he
betook himself, very honourably furnished with arms and horses and
followers, to Alfonso in Spain and was by him graciously received.
Accordingly, he took up his abode there and living splendidly and
doing marvellous deeds of arms, he very soon made himself known for a
man of worth and valour.

When he had sojourned there a pretty while and had taken particular
note of the king's fashions, himseemed he bestowed castles and cities
and baronies now upon one and now upon another with little enough
discretion, as giving them to those who were unworthy thereof, and for
that to him, who held himself for that which he was, nothing was
given, he conceived that his repute would be much abated by reason
thereof; wherefore he determined to depart and craved leave of the
king. The latter granted him the leave he sought and gave him one of
the best and finest mules that ever was ridden, the which, for the
long journey he had to make, was very acceptable to Messer Ruggieri.
Moreover, he charged a discreet servant of his that he should study,
by such means as seemed to him best, to ride with Messer Ruggieri on
such wise that he should not appear to have been sent by the king, and
note everything he should say of him, so as he might avail to repeat
it to him, and that on the ensuing morning he should command him
return to the court. Accordingly, the servant, lying in wait for
Messer Ruggieri's departure, accosted him, as he came forth the city,
and very aptly joined company with him, giving him to understand that
he also was bound for Italy. Messer Ruggieri, then, fared on, riding
the mule given him by the king and devising of one thing and another
with the latter's servant, till hard upon tierce, when he said,
'Methinketh it were well done to let our beasts stale.' Accordingly,
they put them up in a stable and they all staled, except the mule;
then they rode on again, whilst the squire still took note of the
gentleman's words, and came presently to a river, where, as they
watered their cattle, the mule staled in the stream; which Messer
Ruggieri seeing, 'Marry,' quoth he, 'God confound thee, beast, for
that thou art made after the same fashion as the prince who gave thee
to me!' The squire noted these words and albeit he took store of many
others, as he journeyed with him all that day, he heard him say nought
else but what was to the highest praise of the king.

Next morning, they being mounted and Ruggieri offering to ride towards
Tuscany, the squire imparted to him the king's commandment, whereupon
he incontinent turned back. When he arrived at court, the king,
learning what he had said of the mule, let call him to himself and
receiving him with a cheerful favour, asked him why he had likened him
to his mule, or rather why he had likened the mule to him. 'My lord,'
replied Ruggieri frankly, 'I likened her to you for that, like as you
give whereas it behoveth not and give not whereas it behoveth, even so
she staled not whereas it behoved, but staled whereas it behoved not.'
Then said the king, 'Messer Ruggieri, if I have not given to you, as I
have given unto many who are of no account in comparison with you, it
happened not because I knew you not for a most valiant cavalier and
worthy of every great gift; nay, but it is your fortune, which hath
not suffered me guerdon you according to your deserts, that hath
sinned in this, and not I; and that I may say sooth I will manifestly
prove to you.' 'My lord,' replied Ruggieri, 'I was not chagrined
because I have gotten no largesse of you, for that I desire not to be
richer than I am, but because you have on no wise borne witness to my
merit. Natheless, I hold your excuse for good and honourable and am
ready to see that which it shall please you show me, albeit I believe
you without proof.' The king then carried him into a great hall of
his, where, as he had ordered it beforehand, were two great locked
coffers, and said to him, in presence of many, 'Messer Ruggieri, in
one of these coffers is my crown, the royal sceptre and the orb,
together with many goodly girdles and ouches and rings of mine, and in
fine every precious jewel I have; and the other is full of earth.
Take, then, one and be that which you shall take yours; and you may
thus see whether of the twain hath been ungrateful to your worth,
myself of your ill fortune.'

Messer Ruggieri, seeing that it was the king's pleasure, took one of
the coffers, which, being opened by Alfonso's commandment, was found
to be that which was full of earth; whereupon quoth the king,
laughing, 'Now can you see, Messer Ruggieri, that this that I tell you
of your fortune is true; but certes your worth meriteth that I should
oppose myself to her might. I know you have no mind to turn Spaniard
and therefore I will bestow upon you neither castle nor city in these
parts; but this coffer, of which fortune deprived you, I will in her
despite shall be yours, so you may carry it off to your own country
and justly glorify yourself of your worth in the sight of your
countrymen by the witness of my gifts.' Messer Ruggieri accordingly
took the coffer and having rendered the king those thanks which sorted
with such a gift, joyfully returned therewith to Tuscany."




THE SECOND STORY

[Day the Tenth]

     GHINO DI TACCO TAKETH THE ABBOT OF CLUNY AND HAVING CURED
     HIM OF THE STOMACH-COMPLAINT, LETTETH HIM GO; WHEREUPON THE
     ABBOT, RETURNING TO THE COURT OF ROME, RECONCILETH HIM WITH
     POPE BONIFACE AND MAKETH HIM A PRIOR OF THE HOSPITALLERS


The magnificence shown by King Alfonso to the Florentine cavalier
having been duly commended, the king, who had been mightily pleased
therewith, enjoined Elisa to follow on, and she straightway began
thus: "Dainty dames, it cannot be denied that for a king to be
munificent and to have shown his munificence to him who had served him
is a great and a praiseworthy thing; but what shall we say if a
churchman be related to have practised marvellous magnanimity towards
one, whom if he had used as an enemy, he had of none been blamed
therefor? Certes, we can say none otherwise than that the king's
magnificence was a virtue, whilst that of the churchman was a miracle,
inasmuch as the clergy are all exceeding niggardly, nay, far more so
than women, and sworn enemies of all manner of liberality; and albeit
all men naturally hunger after vengeance for affronts received, we see
churchmen, for all they preach patience and especially commend the
remission of offences, pursue it more eagerly than other folk. This,
then, to wit, how a churchman was magnanimous, you may manifestly
learn from the following story of mine.

Ghino di Tacco, a man very famous for his cruelty and his robberies,