AN
              E X P O S I T I O N
                  OF THE LAST
                    PSALME.

             DELIVERED IN A SERMON
               PREACHED AT PAVLES
      Crosse the fifth of Nouember 1613.
    _Which I haue ioyned to the Festiuals_
          as a short Apologie for our
          _Holy daies in the Church_
                 _of England_.

         DEDICATED VNTO MY HONORABLE
friend and most respected kinsman Sir _William_
               _Monins Baronet_.


            _By IOHN BOYS, Doctor_
                 of Diuinitie.


                  _AT LONDON_
       Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for
            _William Aspley. 1615._





                   GVNPOWDER
                  TREASON DAY.

                   Psalme 150.
      _O praise God in his holinesse, &c._


All the Psalmes of _Dauid_ are comprised in two words, [a]_Halleluiah_,
and _Hosanna_, that is, blessed be God, and God blesse; as being for
the greater part either praiers vnto God for receiuing mercies, or else
praises vnto God for escaping miseries. This our present Hymne placed
as a [b]Conclusion of the whole booke; yea, the beginning, middle, end,
to which all the rest (as [c]_Musculus_ obserueth are to be referred)
inuiteth vs in prescript and postscript, in title, in text, in euery
verse, and in euery Clause of euery verse to _praise the Lord_. Teaching
these two points especially:

  1. For what  } God is to be magnified.
  2. With what }

For what, vers. 1, 2. _O praise God in his holinesse, praise him in
the firmament of his power, praise him in his noble acts, praise him
according to his excellent greatnesse._

With what, euen with all that is

    Without vs, vers. 3. 4. 5. _Praise him in the sound of the
      trumpet, &c._

    Within vs, vers. 6. _Omnis spiritus_, &c. _Let euery spirit
      praise the Lord, praise yee the Lord._

  [Sidenote a: _Gueuara._]

  [Sidenote b: _Lyra in loc._]

  [Sidenote c: _In loc._]


This in briefe is the whole texts _Epitomie_, I come now to the words
_Anotomie_, cutting vp euery part and particle seuerally, beginning
first at the first, _O praise God in his holinesse_. Of which one
sentence the Doctors haue many (though not aduerse yet diuerse)
readings, especially three: _Praise God in his Saints, praise God in his
sanctitie, praise God in his sanctuarie_. _S. Hierome_, _Augustine_,
_Prosper_, and [d]other as well ancient interpreters as moderne
translate here praise God in his _Saints_. For if he must be praised
in all his creatures, how much more in his new creatures? if in the
witlesse wormes, and senselesse vapours, Psal. 148, much more doubtlesse
(as _Theodorit_ here collects) in men, in holie men, in _Saints_, vpon
whom hee hath out of his [e]vnsearchable riches of mercie, bestowed the
blessings of the [f]life present; and of that which is to come.

  [Sidenote d: _Chrysost. Basil. Euthym. Arabs apud Muscul. Lyra. Hugo
  Card. Turrecremat. Anonymus._]

  [Sidenote e: _Ephes. 3. 8.16._]

  [Sidenote f: _1. Tim. 4. 8._]

First, almightie God is to be blessed for giuing his Saints such eminent
gifts of grace for the good of his Church, and for the setting foorth of
his glorie. So _Chrysostome_, _Basil_, _Euthymius_, _Prosper_,
_Placidus_, _Parmensis_ expound it. [g]Euery good and perfit gift is
from aboue, descending from the father of lights, a good thought in a
saint is _gratia infusa_, a good word in a saint is _gratia effusa_, a
good deed in a saint is _gratia diffusa_, through his grace which is the
God of [h]all grace, saints are [i]whatsoeuer they are. Wherefore praise
the Lord in his Saints, often remember their vertues as their true
_reliques_, and as it were bequeathed [k]_legacies_ vnto Gods people. So
the wise man, Ecclesiasticus 44. _Let vs now commend the famous men in
old time, by whom the Lord hath gotten great glorie, let the people
speake of their wisdome, and the congregation of their praise._ So the
Confession of _Bohemia_, chap. 17. [l]_Wee teach that the Saints are
worshipped truly, when the people on certaine daies at a time appointed,
doe come together to the seruice of God, and doe call to minde and
meditate vpon his benefits bestowed vpon holie men, and through them
vpon his Church_, &c. And for as much as it is kindly to consider,
_opus diei in die suo_, the worke of the day[m] in the same day it was
wrought; it is well ordered by the Church of England, that the most
illustrious and remarkable qualities of the saints are celebrated vpon
their proper festiuals, that on S. _Stephens_ day, we may learne by S.
_Stephens_ example to loue our enemies: on S. _Matthewes_ day, to
forsake the world and to follow Christ: on S. _Iohn the Baptist_ his
day, to speake the truth constantly, and to suffer for the same
patiently. Thus in stedfastnes of faith and godlinesse of life (_non
legere modò sed degere sanctorum vitas_, as [n]one wittily) to bee
followers of them as they were followers of Christ; is (as [o]blessed
_Latymer_ was wont to say) the right worshipping of Saints, and of God
in his Saints.

  [Sidenote g: _Iames 1. 17._]

  [Sidenote h: _1. Pet. 5. 10._]

  [Sidenote i: _1. Cor. 15. 10._]

  [Sidenote k: _Euseb. Emisen. hom. de S. Maximo._]

  [Sidenote l: _See Harmon. confess. sect. 16. pag. 486._]

  [Sidenote m: _Maior præsat. in Psal. 22._]

  [Sidenote n: _Owin epigram. lib. 3._]

  [Sidenote o: _Ser. on Christmas day preached at Bexterly, & ser. on
  S. Stephens day at Grimstorpe._]

Againe, for as much as there is a _communion of Saints_, as we cõfesse
in the Creed, a knot of fellowship betweene the dead Saints and the
liuing; it is our dutie to praise God for their good in particular, as
they[p] pray to God for our good in generall. It is required on our part
I say, to giue God most humble thanks for translating th{~e} out of this
[q]valley of teares into Hierusalem aboue, where they be [r]clothed with
long white robes, hauing palmes in their hands, and [s]crownes of gold
on their heads, euer liuing in that happie kingdome without either dying
or crying, Apocal. 21. 4. and this also (in the iudgment of _Augustine_,
_Hierome_, _Hugo_, _Raynerius,_ and other) is to _praise God in his
Saints_.

  [Sidenote p: _Apocal._ 6. 10.]

  [Sidenote q: _Psal._ 84. 6.]

  [Sidenote r: _Apocal._ 7. 9.]

  [Sidenote s: _Apocal._ 4. 4.]

These reasons are the grounds of certaine _holy daies_ established in
England by law, namely to blesse God for his Saints eminent grace while
they were liuing, and exceeding glorie now they be dead. Wherein our
Church ascribes not any diuine worship to the Saints, but all due praise
to the sanctifier: in celebrating their memorie (saith _Augustine_) we
neither adore their honour, nor implore their helpe: but (according to
the tenour of our text) wee praise him alone, [t]who made them both men
and martyrs. In the words of [u]_Hierome_ to _Riparius_: _Honoramus
reliquias martyrum, vt eum cuius sunt martyres adoremus: honoramus
seruos, vt honor seruorum redundet ad dominum:_ If thou desire to doe
right vnto the Saints, esteeme them as paternes, and not as patrones of
thy life; honour them only so farre, [x]that thou maist alway praise God
in them, and praise them in God.

  [Sidenote t: _De ciuit. lib._ 8. _cap._ 27.]

  [Sidenote u: _Tom._ 2 _fol._ 118]

  [Sidenote x: _Philip Mornæus de missa, lib. 3 cap. 11. See Melanct.
  resp. ad art. Bauar. art. 25._]

The gunpowder men erre very much in this one kinde of honouring God,
for either they worship _his Saints_ as himselfe, or else their owne
saintlings, and not _his Saints_. In praying to the dead, in mingling
the blood of their martyrs with the precious blood of their Maker, in
applying their merits, and relying vpon their mercies; it is plaine that
they make the Saints (as _Melancthon_ tels them in his [y]Apologie for
the Confession of _Auspurge_) quartermasters with God, and halfe
mediatours with Christ, I say ioynt mediatours not of incercession only
but of [z]redemption also. Nay they make the blessed Virgin vpon the
poynt their only _mediatrix_ and _aduocate_, so they sing, and so they
say. They sing in their publique seruice, [aa]_Maria mater gratiæ, mater
misericordiæ_, &c. the which is Gods owne stile, 1. Pet. 1. 10. & 2.
Cor. 1. 3. so they likewise say, _Maria consolatio infirmorum, redemptio
captiuorum, liberatio damnatorum, salus vniuersorum._ [ab]_Giselbertus
in lib. altercationis Synagogæ et ecclesiæ, cap. 20. Maria quasi maria_,
saith _Augustinus de Leonissa_, sermon 5 vpon _Aue maria_, for as all
riuers come from the seas, and returne to the seas againe, Ecclesiastes
1. 7: [ac]so forsooth (if you will vndertake to beleeue him) all grace
is deriued from _Mary_, and ought to be returned again to _Mary_. We
finde so much _in [ad]Rosario Mariæ, reparatrix & saluatrix desperantis
animæ_, &c. That which is worse, their owne Pope (who cannot, as they
teach, erre in a poynt of doctrine as Pope) calleth her expresly _Deam_.
_Pet. Bembus_ in his epistles written in Pope _Leo 10._ name, _lib. 8.
epist. 17._ printed at _Strasburg an. 1609._ that which is worst of all,
in their most approued Bible: they translate Gen. 3. 15. _ipsa conteret
caput tuum_: she shall breake thine head, although (as their owne Iesuit
[ae]_Ribera_ confesseth honestly) the _Hebrew_ text, the _Chaldee_
paraphrase, the translation of the _Septuagint_, and all good _Latin_
copies reade _ipse conteret_, he shall bruise the serpents head,
applying it to Christ, according to that of _Paul_, _The God of peace
shall tread downe Satan vnder your feete_, Rom. 16. 20. by this euidence
you may see that the gunpowder crue praise not God in the saints, nor
the saints in God: but on the contrarie the saints as God.

  [Sidenote y: _Tit. de sanct. inuocat._]

  [Sidenote z: _See D. Fulke in 1. Tim 2. 5._]

  [Sidenote aa: _Bellar. de sanct. beat. cap. 17._]

  [Sidenote ab: _Apud Magdeburg. Cent. 10. Coll. 275._]

  [Sidenote ac: _See Gospell Annunciat._]

  [Sidenote ad: _Chemnit. exam. Con. Trident. part. 3. pag. 151._]

  [Sidenote ae: _In Habacuc. cap. 1. num. 32._]

Againe these S. _Peter_ men (and as I haue warrant to terme them on this
day _Salt Peter men_) erre from the true meaning of our text, because
they doe not praise God _in sanctis eius_, in his saints: but dishonour
God _in sanctis eorum_, in saints of their owne making, vsually praying
vnto some who were no men, and to many who were not holy men. It is
doubted by the two great lights in their glorious firmament,
_Bellarmine_ and _Baronius_, whether there were euer any such man as
S. _George_, or such a woman as S. _Catharine_. Cardinall _Bellarmine_
_lib. de beatitudine sanct. cap. vlt. §. respondeo sanctorum_ doth
acknowledge that they worship certaine saints whose stories are
vncertaine, reputing the legend of S. _George_ apocryphall according to
the censure of Pope [af]_Gelasius:_ and Cardinall _Baronius ecclesiast.
annal. Tom. 2. ad an. 290._ according to the impression at Rome, fol.
650. as also _de Martyrologio Romano, cap. 2._ confesseth as much of
_Quiriacus_ and _Iulitta_, declaring plainely that their acts are
written either by fooles or heretikes, and in his annotations vpon the
_Romane Martyrologie_ 23. Aprill, he taketh vp _Iacobus de Voragine_ for
his leaden Legend of our English S. _George_, concluding in fine, that
the picture of Saint _George_ fighting with a Dragon is _symbolicall_,
and not _historicall_. If the Scripture be true [ag]_whatsoeuer is not
of faith is sinne_: then assuredly these men (as [ah]_Paul_ speaks)
_are damned of their owne selues_ in their owne conscience, who
(notwithstanding all their doubts) pray still in their publike seruice,
[ai]_Deus, qui nos beati Georgij martyris tui meritis & intercessione
lætificas, Concede propitius, &c._ An Idoll as _Paul_ affirmes, 1. Cor.
8. 4. is nothing, _Ergo_, the Papists in worshipping S. _George_ which
is nothing, commit (euen themselues being Iudges) abominable Idolatrie.

  [Sidenote af: _Can. sanct. Roman. dist. 15._]

  [Sidenote ag: _Rom. 14. 23._]

  [Sidenote ah: _Tit. 3. 11._]

  [Sidenote ai: _Missal. Roman. ex Con. Triden. decret. restit. in
  festo Georgij._]

As they worship some who were no men, so many who were not [ak]holy men,
as a reuerend [al]Doctor of our Church accutely, _Non martyres domini
sed mancipes diaboli_: the Souldiour who peirced Christs holy side was a
Pagan,[am] neither doth any storie which is authenticall speake of his
conuersion, and yet they worship him vnder the name of S. _Longinus_,
or Longesse, March 15. _Papias_ (as [an]_Eusebius_ and [ao]_Hierome_
report) held the heresie of the _Millenarians_, and yet he is honoured
as a saint in the Romane Calender vpon the 22. of Februarie. _Becket_
was a bad subiect in his life, and no good Christian at his death, in
that hee commended himselfe and the cause of his Church vnto S.
[ap]_Denys_ and our Lady. Yet S. _Thomas of Canterburie_ was honoured at
Canterburie in the daies of popish ignorance more then either the worlds
Sauiour, or the blessed Virgine his mother: in which relation I appeale
to the records of that Church, as also to the very stones vnder his
shrine worne with the knees and hands of such as came thither to worship
him. _Boccace_ reporteth how one Sir _Chappelet_ a notorious Italian
Vsurer and Cousoner came to be honoured as a Saint in France. _Sanders_
among them is a saint, albeit he liued in plotting, and dyed in acting
rebellion against his gracious Soueraigne Queene _Elizabeth_ of famous
and blessed memorie. Nay _Dauus_ is _Diuus_, _Saul_ is among the
Prophets, _pater personatus_, father _Parsons_ all the daies of his life
was a perpetual Martyr, as his fellow [aq]_Ribadeneira_ termeth him: and
yet one (who sometime was his inner man, and knew him as I presume,
better then euer did _Ribadeneira_) transposing the letters of _Robertus
Parsonius Iesuita_, found this _anagramme_, _Personatus versuti oris
abi_: the wit-foundred drunkard, _Henry Garnet_ (who did not according
to the Counsell of [ar]_Paul_ vse _vino modico_: but as [as]_Paulinus_
pretily _modio_) that lecherous treacherous Arch-priest, Arch-traitor,
Arch-diuell in concealing, if not in contriuing: in patronizing, if not
in plotting the powder intended massacre, is returned a Saint from
beyond the seas with [at]_à sancte Henrice intercede pro nobis_: his
action is iustified, his life commended, his death honoured, his
miracles and memorie celebrated by that _Ignatian_ spirit,
([au]_portentum nominis portentum hominis_, hauing a great deale of
name, though a very little modestie) _Andreas Eudæmon Ioannes Cydonius_:
but notwithstanding his apologie, the saintship of _Henry Garnet_ is so
buffeted by the replies and antilogies of our accuratlie learned
diuines, as that his straw face will hereafter hardly be worth a straw.
_Catesbie_, _Winter_, _Rookwood_, and the rest of the Cole-saints and
hole-saints (who laboured in the diuels mine by the Popes mint) are
numbred among the holy ones also: Babilon and Egypt praise God in them,
and for them. I haue heard much of _roaring_ gentlemen in _London_ and
_Canterburie_, but if the Lord himselfe had not watched ouer his Church,
if the Lord himselfe had not written England in the [ax]palmes of his
hands, if the Lord himselfe had not kept King _Iames_ as the [ay]apple
of his eye, [az]if the Lord himselfe had not been on our side (now may
Gods Israell in England say) if the Lord himselfe had not been on our
side, when they rose vp against vs, if the Lord himselfe had not (out of
his vnspeakeable goodnesse toward vs and our posteritie) broken their
snares, and deliuered our soules out of that horrible gunpowder pit;
these bellowing Buls of Basan, and Canon-mouthed hell-hounds would haue
made on this day such a roare, that all Christendome should haue felt
it, and the whole world haue feared it. [ba]_O Lord God of all power,
blessed be thy name, which hast this day brought to nought the enemies
of thy people,[bb] so let all thine enemies perish._ _O Lord, that
our[bc] mouthes may be filled with laughter and our tongue with ioy._
_Sint diui modo non viui_, let England hang such, although afterward
Rome hallow such, he that hath an eye to see without the spectacles of a
Iesuit, will affoord as good credit to the register at _Tiburne_ as to
the Calender of _Tyber_: for if these be Martyrs, I wonder who are
Murtherers? If these be Saints, I pray you who are Scythians? If these
bee Catholikes, who are Canibals?

  [Sidenote ak: _Dr. Sutclif examin. of Rom. cap. 7._]

  [Sidenote al: _Dr. Abbot Antilog. pag. 3._]

  [Sidenote am: _Sutclif. vbi sup._]

  [Sidenote an: _Hist. lib. 3. cap. vlt._]

  [Sidenote ao: _Catalog. scrip. in vita pap._]

  [Sidenote ap: _Houenden annal. part. poster. pag. 298._]

  [Sidenote aq: _Catalog. scrip. Iesuit. in vita Parsonij._]

  [Sidenote ar: _1. Tim. 5. 23._]

  [Sidenote as: _Epist. lib. 3. epist. 6._]

  [Sidenote at: _Sheldon preface before his motiues._]

  [Sidenote au: _Eliens. epist. lector. ante resp. ad Bellar. apol._]

  [Sidenote ax: _Esay 49. 16._]

  [Sidenote ay: _Deut. 32. 10._]

  [Sidenote az: _Psal. 124._]

  [Sidenote ba: _Judith. 13. 4._]

  [Sidenote bb: _Iudges 5. 31._]

  [Sidenote bc: _Psalm. 126. 2._]

I passe to the second exposition of these wordes, _O praise God in his
sanctitie_, so _Munster_, _Pagninus_, _Beza_, _Tremelius_ and our old
translation heere, _Praise God in his holinesse_: now God is holy
_formaliter & effectiuè_, holy in himselfe, and making other holy; the
Lord is glorious in holinesse Exod. 15. 11. Wheras other Gods are famous
for their vnholinesse, _Venus_ was a wanton, _Mercurius_ a theefe,
_Iupiter_ a monsterous adulterer, an ingenious man (as[bd] _Basile_
writes) would blush to report that of beastes, which the Gentiles haue
recorded of their Gods. If such imputations are true saith
[be]_Augustine_, _quàm mali_ how wicked are these Gods: if false _quàm
malè_ how wretched and foolish are these men, adoring the same things
in the temple, which they scoffe at in the theater, _in turpitudine[bf]
nimium liberi, in superstitione nimium serui_: so that their Gods are
not as our God, euen our enemies being Iudges Deut. 32. 31. there is
none holy as the Lord 1. Sam. 2. 2. called[bg] often in holy Scripture
_the holy one_, yea thrice holy; _holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of
hosts_ Esay. 6. 3. his [bh]name is holy, his [bi]law is holy, his
[bk]spirit is holy, his will holy, his word holy, _righteous in all his
waies, and holy in all his workes_ Psalm. 145. 17. making vs also which
are his seruants an _holy people_ Deut. 7. 6. an _holy priest-hood_
1. Pet. 2. 5. _his holy temples_ 1. Cor. 6. 19. our bodies, our soules,
our selues, our whole [bl]seruice holy, wherefore _praise God in his
holinesse_.

  [Sidenote bd: _Lib. de legend. libris gentilium._]

  [Sidenote be: _De Ciuit. Dei lib. 6. cap. 6._]

  [Sidenote bf: _August. contra faust. man. li. 12. cap. 40._]

  [Sidenote bg: _Esay 1. 4. & 10. 20._]

  [Sidenote bh: _Luk. 1. 49._]

  [Sidenote bi: _Psal. 19. 7._]

  [Sidenote bk: _Mark. 12. 36._]

  [Sidenote bl: _1. Pet. 3. 2._]

[bm]_Luther_, _Caluin_, _Vatablus_, your _English-Geneua_ bibles, & our
new translation haue praise God in his _sanctuarie_, the which in holy
scripture signifieth either heuen, or the temple, heauen is often called
in sacred writ _Gods sanctuarie_, for [bn]thus saith he that is high and
excellent, he that inhabiteth eternitie, whose name is the holy one,
_I dwell in the high and holy place_. Christ in comming to vs is said
to _breake the heauens_ Esay 64. 1. and when he went from vs vnto his
father _a cloud tooke him vp into heauen_ Acts 1. and _frõ heauen_ he
shal come againe to iudge the quicke and the dead 1. Thes. 4. 16. That
_his sanctuarie_ may be taken heere for heauen, is gathered out of the
very next clause (_praise him in the firmament of his power_) the which
(as [bo]_Caluin_ & [bp]other expositors haue well obserued,) is
exegeticall, and expoundes the former, as if Dauid should haue said,
praise the Lord in his sanctuary, that is _in the firmament of his
power_, for the heauens declare the glory of God and the firmament
sheweth his handy worke Psalm. 19. 1. let all people praise God our
father in heauen, especially such as dwell with him [bq]in heauen,
O praise the Lord all ye blessed Angels and Saints inhabiting his
sanctuarie which is highest and holiest.

  [Sidenote bm: _Idem Genebrard et alij._]

  [Sidenote bn: _Esay 57. 15._]

  [Sidenote bo: _In loc._]

  [Sidenote bp: _Bellarmine in loc._]

  [Sidenote bq: _Genebrard Agellius Acernensis epist. in loc._]

[br]Other apply the word _sanctuary_ to the Temple, so termed for two
respects especially. 1. because God manifesteth _his holines_ toward
vs in that holy place more principally, calling it expresly [bs]_his
house_. 2. a _sanctuarie_ in regard of our _holy seruice_ toward God,
for albeit euery day be to the good man a sabbath, and euery place a
temple; yet the God of Order hath appointed certaine times, and certaine
places also, wherein hee will bee worshipped publiquely, saying
Leuiticus 19. 30. _Ye shall obserue my sabbaths, and reuerence my
sanctuary_. For our holines toward God concerneth vs [bt]one way in
that we are men, and another way in that we are ioyned as parts to that
visible mystical body which is his Church as men, wee are at our owne
choyce both for time, and place, and forme, according to the exigence of
our owne occasions in priuate, but the seruice which is to bee done of
vs as the members of a publique body, must of necessity bee publique,
and so consequently to bee performed on holy daies in holy places, and
for this doctrine the scriptures afford both patent and paterne, the
patent is reported by the Prophet _Esay_: Chap. 56. vers. 7. and
repeated by Christ in [bu]three seuerall Euangelists: _my house shall
be called an house of prayer for all people_. The paterns are manifold,
_I will enter into thine house in the multitude of thy mercies, and in
thy feare will I worship toward thine holy temple_, saith our Prophet,
Psal. 5. 7. The Publican and the Pharisie went _into the temple to
pray_, Luke 18. _Peter_ and _Iohn_ went vp together _into the temple at
the ninth houre of prayer_, Acts 3. _Anna_ fasted and _prayed in the
temple_, Luke 2. This one word, _sanctuarie_ teacheth vs how we should
behaue our selues in the Church as in Gods presence: Doest thou come to
that holie place to receiue the blessed Supper of our Lord? remember
that the temple is _sanctuarium, non promptuarium_, a sanctuarie, not a
buttrie, [bx]_haue ye not houses to eate and drink in, despise yee the
Church of God?_ Doest thou come to pray? [by]_take heede to thy foote
when thou entrest into Gods house_, compose thy knees, and eyes, and
hands, and heart after such a deuout manner: as that thou maist not
onely praise God vpon the loud cymbals, but (as it is vers. 5.) _praise
him vpon the well tuned cymbals_ also. Doest thou come to heare the
sermon? remember that the preaching of the Gospel is [bz]not the word
of a mortall man, but the [ca]power of the immortall God vnto saluation:
and albeit the Preacher be neuer so simple, neuer so sinfull; yet the
word is holy, the action holy, the time holy, the place holy, ordained
by the most holy to make thee holy. Vpon whatsoeuer occasion thou
commest into the Temple, remember alwaies that the ground is holy
whereon thou standest, it is a _sanctuarie_, the habitation of God,
and place of his _holinesse_: and therefore not to be [cb]prophaned with
ordinarie though lawfull worldly businesse, much lesse with vnlawfull
pastimes and enterludes, it is a place for praise, not for playes,
_O praise God in his sanctuarie_.

  [Sidenote br: _Luther Vatablus Chald. apud Genebrard english Com.
  dedicated to Mr. Herlakinden._]

  [Sidenote bs: _Esay. 56. 7._]

  [Sidenote bt: _Hooker eccles. pol. lib. 5. §. 24._]

  [Sidenote bu: _Mark 11. 7. Luke 19. 46. Matth. 21. 13._]

  [Sidenote bx: _1. Cor. 11. 22._]

  [Sidenote by: _Ecclesiastes 4. 17._]

  [Sidenote bz: _1. Thess. 2. 13._]

  [Sidenote ca: _Rom. 1. 6._]

  [Sidenote cb: _Canon 88._]

Or (as [cc]_Martine Luther_ interprets it) praise God _in his
sanctuarie_, that is, _for his sanctuarie_, for [cd]shewing his word
vnto _Iacob_, his statutes and ordinances vnto _Israel_, for his
adoption, and his couenants, and his promises, and his seruice, Rom.
9. 4. O praise the Lord for his [ce]true Church established for the
present among the Iewes, and hereafter in the fulnesse of time to be
constituted among Christians vntill the worlds end. For this clause may
bee construed of the mysticall heauen and temple, so well as of the
materiall heauen and temple. The good man (I meane the true Christian)
is not only Gods [cf]house, but also Gods [cg]temple, yea, Gods heauen,
as [ch]_Augustine_ expounds the words of Christ, _Our father which art
in heauen_, that is, in holy men of heuenly conuersation, in whose
sanctified hearts hee dwelleth as in his [ci]sanctuarie. _Archimedes_
in his conference with _Hiero_ said, _Giue me a place where I may stand
out of the world, and I will moue the whole earth_. In like manner, he
that will bee reputed a Saint, and so take vpon him to remoue men
earthly minded from their worldinesse, must himselfe at the least haue
one foote out of the world, seeking (as the blessed [ck]Apostle speakes)
the things aboue, that [cl]other may see his good workes, and glorifie
God which is in Heauen, that is (according to the true soule of our
text) _praise God in his Saints_ which are his sacrarie, his sanctuarie,
his house, his heauen.

  [Sidenote cc: _In loc._]

  [Sidenote cd: _Psal. 147. 19._]

  [Sidenote ce: _Christ. Corn. in loc._]

  [Sidenote cf: _Heb. 3. 6._]

  [Sidenote cg: _1. Cor. 3. 16_]

  [Sidenote ch: _Lib. 2. de ser. dom. in mont._]

  [Sidenote ci: _Bellarm. & Corn. in loc. vel hoc dicit de populo,
  vel de vita sancta Chrysost. Basil. in loc._]

  [Sidenote ck: _Coloss. 3. 1._]

  [Sidenote cl: _Mat. 5. 16._]

Heere then all the three diuers lines (_praise God in his Saints, praise
God in his sanctitie, praise God in his sanctuarie_) meet in one
centrie; namely, God is to be praised in his sanctuarie for his
sanctitie conferred vpon his Saints, whereby they shined as [cm]lights
in this heauen on earth, and shine like [cn]starres in that heauen of
heauen. If I were not (according to the text and the time) foreward to
prosecute the Gunpowder men, as the more dangerous enemies of God and
his Gospell, I might vpon this ground take vp the bucklers against
idle _Nouelists_, vtterly condemning the _festiuals of holie Saints_,
established in our Church by good order of law. Their principal
obiection is taken out of _Pauls_ Epistle to the Galathians, chap. 4.
verse 10. _Yee obserue dayes and monethes, and times and yeares, I am
afraid of you, lest I haue bestowed vpon you labour in vaine._ To which
answere is made, that there is a [co]foure-fold obseruation of
          {Naturall.
          {Politicall.
    daies {Ecclesiasticall.
          {Superstitious.
Of all which onely the superstitious is condemned, as _Aretius_ and
_Illiricus_, and [cp]other Protestant Diuines vpon the place. Now the
superstitious obseruation is either _Iudaicall_ or _Idolatricall_; it is
apparant that _Paul_ meant the first hereof especially, [cq]because the
Galathians after they were conuerted vnto Christ, were seduced by false
teachers vnto the ceremonies of the Iewes, as concerning the Sabbaths &
the new Moones, and the like, the which were figures of Christ and had
their end in him.[cr] _Are yee so foolish, that hauing begun in the
spirit, yee would now be made perfit by the flesh?_ As for
_Idolatricall_ obseruing of times, it is granted easily that the
_Pagans_ (in dedicating feasts vnto false gods, and in making
[cs]differences of daies dismall and fortunate, either by curious arts,
or by particular fansies, or popular obseruations) are worthily reputed
superstitious. And the [ct]_Papists_ also (solemnizing holie daies of
the Saints in their Churches with idolatrous worshipping of the
creatures, and their Images: and out of their Churches with Epicurelike
belly-cheere, reuelling, & idlenesse) _turn againe to the beggarly
rudiments and fashions of the world_: But the festiuals of England
(celebrated according to the doctrine and Iniunctions of our Church) are
verie farre from these and all other kindes of superstition. [cu]For
then is God truly worshipped in the publike congregation, I say the
true God is truly praised in his true Saints; on our holie daies the
sacraments are rightly ministred, the Scriptures are fruitfully read,
the Word is faithfully preached; all which are maine meanes to withdraw
men not only from superstition and idolatrie, but also from all sortes
of error and impietie whatsoeuer.

  [Sidenote cm: _Philip 2. 15._]

  [Sidenote cn: _Dan. 12. 3._]

  [Sidenote co: _Illiric. in Galat. 4._]

  [Sidenote cp: _See Sir Christop. Heydons answer to Mr. Chambers,
  pag. 368. and how the fathers answere this. Bellarmin. de sanct.
  Cultu, cap. 10._]

  [Sidenote cq: _English glosse._]

  [Sidenote cr: _Galat. 3. 3._]

  [Sidenote cs: _See Ambrose in Galat. 4. & August. epist. 119.
  cap. 7._]

  [Sidenote ct: _Dr. Fulke in Galat. 4. 10._]

  [Sidenote cu: _See Dr. Whitgifts defence of his answere to the
  admonit. fol. 538. 539._]

Yea, but the words of the Commandement are, _sixe daies shalt thou
labour_: _Ergo_, there should be no holie day besides the Lords day.
[cx]Protestant Diuines answere that the clause (_sixe daies shalt thou
labour_) is a permission, or a remission of Gods right, who might
chalenge to himselfe all our time for his worke, and not a restraint for
any man from seruing of God on any day. For the Iewes beside the Sabbath
had diuers other feasts; as _Easter_, _the feast of vnleauened bread_,
_the feast of first fruits_, _Whitsuntide_, _the feast of blowing
Trumpets_, _the feast of Tabernacles_; all which (as we reade Leuiticus
23) they kept by Gods appointment holie, notwithstanding these words of
the law, _sixe daies shalt thou labour_. And so the Christian Church in
all ages hath vpon iust occasions separated some weeke daies vnto the
praising of the Lord, and rest from labour. Ioel 2. 15. _Blow the
trumpet in Sion, sanctifie a fast, call a solemne assemblie._ [cy]Daies
of publike fasting for some great iudgement, daies of publike reioycing
for some great benefit, are not vnlawfull, but exceeding commendable,
yea necessarie. Whosoeuer doubts of the Churches libertie herein, or of
the practise of this libertie, may peruse the ninth chapter of _Ester_,
in which it will appeare, that Gods people by the commandement of
_Mordecai_, did euery yeare solemnize and keepe holy the fourteenth and
fifteenth day of the moneth _Adar_, in remembrance of their great
deliuerie from the Treason of _Haman_. Vpon these grounds the last euer
renouned Parliament enacted, That wee should for euer spend the prime
part of this present fifth of Nouember in praying and praising the Lord,
for his vnspeakable goodnesse in deliuering our King, Queene, Prince and
States of this realme from that hellish, horrible, bloody, barbarous
intended massacre by Gunpowder. Now that I may for my part execute the
will of the Parliament (sparing the _Nouelists_, and referring such as
desire to bee further satisfied in this argument of holy dayes, vnto
the iudicious writings of my most honoured and honourable maister,
_Archbishop Whitgift_, in the [cz]defence of his answere to the
Admonition) I proceede in the text, _praise him in his noble acts,
praise him according to his excellent greatnesse_.

  [Sidenote cx: _B. Babington in 4. com. Caluins Cat. Dr. Whitgift
  vbi supra fol. 542. & 553. six daies thou maiest labour._]

  [Sidenote cy: _Perkins aur. Cat. cap. 23._]

  [Sidenote cz: _From pag. 538. to 555._]

[da]Some reade _Laudate eum in [db]virtutibus eius_, praise him in his
_powers_: [dc]other _ob fortitudinem eius_, praise him in his _power_;
and according to these two diuerse translations, I find two different
expositions; one construing it of Gods glorious [dd]Angels, and the
other applying it to Gods glorious acts: For the first it is euident in
holy writ, that there bee certaine distinctions and degrees of Angels in
the quier of Heauen, there be _Seraphins_, Esay 6. 2. _Cherubins_, Gen.
3. 24. _Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, and Powers_, Colloss. 1. 16.
in all which and for all which God is to be praised, as being his
[de]ministring spirits for the good of such as shall be heires of
saluation; as long as wee serue God, all these serue vs, euen the
Cherubins, and Seraphins, Angels, and Archangels. I say, so long as we
serue the Lord, these pages of his honour and parts of his courts attend
vs, and pitch their tents about vs: a doctrine very profitable, very
comfortable, yet for as much as I hold it lesse pertinent to the
present occasion I thus ouerpasse it, and hast to that other exposition
interpreting these words (as our Church readeth) of Gods _noble acts_.

  [Sidenote da: _Vulgar Latine Castalio._]

  [Sidenote db: _Pagnin._ In fortitudinibus.]

  [Sidenote dc: _Vatablus Munster._]

  [Sidenote dd: _Turrecremat. & Raynerius in loc._]

  [Sidenote de: _Heb. 1. 14._]

Now the workes of God are of two sorts, _ad intra_ & _ad extra_: some
be confined within himselfe, other extended towards vs: works of the
sacred Trinitie within it selfe (as that the Father begets, and the
Sonne is begotten, and the holy Ghost proceeds from both) are wonderfull
acts of such an high nature that it is our dutie rather simply to adore,
then subtilly to explore them: all his acts extended toward vs are
summarilie reduced vnto two, namely the works of creation and
redemption. [df]The worke of creation is attributed in the Masse of the
matter to God the Father, in the disposition of the forme to God the
Sonne, in the preseruation of both to God the holy Ghost. So likewise
that of redemption, in election vnto God the Father, in the consummation
vnto God the Sonne, in the application vnto the holy Ghost, all which
are very _noble acts_, and God is to be praised in them _according to
his excellent greatnesse_. The worke of creation is so mightie, that
none could bring it to passe but the Father almightie: that God should
haue nothing but nothing, whereof, wherewith, whereby to build this
high, huge, goodly, faire frame; is a principle which nature cannot
teach, and Philosophie will not beleeue. The worke of redemption is of
farre greater might and mercy, for the making of the world was (if I may
so speke) onely lip-labour vnto God, _he spake the word and it was done,
he commanded and it stood fast_, Psalm. 33. 9. but Christ in redeeming
the world said many words, and did many wonders, and suffered also many
wounds. It is true that the least ake of his least finger is _infiniti
meriti, sed non definiti meriti_, that is of an infinite merit, yet not
that determined ransome for the sinnes of the whole world. It cost him
more to redeeme soules, [dg]_he dyed for our sinnes and rose againe for
our iustification_, hee suffered for vs and that death, and that a
violent death, and of all violent deaths the most accursed death on
the Crosse.

  [Sidenote df: _Aduancement of learning lib. 2. pag. 116._]

  [Sidenote dg: _Rom. 4. 25._]

The worke of sanctification is a noble act also, for euery man if you
rightly consider his making is a wonder, I am saith our [dh]Prophet
fearfully and wonderfully made: but a good man if you consider his new
making is a wonderfull wonder, as [di]_Paul_ speakes _a spectacle to men
and Angels_, as the vulgar Latine runnes in the 68. Psalme, at the last
verse, _mirabilis deus in sanctis_, O God wonderfull art thou in thy
Saints.

  [Sidenote dh: _Psalm. 139. 13._]

  [Sidenote di: _1. Cor. 4. 9._]

But _Dauid_ [dk]here meaneth especially the valiant acts of God in
gouerning & garding his people from their enemies, [dl]O come hither and
behold the workes of God, how wonderfull hee is in his doing toward the
Children of men, he turned the sea into drye land so that his people
went on foot thorough the middest of the sea, the [dm]waters were a wall
vnto them on the right hand and on their left; but the waues of the Sea
returned and couered the chariots and horsemen euen all the hoast of
_Pharaoh_ that pursued them. Almighty God raigned hailstones out of
heauen vpon the cursed Amorites at Bethoran, and they were more
([dn]saith the text) that dyed with the haile, then they whom the
Children of Israell slew with the sword. And when Duke _Iosua_ prayed,
_Sunne stay thou in Gibeon, & thou Moone in the valey of Aialon_:
_the Sunne abode and the Moone stood still vntill the people auenged
themselues vpon their enemies_. When _Zenacherib_ and his innumerous
hoast came to fight against _Hezekiah_ King of Iuda, Gods Angell in one
night slew an hundred eighty and fiue thousand Assyrians. 2. Kings 19.

  [Sidenote dk: _Placid. Parmen and the english Com. dedicated to
  M. Herlakinden._]

  [Sidenote dl: _Psalm. 66. 4._]

  [Sidenote dm: _Exod. 14. 29._]

  [Sidenote dn: _Iosua 10._]

And vndoubtedly (beloued) there is no nation vnder the cope of Heauen
hath had greater occasion to praise God in this kind then England, the
preseruation of the most illustrious princesse the Lady _Elizabeth_
vnder the fiery triall of her vnkind sister Queene _Marie_ was a _noble
act_, and the seminary of much happinesse vnto this kingdome for many
yeares after, and so much the more noble because _Philip_ King of Spaine
hath often confessed that he spared her life (when wildy _Winchester_
and bloodie _Bonner_ had brought her into the snare) not out of any
pietie or pittie, but onely out of policie. Her exaltation to the Crowne
was another _noble act_, so noble that some [do]Popish Prelats in their
enuie burst a sunder and dyed for very griefe of heart. Well might that
good Lady sing and say with the blessed Virgine, _He that is mightie
hath magnified me, and holy is his name, he hath put downe the mightie
from their seat and hath exalted the humble and meeke_: her flourishing
in health, wealth, and godlinesse, more then 44. yeares (in despite
of all her foes abroad, at home, schismaticall, hereticall, open,
intestine) was another _noble act_: for after once the Bull of Pope
_Pius Quintus_ had roared, and his fat Calues had begunne to bellow in
this Island: there passed neuer a yeare, neuer a moneth, neuer a weeke
(I thinke I might say) neuer a day, neuer an houre, but some mischiefe
was intended either against her person or her people: the resisting of
the rebellion in the Northerne parts of England, was _a noble act_: the
discouering and so consequently the defeating of _Campians_ treason _a
noble act_: of _Parris_ treason _a noble act_: of the _Lupus Lopus_
his treason, _a noble act_: of _Squires_ treason, _a noble act_. Her
glorious victories against her fell and insolent enemies the _Spaniards_
in _Ireland_, in _Flanders_, in _France_, in their owne dominions of
_Portugal_, _Indies_, and _Spaine_ were _noble acts_. It was a wonder of
wonders, that a _Mayden Queene_ should at one time be both a staffe to
_Flanders_, and a stay to _France_, a terror to _Pope_, a mirror to
_Turke_, feared abroad, loued at home, Mistresse of the Sea, wonder of
the world. Shee might truely bee called a _Prince of Peace_, for shee
was Crowned in Peace, shee liued in Peace, she dyed in Peace, she was
buried in Peace: and when shee had slept with her Fathers, it was
another _noble act_ of the Lord to send vs in the midst of all our
feare so learned, so meeke, so pious a Prince as King _Iames_, in such
exceeding sweet peace, that neuer a sword was drawn, happily neuer a
word spoken against him. All these were _noble acts_, and ought to be
had in a perpetuall remembrance. But of all other noble preseruations,
_Our deliuerance from that intended mercilesse and matchlesse Massacre
both in fact and fiction, the fifth of Nouember, in the yeare 1605._ is
most _noblie noble_. King _Iames_ on this day might haue said with King
[dp]_Dauid_, _O Lord which art my rocke and my fortresse, thou hast
giuen me the necks of mine enemies, that I might destroy them that hate
me, that I might breake them as small as the dust of the earth, and
tread them flat as the clay of the streete_. [dq]_O giue thankes vnto
the Lord, for he is gracious, and his mercy endureth for euer. Let
Israel now confesse that he is gracious, and that his mercy endureth for
euer. Let the house of Aaron now confesse that his mercy endureth for
euer. Yea let all such as feare the Lord now confesse that his mercy
endureth for euer._ All the Congregations of the Saints in the whole
world, haue good cause to thanke God our strength and deliuerer.
_Scotland_ hath good cause, for if _England_ had been but a _Tuesday
breakefast_, assuredly _Scotland_ should haue been but a _Fridaies
drinking_, one morsell as it were for the greedy deuourer. The Churches
in _France_ relieued often by vs, haue good cause to reioyce with vs.
Our neighbours of _Holland_ haue good cause to triumphe as they doe, for
if our house had been set on fire, their house being the next would haue
been quickly pulled downe. The Churches in _Germanie_, _Denmarke_,
_Hungarie_, _Geneua_ likewise haue good cause to _praise God in this
noble act according to his excellent greatnesse_.

  [Sidenote do: _See M. Foxe Martyr. in fine._]

  [Sidenote dp: _2. Sam. 22. 41._]

  [Sidenote dq: _Psalm. 118._]

More principally the Common-weale of England, and in it all men of all
factions, and all fashions whatsoeuer. _Atheists_ (if they think there
be a God) haue good cause to thanke God, acknowledging his mercie toward
them in sparing vs, and so sauing the bad for the [dr]righteous sake.
_Carnall Gospellers_ haue good cause to thanke God, confessing that so
long as [ds]_Lot_ is in _Sodome_, it can not be destroyed; and so long
as _Moses_ standeth in the [dt]gap, and [du]prayeth for his people, Gods
wrathfull indignation can not deuoure vs. Yea, let the _Gunpowder men_
themselues (if they haue any sparke of grace) confesse that God is to be
praised in this _noble act_; for suppose (God be thanked, we may suppose
and dispose thus of these matters vnto our comfort) I say suppose, their
diuelish plot had been acted, I assure my selfe our cause had been farre
better, and our number farre greater than theirs; and as for our sinnes
(which are indeede our greatest enemies) they would haue brought into
the field so many as we: so that hauing so much armour of light, and
more armour of proofe then they, [dx]_Causa iubet melior superos sperare
secundos_.

  [Sidenote dr: _Gen. 18. 26._]

  [Sidenote ds: _Gen. 19. 22._]

  [Sidenote dt: _Psalm. 106. 23._]

  [Sidenote du: _Exod. 32. 11._]

  [Sidenote dx: _Lucan._]

But suppose the least and the worst part had ouercome the bigger and
the better, yet (if they bee not hewen out of hard rockes) if these
_Romanists_ haue not sucked the milke of wolues (as it is reported
of the first founder of Rome) they would haue relented to see their
natiue Country made nothing else but a verie shambles of _Italian_ and
_Ignatian_ butchers. When _Alexander_ saw the dead corps of _Darius_;
and _Iulius Cæsar_, the head of _Pompey_; and _Marcus Marcellus_,
_Syracusa_ burne; and _Scipio_, _Numantia_ spoild; and _Titus_,
_Hierusalem_ made [dy]euen with the ground, they could not abstaine from
weeping, albeit they were mortall enemies. But aboue all other in this
kingdome, the truely zealous, and zealously true hearted protestants
haue greatest occasion of reioycing; for if the Lord had not (_according
to his excellent greatnes_, and according to his excellent goodnes too)
deliuered vs out of this gun-powder gulfe, our bodies happily might haue
beene made food for the foules, or else fewell for the fire; and that
which would haue grieued our posteritie more, supersition and Idolatrie
might in short time haue been replanted in this land; I meane that
vpstart Antichristian religion of _Rome_, wherein many things,
especially foure (as iudicious [dz]_Fox_ well obserued) are most
abominable.

    1. Vnlimited jurisdiction, derogatorie to all Kings and Emperours.

    2. Insolent titles, preiudiciall to all Bishops and Prelates.

    3. Corrupt doctrine, injurious to all Christians.

    4. Filthie lise, detestable to all men.

  [Sidenote dy: _Luc. 19. 44._]

  [Sidenote dz: _Martyr. pag. 1._]

The greater was our danger, the greater was our deliuerance; the greater
our deliuerance, the greater our thankes should be; for as it followeth
in my text, _God is to be praised according to his excellent greatnes_.
It is true that our most and best praises are few for the number, and
little for the measure; whereas God is infinite for his goodnes, and in
his greatnesse incomprehensible. So that the meaning of [ea]_Dauid_ is,
that we should praise him according to our capacitie, and not according
to his immensitie; according to the grace bestowed vpon vs, and not
according to the glorie which is in him. Ecclesiasticus 43. 30. _Praise
the Lord, and magnifie him as much as ye can, yet doth he farre exceed.
Exalt him with all your power, and be not weary, yet can ye not attaine
vnto it._

  [Sidenote ea: _Basil. Musculus, Placid. parnen. in loc._]

Now where the Lord giueth a greater meane, there he requireth a greater
measure; where he bestoweth a greater portion of giftes, he doth expect
a greater proportion of glorie. Wherefore seeing the Lord hath out of
his abundant mercie conferred vpon this kingdome inestimable blessings,
in the preaching of his word for the space of more then fiftie yeares;
it is questionlesse he lookes for no little thankes or small praise, but
for great thankes and great praise according to his excellent greatnesse
manifested in this our deliuerance. I come therefore to the second part
of this Psalme, shewing _with what_ God is to be praised, _In the sound
of the trumpet, &c._

God is to be praised (saith [eb]_Augustine_) _totis votis de totis
vobis_ with all your soules, and with all your selues. That therefore
we may manifest our inward affections by such outward actions as are
commendable, where there be _trumpets_, let them sound: where there be
_lutes_ and _harpes_, let them strike vp: where there be _loud Cymbals_
and _well tuned Cymbals_, let them ring, let them sing the praises of
God for this our most happy deliuerance; let trumpet and tongue, viol &
voice, lute & life, witnes our hartie reioycing in the Lord. If our true
zeale were more fierie within, it would doubtlesse break forth into moe
publike workes, then it doth, against that bloody brood of the
Gun-powder crue. There haue been many collections in euery Dioces for
the reedifying of the Churches of Saint _Albanes_ and _Arthuret_, the
which I assure my selfe were good works: there haue been in this latter
age many gorgeous, I might say glorious buildings erected about and in
this honorable Citie, to the great ornament of our Country, the which I
thinke you may number among your good workes: there haue bin Lotteries
to further _Virginean_ enterprises, and these (for any thing I know)
were good workes also: there haue been many new play-houses, and one
faire Burse lately built; _Paris_-garden in a flourishing estate makes a
great noyse still, and as I heare _Charing_ Crosse shall haue a new coat
too: but in the meane time while so many monuments are raised, either
to the honour of the dead, or else for the profit and pleasure of the
lyuing: _Dic mihi musa virum_, I pray Muse and shew me the man, who
ioynes with that euer zealous, reuerend, learned Deane in founding a
Colledge for a Societie of writers against the superstitious Idolatries
of the Romane Synagogue, the which happily might be like _the [ec]Tower
of Dauid_, where the strong men of Israel might haue shieldes and
targets to fight the Lords battaile: [ed]_Is it time for your selues
to dwell in your seiled houses, and this house lye wast?_

  [Sidenote eb: _In Psalm. 147._]

  [Sidenote ec: _Cant. 4. 4._]

  [Sidenote ed: _Haggai. 1. 4._]

Remember I beseech you the words of [ee]_Azariah_ vnto King _Asa_ and
the men of Iuda, _The Lord is with you while you are with him, and if
yee seeke him, he will be found of you; but if yee forsake him, he will
forsake you_. Benot cold in a good cause, flie not out of the field,
play not the cowards in the Lords holie wars; for albeit happily your
selues are like for your time to do wel enough in despite of the Diuell,
and the Pope his darling: yet your posteritie will assuredly rue it, and
haue iust cause to curse their dastardly, spiritlesse and worthlesse
progenitors. I say no more concerning this point, only I pray with our
forefathers in the first English Letany, set out in the dayes of King
_Henry_ the 8. _from all sedition and priuie conspiracie, from the
tyrannie of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable enormities, from
all false doctrine and heresie, from hardnesse of heart, and contempt of
thy word and commandement._

  _Good Lord deliuer vs._

  [Sidenote ee: _2. Chron. 15. 2._]

Where note by the way, that the Popes abominable tyrannie is hedged in
(as it were) on the one side with _sedition_ and _priuie conspiracy_,
and on the other side with _false doctrine_ and _heresie_. I haue
another prayer, and for as much as it is in Latine, I must entreat all
such (if any such here be present, who loue _Bonauentures_ psalter and
the Romish seruice) to ioyne with vs in this orison. _Papa noster qui es
Romæ maledicetur nomen tuum, intereat regnum tuum, impediatur voluntas
tua, sicut in Coelo sic et in terra. Potum nostrum in Coena dominica
da nobis hodie, & remitte nummos nostros quos tibi dedimus ob
indulgentias, sicut & nos remittimus tibi indulgentias, & ne nos inducas
in hæresin, sed libera nos a miseria, quoniam tuum est infernum, pix &
sulphur in secula seculorum._

The word of God is a [ef]two edged sword, sharp in a literal, and sharp
in an allegoricall exposition. Hitherto you haue heard the history, now
there remaineth a mistery, _nihil enim hic ludicrum aut lubricum_ saith
[eg]_Augustine_, and therefore [eh]diuines vnderstand here by the
_sounding of the trumpet_, the preaching of the Gospell, [ei]whose
sound went out thorow all the earth vnto the endes of the world: at the
seuenfold sounding of this trumpet the walles of [ek]Iericho fal, that
is all the pompes and powers of this world are conquered & brought to
nought, this trumpet is mightie thorough God to cast downe holdes, and
Imaginations, and euery high thing that is exalted against the knowledge
of God. 2. Cor. 10. 4.

  [Sidenote ef: _Heb. 4. 12._]

  [Sidenote eg: _In loc._]

  [Sidenote eh: _Prosper Luther Hugo Card._]

  [Sidenote ei: _Rom. 10. 18._]

  [Sidenote ek: _Iosua. 6. Strictior est tuba ex parte buccinantis
  quàm ex altera, quia prædicator strictius se debet examinare. Hugo
  Card. in loc._]

[el]Other say that the Saints are these _trumpets_, and _harpes_, and
_Cymbals_, and that their [em]members make this musicke to the Lord, our
eyes praies the Lord, while they be [en]lifted vp vnto their maker in
heauen, and waite vpon his mercy: our tongues praise the Lord, in
singing [eo]Psalmes, and hymnes, and spirituall songs vnto the Lord:
our eares praise the Lord, while they [ep]heare the word of God with
attention: our hands praise the Lord, while they be [eq]stretched out
vnto the poore, and while they [er]worke the thing that is good: our
feete praise the Lord, when they bee not [es]swift to shed blood, but
[et]stand in the gates of Gods house, ready to [eu]run the wayes of his
commandements. _In Tympano sicca & percussa pellis resonat, in choro
autem voces sociatæ concordant_ said [ex]_Gregorie_ the great: wherefore
[ey]such as mortifie the lusts of the flesh praise God _in tympano_, and
they who keepe the [ez]vnity of the spirit in the bond of peace, praise
God _in choro_: the _Brownist_ in separating himselfe from the Church
though he seeme to praise God _in tympano_, yet hee doth not praise God
_in choro_: and the _carnall gospeller_ albeit he ioyne with the Church
_in choro_, yet he prayseth not God _in tympano_; they praise God in
_well tuned Cymbals_ who tune their soules before they preach or pray,
whosoeuer desires to bee a sweete singer in Israel must bee learned in
the schoole, before hee be lowd in the temple: the heart likewise must
be prepared for praying, as the harpe for playing, if our instruments of
praise be not in tune, then our whole deuotion is like _the [fa]sounding
brasse or as the tinckling Cymbal_: in Gods quier there is first _tune
well_, and then _sound well_, if once we can say with [fb]_Dauid_,
_O God mine heart is ready, mine heart is ready_, then our lute and
harpe will awake right early: let thy soule praise the Lord, and then
all that is either without or about thee will instantly doe the same.

  [Sidenote el: _Augustin in loc._]

  [Sidenote em: _Chrysost. Euthym. in loc._]

  [Sidenote en: _Psalm. 123._]

  [Sidenote eo: _Colos. 3. 16._]

  [Sidenote ep: _Mat. 13. 9._]

  [Sidenote eq: _Ecclesi. 7. 32._]

  [Sidenote er: _Ephes. 4. 24._]

  [Sidenote es: _Psal. 14. 6._]

  [Sidenote et: _Psal. 122. 2._]

  [Sidenote eu: _Psal. 119. 32._]

  [Sidenote ex: _Pastoral. part. 3. admonit. 23._]

  [Sidenote ey: _August. Cassiod. Hugo. Card. in loc._]

  [Sidenote ez: _Ephes. 4. 3._]

  [Sidenote fa: _1. Cor. 13. 1._]

  [Sidenote fb: _Psalm. 108. 1._]

_Let euery thing that hath breath praise the Lord_, that is [fc]_omne
spirans_, [fd]_omnis spiritualis_, [fe]_omnis spiritus_, let euery
creature praise the lord for his estate of confection, euery Christian
praise the Lord for his estate of refection, euery blessed spirit loosed
out of the worldes misery praise the Lord for his estate of perfection,
let euery creature, man aboue all the Creatures, and the soule of man
aboue all that is in man praise the Lord. _Omnis spiritus, i. [ff]totus
spiritus_, [fg]all the heart, all the soule, all the mind, as the
psalmist [fh]elsewhere, I will thanke thee O Lord my God with all mine
heart, euen with my [fi]whole heart, or _omnis spiritus_ the spirit
of euery man in euery place, for this saying is [fk]propheticall,
insinuating that God in time to come, shall not only be worshipped of
the Iewes at Ierusalem with outward ceremonies, _in the sound of the
trumpet and vpon the lute and harpe_: but in all places, of all persons
in spirit and truth as Christ expounds _Dauid_ in the 4. of Saint
_Iohns_ Gospell at the 23. verse, whereas vnbeleeuing Iewes are the
sonnes of _Abraham_ according to the flesh only, beleeuing Gentiles are
the [fl]seed of _Abraham_ according to the spirit, and heires by
promise, more Israel saith [fm]_Augustine_ then Israel it selfe. The
sonnes of _Abraham_ (as Christ tels vs in the [fn]Gospell) are they who
doe the workes of _Abraham_, and _Abrahams_ chiefe worke was faith,
_Abraham_ beleeued (saith the [fo]text) and it was imputed to him for
righteousnes. _Ergo_, the true beleeuer is a right Isralite, blessed
with faithfull _Abraham_. Galat. 3. 9. [fp]some stretch this further,
applying it not onely to the spirits of men in the Church militant, but
also to the blessed Angels and Saints in the triumphant, for this Psalme
consists of a threefold _apostrophe_.

  [Sidenote fc: _Agellius Vatablus_.]

  [Sidenote fd: _Hieron. August._]

  [Sidenote fe: _Genebrard & alij plerique._]

  [Sidenote ff: _Hugo. Iunius._]

  [Sidenote fg: _Luk. 10. 27._]

  [Sidenote fh: _Psal. 86. 12._]

  [Sidenote fi: _Psal. 111. 1._]

  [Sidenote fk: _Caluin. Genebrard. in loc._]

  [Sidenote fl: _Galat. 3. 29._]

  [Sidenote fm: _Psalm. 148._]

  [Sidenote fn: _Iohn 8. 39._]

  [Sidenote fo: _Gen. 15. 6. Rom. 4. 3._]

  [Sidenote fp: _Genebrard._]

1. _Dauid_ inuiteth all the Citizens of heauen, _O praise God in his
sanctuarie, praise him in the firmament of his power_.

2. All the dwellers vpon earth, _praise him in the sound of the trumpet,
praise him vpon the lute and harpe, &c._

3. Both and all, _let euery thing that hath breath_, euery thing which
hath either the life of nature, or of grace, or of glorie, let _euery
spirit_ [fq]whether it be terrestriall or celestiall, of whatsoeuer
condition, age, sexe, _praise the Lord_.

  [Sidenote fq: _Placidus parmensis & Bellarmin. in loc._]

It is a [fr]_Rabbinical_ conceit that this hymne consists of 13.
_Halleluiahs_, answering 13. Properties of God mentioned Exod. 34. 6.7.
verses, and in that our Prophet after a dozen _Halleluiahs_ hath not
done, but addeth a thirteenth, hee doth insinuate that when all our
deuotion is finished, it is our dutie to begin againe with Gods praise,
for as [fs]of him, and thorough him, and for him, are all things, euen
so to him is due all glorie for euermore: as his mercies are from
euerlasting to euerlasting, from euerlasting election, to euerlasting
glorification: so likewise his praises are to bee sung for euer and
euer. In this life we begin this hymne singing (as musitians speake) in
_breifs_ and _semibriefs_ a staffe or two, but in the world to come
standing before the throne of the Lambe, clothed in long white robes,
accompanied with all the sweet voyces of heauens incomparable melodious
quire: we shall eternally sing, [ft]_Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
almightie, which was, and which is, and which is to come, [fu]praise,
and glorie, and wisdome, and power, and might, be vnto our God for
euermore._ Amen.

  [Sidenote fr: _Genebrard._]

  [Sidenote fs: _Rom. 11. 36._]

  [Sidenote ft: _Apocalip. 4. 8._]

  [Sidenote fu: _Apocalip. 7. 12._]


                     FINIS.


           *       *       *       *


[Notes and Errata

In the Latin words "Coelo" and "Coena", the letter combination "oe" was
printed in single-letter (ligature) form, analogous to æ for ae.

The titles "Mr." and "Dr." were printed with superscript r, properly
transcribed M^{r}. and D^{r}. They have been simplified for readability.

Years are always printed with following period (full stop), regardless
of place in the sentence.

Sidenotes--here equivalent to footnotes--were labeled sequentially a-z,