*CHAPTER XV.*

                          *GENTLE AND SIMPLE.*


Toney wished with all her heart her _avante garde_ had not been shown
into Lady Dove's presence, but now that they were here she would not for
the world hustle them out.  She might hurt their feelings, and they must
consider that "something to their advantage" meant only a snubbing.  She
hid her despair with extra energy.  How she hated social distinctions!
The Honourable Edward came forward to greet her with great cordiality.
His mother, more slowly, did the same.  Toney felt a difficulty in
introducing the _avante garde_, as she did not know one of their names.
However she made a dash at Smith, hoping one of them would respond to
the call.

"Oh, Mr. Lang, may I introduce Mr. Smith to you?"  She seized on the
meekest and saddest individual, who wore large spectacles and looked
much depressed.

"My name is Dr. Harris," he said, raising himself to his full height.
"The Rev. Smith you may mean," and he indicated an old clergyman wearing
a threadbare coat, who also held the advertisement in his hand.

"Oh yes, of course, how do you do, Mr. Smith? You came to see Mr.
Russell, didn't you, but I can do just as well.  Mr. Lang, this is Mr.
Smith and Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Harris."

"Miss Smith, if you please," corrected a prim lady with remains of faint
beauty.

Mrs. Harris, however, looked most disconcerted; Lady Dove's anger had
fallen especially upon her, so now she only murmured, holding out a
piece of newspaper.

"We only came to see about this advertisement, because we didn't get any
answer, and we were so anxious----"

"Of course, yes, it's all right."  Then Toney turned to the last
individual, a man who looked somewhat superior to the others, and who
smiled without intermission.

"Mr.----"  Toney paused, she couldn't say Smith again, but she got no
answer, only a nod and another smile.

"He's stone deaf," said Miss Smith, who by her manner was trying to show
Toney that a clergyman's sister is always a lady, little guessing that
Toney cared for none of such things.

"He joined us," said Dr. Harris, "but his infirmity makes it difficult
to converse with him, his name is, I believe, Grant--Captain Grant!"

Captain Grant smiled and nodded, and insisted on Toney's reading her own
advertisement, by pointing to it line by line with his first finger.

"Yes, of course--Mr. Lang, Captain Grant," she introduced the two, and
then hurriedly went to the tea-table, where Mrs. Faber was in her old
position of tea-maker.

"Chum, dear, I'm plunging about in a bog; give them some tea quickly;
that will be to their advantage anyhow.  Mr. Lang will perhaps help me.
Aunt Dove is looking awfully churny with the poor dears."

For a few minutes Toney flew about helping her five friends to minute
cups of tea and tiny wafers of bread and butter, but the Honourable
Edward Lang came nobly to the front, though with an amused smile on his
face.  The two elder ladies talked together earnestly and discussed the
injustice of Radicals and Socialists, for on these topics they were in
accord.

Dr. Harris was not however going to be put off with only tiny cups of
tea.

"I should be much obliged, madam, if you could tell me when we may
expect to see Mr. Plantagenet Russell?  We, at all events, must catch
the earliest train back."

"There he is!" exclaimed Toney, catching sight of Lewis and Mr. Russell
coming hastily to the house.  "I really think you had better go and see
him in his private room.  Let me show you the way, and I'll order a
substantial tea there.  You must be awfully hungry."

Toney headed the procession out of the drawing-room, Edward Lang,
hurrying to open the door for her, and hiding, as best he could, his
amused smile as Toney nodded at him, saying, "I'll come back soon."

Lady Dove gave a sigh of relief.  She was so much annoyed that she
forgot her role of kind aunt.

"Antonia is incorrigible.  You see how she collects strange people round
her.  I tried hard to show her what an English lady should be like, but
it was trouble wasted."

"She will soon outgrow all that," said Lady Southbourne kindly; "in
these days young people are so original, but it does not last!"

Mr. Lang laughed heartily.

"I am sure Miss Whitburn will always be original. She certainly can't
help being kind."

"She drags Sir Evas into all kinds of queer things. He has really felt
the strain of so much work. General Stone was hardly kind to make him
the girl's guardian."

"He looked as if he enjoyed all the coming of age," said Edward Lang; to
himself he added, "I don't mind relieving him of the burden of fifty
thousand a year at all!  Good heavens! the girl must be allowed to have
her head at first, then she'll soon calm down."

"Dear Lady Dove," said Lady Southbourne, gently laying her pale lavender
kid gloved hand on her hostess as a mark of sympathy, "young people will
be young people, I daresay when you were young----"

"No indeed, I was brought up by a very particular mother, who knew what
a young lady should be like."

"Ah! yes, those were indeed good old days!"

At this moment Toney rushed in again with breathless speed, and
addressed herself to Mr. Lang.

"There! it's all right, and they have unfrozen, poor dears.  It's
strange, isn't it, how these stately English homes act like cold storage
on people."

"Cold storage brings us excellent things from abroad."

"I'd rather come over warm!  Gracious stars!  I had a trouble to thaw
them, but now they're sitting down to a proper meal."

"Are your friends Salvationists, Antonia, or did they come for begging
purposes?" said Lady Dove.

"They came hoping to hear of something to their advantage.  You see,
Lady Southbourne, I advertised for people in reduced circumstances, and
the answers were so many that Mr. Russell couldn't keep ahead."

"Something to their advantage, and pray what is that, Antonia?  You must
have taken leave of your five senses!" exclaimed Lady Dove, turning pink
with vexation.

Here Mrs. Faber threw herself into the breach.

"It's only one of Toney's kind schemes, Lady Dove.  I will go and see
after the visitors, Toney, if you take my place."

This happily turned the stream of hot lava from poor Toney, and Lady
Dove remarked,

"It is most tiresome, my companion has influenza. I generally find,
don't you, Lady Southbourne, that middle-class people always give in if
even a little finger aches.  Of course, poor things, they do not
understand our motto of 'noblesse oblige.'"

The Honourable Edward left the two ladies to their duet over the
cowardice of the middle-class, and went to sit by Toney, who was
drinking tea in earnest.

"It's rather warm work when you're taken by surprise.  If I had been
here it would have been all right," she said, smiling once more.

"I think it's always 'all right' where you are," said the young man
gallantly.  Toney looked up suddenly and gazed at him.

"Gracious stars! how awfully nice of you to say that, but it isn't true!
I always seem to raise the dust when I come into this room!  Aunt Dove
was made of different paste, so somehow we don't blend. You see I was
just reared anyhow, never knew there were gentlemen and ladies till I
came here!  Out home we were all men and women, and pretty rough at
that--ouf!"

"We are all going to become Socialists, whether we like it or not," he
said softly.

"You'll exclude Aunt Dove, won't you?" and Toney's merry laugh sounded
through the room.

"So little self-control," Lady Dove was heard to murmur.

"That's me!" said Toney, nodding her head, "but as you were kind enough
just now to overlook my 'bringing up,' as Aunt Dove calls it, I'll tell
you about my friends.  I'm going to buy Deep Hollow Farm and build a
sort of a Home for stray folk that can't swim against the stream."

"Will these be your first inmates?"

"Perhaps, Mr. Russell will tabulate them all, and we'll take the worst
cases.  No favour, but, of course, I must help them because they took
such a lot of trouble to come to-day, and because I expect they felt
pretty bad before I came!"

"I think it is a noble idea, Miss Whitburn--I hope you will let me help
you as much as I can.  There may be some cases in which I can prove
useful."

"Of course there will be.  Let me see, will you come and help to
tabulate?  Mr. Russell groans over the work."

Mr. Lang had no intention of working hard, but he hid this intention.

"I'm at your commands, Miss Whitburn."  He was wondering in what manner
and how soon he could make an offer to Toney!  Would she be easily won?
He began to fear a title would not be a great attraction.  He would have
to go in for Socialism or Individualism or some 'ism, to have a better
chance of getting L50,000 a year.  It would be rather fatiguing, but his
debts were many, and the money was worth the effort.  Miss Whitburn was
not likely to be particular about tying up money, and Sir Evas, her
guardian, was very easy-going, and would be glad to get her well
married.  So argued Edward Lang, never doubting but that he would be a
welcome suitor.  Unfortunately many mothers with marriageable daughters
were so very kind to him and had spoilt him.  At the bottom he was not a
bad fellow, but terribly extravagant.

"Then let me command you to go away," said Toney laughing, "for Aunt
Dove won't like me to leave you, and those poor people will find
themselves thrown from the frying-pan into the fire.  Mr. Russell will
want to tabulate them so minutely."

The Honourable Edward rose quite willingly. He was afraid of seeing more
of Toney's "friends" arriving, and in any case he could not very
conveniently make love to the heiress in this formal drawing-room.

"If I obey you now, tell me when I may come again?"

"Oh, whenever you like, there's sure to be something going on in the
tabulating line for some time to come."  Toney's laugh was catching.

"But I may be rewarded with a talk with you, apart from the genteel
beggars," he said cheerfully.

"It's all very well laughing at beggars, but if one has nothing one does
strange things.  Do you know when I first came here I was a beggar, and
not at all genteel, Aunt Dove would tell you--and I was glad to make a
whistle for five shillings!"

"Was it a successful whistle?"

"I rather think it was!  I believe it was owing to it that General Stone
left me his money.  Now do say good-bye, please."

"_Au revoir_ then, Miss Whitburn, I prefer saying that----  Mother, I
really think----"  Lady Southbourne always obeyed her son and rose
immediately.

"So delighted to have seen you not looking a bit tired after your
delightful party," she said to Toney, keeping her hand affectionately in
her lavender kid, "I wish we could stay longer----  Now why not come
over and spend a few days at the Towers? Wouldn't that be delightful,
Edward?"

"It would indeed!"

Toney shook her head.

"Afraid I can't, thanks; besides, I shouldn't know what to do, and at
Aldersfield I've got heaps waiting to be settled."

"Of course we mustn't be selfish," said Lady Southbourne, not taking any
notice of Toney's reason for not going to the Towers!

At last they were off, followed by the most gracious remarks of Lady
Dove as Toney flew back to her own room.

There she found not only Dr. and Mrs. Harris, Mr. and Miss Smith, and
Captain Grant, but also Lewis and Mrs. Faber assisting the visitors to
make a square meal; whilst Mr. Russell was tabulating them, every now
and then making a dart at one of the individuals to get special answers.

"This is nice!  How kind of you, Mr. Waycott. Lady Southbourne and the
Honourable Edward took so long to go I had to give him a hint."

"Oh, Toney! what did you say?" said Mrs. Faber.

"Why I asked him to go and he went.  It's better to speak honest, isn't
it?--Dr. Harris, have some more veal pie.  Our cook is just perfect at
veal pies."

Dr. Harris said he didn't mind if he did have some more, but at that
moment Mr. Russell made a dart at Miss Smith.

"What is the date of your birth, Miss Smith?"

Now Miss Smith's age was a hid treasure, and to be asked to dig it up in
this public way was more than she could bear.  She blushed a vivid
purple.

"It's of no consequence whatever, Mr. Russell," she said.  "I really
have forgotten my birthday."  Mr. Russell went back and put down
"birthday forgotten."

"But the year?" he asked again, feeling his whole _raison d'etre_
depended on that date.

"Let me see--What year were you born, brother?"

Mr. Smith blinked very often as he answered, wishing to spare his
sister.

"I think I had better send you these particulars--if there is--any good
to be got by them."

"Oh, never mind," said Toney, seeing the difficulty. "Mr. Russell,
please put 'Uncertain.'  It isn't easy to remember, if you are asked
suddenly how old one is, is it, Mr. Waycott?"  Lewis was stifling a
smile.

"I am six-and-twenty, I know, because Aunt Honoria keeps my birthdays
and announces my age every year."

"Your relative knows that a man does not mind," said Dr. Harris, "but
ladies have rooted objections to telling their age."  He bowed to Miss
Smith, and Miss Smith giggled softly.

Toney saw the motor drive up, and seized the occasion to dash away.  She
soon returned.

"Now you shall all be driven to the station, when you are ready, and I
do hope you won't regret your journey.  It's been so very, very nice,
seeing you. Just on the day, too, that I have taken the farm."

By the time they were squeezed into the big motor their faces were
wreathed with smiles, especially when Toney had thrust an envelope into
each of their hands, murmuring something about "Just to pay the
journey."  The deaf gentleman opened it publicly, and nearly dropped the
five pound note, then nearly all tumbled out again to say "Thank you,"
but at a sign from Toney Jim flew off as if pursued by the furies.




                             *CHAPTER XVI.*

                           *UNEXPECTED NEWS.*


"Oh, Toney, what did you give them?" asked Mrs. Faber, when they all
returned to Toney's sitting-room.  "Wasn't it a pity to----"

"Now Chum is against me.  It was only five pounds each, as they had to
pay the journeys--Mr. Waycott, you are the only one who understands."

"I'm delighted you say so, but--in what way do I show my superior
wisdom?" said Lewis smiling.

"You don't think that money is a little china god that has to be handled
carefully."

"I suppose we all have crooked ideas of money," he said, conscious that
he didn't care much about these wayfaring beggars; certainly not at all
as Toney did.

"They shouldn't have been so impatient," said Plantagenet Russell,
turning over his big book.  "I had only reached the letter H, but I'll
send a card at once to all the rest, or we shall have daily
processions."

"Well, I'm very glad they came, for now you see with your own eye, Mr.
Russell, that my poor clergy, doctors, sailors, and relations of the
above, do exist!"  They all laughed.

"Of course they exist, Miss Whitburn, but if they had been properly
careful and hard-working they wouldn't now be out of elbows.  And Miss
Smith was so ridiculous about her age!"

"She was a bit jibby about it, wasn't she? but I expect she had a lover
somewhere, and she doesn't like to let it out."

"Oh, Toney, you are too romantic--you always were," said Mrs. Faber.

"Anyhow, you can't complain of deaf Captain Grant.  He looked so
cheerful, and did not want to hide his age."

Plantagenet turned over to the letter G in his book.

"Here he is; Grant, Charles, Captain.  Lost hearing and work.  Very
small income, age sixty, only poor relations, references."

"Of course they sound uninteresting as tabulated folk.  I'm sure St.
Francis never tabulated people! There's a lovely story of one of the
brothers, who was nursing a leper, being told to go fifteen miles off,
and not liking to leave his patient, took him up on his back from dawn
to sunrise all the way, and no one could believe he could have done it
in the time, so everybody was awfully astonished."

"I'm thankful there are no lepers in England now, Miss Whitburn," said
Mr. Russell in his drawling voice; "I'm rather afraid you might wish me
to carry one of them fifteen miles if you sent me on a message.
Couldn't do it, I assure you!"

The idea made them all laugh.

"I must go back now," said Lewis, "and, short of lepers, what can I do
to help you?"

"I really think we must all help to answer the letters if you will come
to-morrow morning; Mr. Russell has composed a short note asking for all
particulars."

"Age and pedigree!  Well, Russell, I'll turn up and help to-morrow,"
said Lewis, nodding towards the secretary.

"There's the bell," exclaimed Mrs. Faber.  "I expect Lady Dove will want
her novel.  Henry says I must come home to-morrow.  I do hope Miss
Grossman will be well enough to come down."

"I'll find time, if she is not, Chum, dear.  You are such an angel!  You
are just like Santa Clara; isn't she, Mr. Russell?"

"I'm not acquainted with Santa Clara," he answered, "but I shall be
quite willing to do anything I can for Lady Dove, Mrs. Faber, when my
labours are lessened."

Toney went off with Lewis, she felt she must have a stretch after her
anxieties.

"I'm so happy about that land," she exclaimed, as the two crossed the
park in the twilight, "that I can't feel upset even!  I shall write to
my architect to-night.  You do seem to make everything straight."

"Do I?" said Lewis in a low voice.  Was it ever going to dawn on Toney
why he tried to make everything straight?  At present he feared she
credited him with pure love of humanity.  If only he dared speak; but,
no, that money stood in the way.  How he hated fifty thousand a year!

"Yes, you do; and that's why, when I have any plan, I always think first
of you.  Dear Chum is so afraid of doing wrong, and Uncle Evas is so
just--straight-ahead-going, that a secret is really no use at all with
him!  He blurts it out at the most inconvenient moment!  He is a dear
old duck all the same!  He sits up all night, or did, to write my
business letters because Aunt Dove couldn't bear to see him do it.
Well, but that's not what I wanted to ask you about."

"Any more stray sheep, Toney?  They're pretty thick on the ground as it
is!"

"I hope they are all in the fold to-night, but I want to talk about
Jeanie and Maud Hamilton.  I know you would like them to have something
nice and so you can best help me."

"My dear Toney, they wouldn't like being tabulated," said Lewis
laughing.

"No, of course not.  I wish Mr. Russell had not that craze; however,
Pups used to say, 'every man knows what crutch suits him best.'  I never
quite knew what he meant, but I do now: Mr. Russell finds that big book
his crutch."

"But what about the Hamiltons?  You know Aunt Honoria and I are always
delighted to have them with us.  My Uncle Hamilton was an easy-going
spendthrift, and never thought what would happen when he died, so when
he departed this life, they said he had quietly eaten more than half his
capital."

"I daresay he helped other people, so that's just the reason why other
people should take care of his children.  Jeanie loves music and wants
to go to Vienna, I heard her say so, and Maud--Maud is nice, isn't she?"

"Yes, she is vastly improved."

"Yes, and she is what Aunt Dove calls a 'real lady.'  Of course she
looked hard at me when she said it!  She meant I wasn't, and I'm not, I
know I wasn't born that way----  Well, I want somehow to give Maud a
good time and Jeanie too at Vienna. I want to pay all their masters and
expenses, and how is it to be managed without letting them know it?"

"Toney, you really mustn't----  Besides, there's no way of doing it."

"Yes, there must be some uncle in Australia or Africa, or Klondike, that
would send them three hundred pounds."

"I don't know of any such individual.  Yes, by the way, there is an old
cousin in the Argentine, from whom they expect a legacy.  I believe he
is a penniless rascal, but they paint him with a coat of gilding and
call him, 'dear Cousin Seaton.'"  They laughed together like two good
comrades.

"He'll do!  Mr. Staines, who is very understanding, will get someone to
send it from the Argentine, and that will be true.  'Three hundred
pounds from a friend in the Argentine for musical training in Germany,'
and they'll jump to conclusions!"

"And you want me to abet you in the falsehood?"

"Of course.  You will have to belong to the 'poor little disciples,' as
St. Francis liked his brothers to be called, and they had to do all
sorts of queer commissions."

"Did the 'poor little disciples' have to swallow bare-faced deceptions?"

"I think so, for they couldn't have liked all they had to do and yet
they said they did!  It is a farce, isn't it?  Oh, good-bye, there's
Uncle Evas coming, and I'll just walk back with him.  He's a little down
to-day.  Guess he's had to make head against a breeze.  He's quite ready
for a 'poor little disciple.'"

Lewis could not help laughing.  Something in Toney carried all before
her, because she never let self get into her plans.  Sir Evas brightened
up as he met his niece.

"Hulloa! where are you two going?  I've had a day among the farms.
There's a lot of repairs to be done and they think I must see them all
myself."

"So you should, uncle!  Tell you what, we'll just titivate them all up
and you'll have no more trouble for years."

"My dear Toney!  It's much better done by degrees, doesn't drain the
property so much."

"We'll do it now, uncle, and all at once.  You always say, 'make hay
while the sun shines,' and that's what I am doing."

"Toney has been making hay with a vengeance to-day, Sir Evas," and Lewis
told the history of the _avant garde_.

"My dear girl, the house will be besieged!  You see, Lewis, what a
mistake the General made," said Sir Evas laughing, "did your aunt----
Ehem--bear it well?"

Toney shook her head.

"It shan't happen again, uncle.  We'll tabulate hard to-morrow.  It all
comes of tabulating!  Now pretend you know nothing about it.  Where
ignorance is bliss.  Good-bye, Mr. Waycott, and thank you awfully much.
Now, Uncle Evas, we must quick trot home, it's Chum's last evening.
Remember to be very nice and grateful to her. She's done a lot of hard
work you know."

"So have we all, Toney!  However, I'll compose a speech on the way home.
Good night, Waycott, hope you don't want speeches."

Lewis surreptitiously watched them going off.  It seemed like the last
ray of evening sunshine disappearing in the woods.  Why should he bother
about the money?  Why?  Then he shook his head.  Everyone would say he
had married Toney's fifty thousand.  His pride rebelled and even a
perfectly clear conscience could not conquer it.

"There's a lovely moon so we shan't be benighted," said Toney, taking
her uncle's arm.

"I say, Toney, we mustn't be late for dinner," he said walking quicker.
He was trying to brace himself to hear the story of the _avant garde_,
and this time he knew it would not be accompanied with laughter.

"Isn't dinner a bother?  Meals in general too. Brother Juniper, that's
the one who didn't speak for six months and played see-saw with the
children--well, he once was left alone and he was told to see he cooked
some food when the others returned, and he agreed, but when they were
gone he thought it was a lot of trouble so much food cooking, so he went
begging for food and made a big fire, and borrowed big pots and put all
the food he got into it.  Fowls with their feathers on, and eggs with
their shells, and the fire was so big that he had to tie a plank on his
body to get near the pots.  Then at last he rang the bell and all the
brothers came, expecting great things, and he said, 'Eat well, for I
have cooked enough for a fortnight, and then we can all go to prayer and
think no more about food.'"

"I hope they enjoyed it!" said Sir Evas absently. He was thinking of his
wife.

"It says so quaintly that, 'there is not a pig in all the land of Rome
so famished as to have eaten it!'  But he got a wigging from the
General!"

This chimed in with Sir Evas' thoughts.

"I daresay he deserved it!  Fowls with their feathers on can't be very
digestible."

"Anyhow he was right about the time we waste over our meals!  Do you
know, uncle, you are rather like Brother Amazialbene."

"Good heavens, what a name!  Didn't your Brother shorten it ever?"

"No, you see they had time then.  Anyhow, he possessed the virtues of
patience and obedience, for if he were beaten for the whole day long, he
would never murmur nor complain with a single word!"

"I don't think I should take the beating so easily! But I want to say,
Toney, that you are giving away your money right and left rather too
freely.  There's moderation in all things, my dear child."

"Dear old ducky.  It's just perfect to hear you! I'm only afraid of not
being able to get rid of it all, but I mean to try."

"You must remember--Ehem--if you were to marry, of course your husband
would help you to get rid of a good lot!"

Toney turned the conversation and the two who so well understood each
other appeared in the Aldersfield drawing-room just as Lady Dove was
telling Mrs. Faber to leave off as it was time to dress.

"Oh, there you are!  Well, I do think, Evas, that you might have
returned to tea.  Has Antonia told you of the terrible inroad we have
had?  If----"

"Yes, yes, it was a mistake--but they didn't do any harm, did they?"

"Lewis Waycott and Edward Lang were here happily, and were very
good-natured.  By the way, I have had Mrs. Kenward here, and I have
heard some news about him, which of course I have been expecting."

"Indeed, what's that?" said Sir Evas, pleasantly relieved that the storm
was blowing over, whilst Toney leant against the door and listened.

"Lewis is going to marry his cousin Maud.  It is private as yet, but
quite understood."

"Good gracious!  Strange we have not heard it!"

"Oh, you men have no eyes.  At the party I saw them constantly smiling
at each other, and Mrs. Hamilton said very pointedly something about
young people fancying no one saw their inclinations. I guessed her
meaning.  Well, she has been working that way for some years, she means
to feather her nest well, but of course it's a pity!"

Without knowing what he was doing, Sir Evas turned towards Toney, and to
his surprise he found her gone.

"Well," he said, "I always thought he liked Toney!  But it's no use
meddling with such things."

Upstairs Toney was sitting on her window-sill with Trick in her arms.
She had locked her door, and for the first time in her life there was no
smile on her lips at the thought of Lewis Waycott.

"Oh, I am glad, I must be glad that he will be happy," she said to
herself, "but I wish he had told me himself, though she is a nice girl
and will sort of do all he wishes."  Then she laid her head against
Trick's face and whispered, "Trick, Trick, you'll not leave your
mistress, will you, dear?  You're all I've got of my very own."




                            *CHAPTER XVII.*

                           *STUCK IN A BOG.*


After great events there is always a certain feeling of flatness, and it
must have been that which made Toney somewhat silent and plunge at times
into the tabulating work with furious energy.  Lewis Waycott came every
morning and, to everybody's surprise, the Hon. Edward often turned up
too. It really was amusing to see the self-made secretaries each in
front of a book and a pile of letters, whilst Plantagenet Russell
indolently "bossed the show," as Toney remarked.  Before he had worked
long Edward Lang's labours were transmuted into conversation, and he
always found an excellent excuse for luring Toney out into the park or
the garden; strange to say, Toney did not seem to object, and left Lewis
and Plantagenet at their task without too many apologies.  The feeling
of needing a good stretch came upon her, and though she would have
preferred solitude, Edward Lang's thirst for information served her
purpose.  When Lewis was gone, however, then she returned to the
tabulating work with increased energy, and the Hon. Edward's wishes
could not drag her away. She said to herself she missed her chum, and
that the world was a bit awry without her sweet sympathy, but she
manfully fought against these feelings, flying to her "Little Flowers"
for strength when she felt extra depressed.  She liked reading about
Brother John, of Alverina, who had entered the Order as a boy, "But
seeing that God careth with tender care for His children, giving them at
divers times, now consolation, and now tribulation, now prosperity, and
now adversity, according as He seeth they have need thereof, for to
continue in humility, or for to kindle more in them desire for heavenly
things," Brother John remained without the light and love of God, and
this so afflicted him that he took to running hither and thither about
the woods, till at last he had a vision of Christ and after many
entreaties, the gift of divine grace returned to him.

"All work and no play, Toney, will make you dull, a day's hunting will
do you a world of good," said Sir Evas one day.  "I'll come with you,
and Colon wants exercise.  The meet is at the Towers."

Toney looked up quickly.

"It's you, uncle, who want to hunt, but of course I'll come.  Mr.
Waycott will help Mr. Russell to-day, and perhaps a good blow will clear
away my cobwebs.  We're getting so puzzled as to who's the most needy
and deserving, that we seriously think of raffling them."

"I hope Waycott won't give up his hunting for your beggars, Toney.
Anyhow, we'll start early to-morrow."

It was a real joy to see Toney hunting; she sat her horse as if she were
part and parcel of the steed and certainly there was perfect sympathy
between them.  The county gentlemen, who now and then spoke hard words
about some of the Dianas of the hunting field, were lost in admiration
as they saw Toney's seat, and Sir Evas felt immensely proud of the
praises bestowed upon his niece.  That this young huntress was an
heiress added to the admiration, and Toney found herself surrounded with
a little court of followers, foremost among them was, of course, Edward
Lang.  He meant to try his luck to-day, and was therefore delighted at
seeing her at the meet, but how was he to find his opportunity?

Toney looked as if cobwebs were swept away judging by her face as she
and Sir Evas joined the meet, indeed, she looked a perfect picture as
she and Colon impatiently waited to be off though talking to Edward
Lang.

"Colon is nearly perfect.  Uncle Evas bought him when he became my
guardian, and I don't think there is a better judge of horses in all
England."

"That is a rare talent.  You'll lunch here of course, Miss Whitburn?"

"I think we shall need fortifying.  Oh, now they're off!  I feel as if
we should fly over everything."

And, indeed, it looked like it, for Toney and Colon were soon flying
across country in grand style. Sir Evas presently gave up trying to keep
up with her, five-barred gates were not for him now, though in his youth
he had been a mighty hunter.

"Look at Miss Whitburn taking that hedge!  By jove!" exclaimed one of
the young men.

"Did you see her take that wide ditch?  It was magnificent, and there's
no show-off; it's just because she and her thorough-bred forget
everything that it's so splendid."

Edward Lang even had not been able to keep up with Toney, but you can't
make a proposal flying over a gate, so he comforted himself with
thinking,

"Australia ought to be proud of having reared her; anyhow, a girl who
rides like that can be trusted not to give way to too many fads."

No need to describe a hunting morning in that county, it has all been
done before, and best by those who have themselves known the full
excitement of a splendid run.  To Toney it seemed to give new life and
happiness, but she never was too much excited to forget that this was
only an interlude.  She and her father had had many a day's hard riding,
and he had taught her so young that the word or feeling of fear did not
even enter into her composition; and, besides this, Colon was a
thoroughbred to be proud of.  He understood the run as well or better
than she did, and seemed endowed with miraculous powers of clearing
everything that came in his way, whilst a soft pat from a loving hand
was reward enough.  It must be owned that though the masculine gender
applauded, some of the hunting ladies were somewhat jealous.

"Of course," said a pretty girl to Edward Lang, "if you get a
thorough-bred like that you can do anything, it depends on the horse."
Her own was evidently a hack of moderate powers.

He shook his head.

"I fear it isn't all the horse, Miss Symons; Miss Whitburn has a superb
seat."

"They say she was originally a circus rider," answered Miss Symons;
"that accounts for her splendid seat, doesn't it?"

The Honble. Edward winced a little.  He meant to propose to-day and this
remark affected him disagreeably.  Would his wife have to live down
these queer reports?

"I never heard that report," he said smiling, "but if I had been the
owner of the circus I would not have let Miss Whitburn leave me.  Her
father was a doctor in Australia."

"Oh, Australia!  They are queer people there! Descendants of convicts,
aren't they?"

At this moment the dogs were seen in full cry, the fox had been
dislodged and part of the hunt came flying back across a field hard by.
Toney was close behind, and at that moment Miss Symons and Edward Lang
saw her and Colon leap over a gate that would have been avoided by all
the ladies and most of the men.

"By Jove!  That was the most beautiful thing I have ever seen,"
exclaimed Edward Lang, looking towards Toney and leaving the
disconsolate Miss Symons to answer her own question.  To his amusement
Toney drew rein and came to meet him and her uncle.

"Uncle Evas, you look as if you wanted your lunch.  Wasn't it
splendatious?  Colon just flies!"

"Don't stop your Pegasus for me, Toney."

"But I want to.  How far is it to the Towers, Mr. Lang? and then we have
to get home."

"I quite agree; besides the fox has got into Red Hollow and will escape.
They always do in Red Hollow."  Toney smiled.

"He deserves it.  But it does make one happy, doesn't it?"

The three trotted back to the Towers, Edward Lang was rather silent,
wondering how he should propose.  He heartily wished Toney were as
easily approached as Miss Symons, who was always lifting her sad sweet
eyes to his.

The breakfast was a joy to the hungry, and Lady Southbourne all
amiability to Toney and Sir Evas. He had nothing to mar his enjoyment,
and even managed not to think of Melina at home.

All luncheon time Edward could think of nothing more original than
discussing the hunt, but as so many of the male guests would chat with
Toney and all were enthusiastic over her riding, he only succeeded in
carrying her off to the conservatory when the horses were at the door.
It does not help matters if you feel there must be no delay over your
proposal.

"You just eclipsed all the girls on the hunting field, Miss Whitburn,"
he began, as he picked some lovely flowers at random.  "I do hope you'll
come again soon.  Why haven't we seen you oftener--I--I----"

Hunting and love don't dovetail easily, and Toney was sniffing hard at
some flowers quite unconscious of what was coming.

"I shan't have much time, but Colon loves it; I love the exercise too,
but I'm not sure about the fox!"

"You are too much of a sportswoman to join the squeamish set."

"I'm not a sportswoman but I do love riding. Pups and I had glorious
days out in the Bush! I wish England didn't feel so small, but one gets
used to being cooped up, and it's very good discipline."

"You are too young and too beautiful to talk of discipline," he
murmured.  Toney took her face out of a bush of sweet azaleas and looked
at him in amazement, so he continued very quickly,

"Of course you must know that _I_ think so, and that I--I--want to know
if you will let me tell you I love you?  Upon my word, I--do hope you'll
give me a chance.  Mother is awfully fond of you too, and in fact, will
you be my wife?"

Never, never had Edward found it so difficult to compose a speech worthy
of the occasion.  He had never made love to such a perfectly simple
bright-eyed girl, impervious to flattery.

Suddenly Toney realised that she was having an offer made to her:

"Gracious stars!  You don't mean you want to marry me?  I'm sure you
don't, because Aunt Dove says no one can want to marry me except for my
money," and Toney laughed happily, "and you are ever so much too nice
for that."

If only she had been shy!  If only she had not mentioned money in this
bald way!

"Of course it isn't for your money--but----" the lie stuck a little in
his throat, looking at those wide-opened laughing eyes, "but I think I
could make you happy, and you should have your own way."  Toney nodded.

"Oh, yes, of course I should!  That's why it's no use thinking of it.
My way and your way would never be one scrap like twins.  Uncle Dove
says it's best to give me my head, but he declares no other man but he
would put up with it!  Ouf! that's over, isn't it?  You don't mind one
bit, I'm sure! Good-bye.  I heard uncle calling.  Time's up and Colon
hates waiting.  Good-bye," and Toney flew off like a sudden gust of
wind, leaving Edward Lang to chew the cud of disappointment alone.

Lady Southbourne watched Sir Evas and Toney ride off followed by Jim,
who had enjoyed himself immensely in the servants' hall, weaving yarns
about his mistress and Colon.

"Well, Toney, you look very fit in spite of your high jumps," said Sir
Evas, looking with pleasure at his niece, "It was a very fine run."

"And you look all the sprucer, dear old duck, but I shan't come often
if----"

"If--what's the matter?"

"If I have to have an offer at the end!  Mr. Lang didn't do it very
easily either, got into a bog and sort of stuck there."

"Good heavens, Toney, have you refused the best match of the county?"

"I don't believe he wanted _me_, but the money. Aunt Dove sees some
things awfully truly, I can tell you, uncle, so I just repeated what she
said about it to him."

"Good heavens!  What was that?"

"You know, that it's only my money the men will want."

"You didn't tell him to his face, Toney?"

"Why not?  It's much better to be honest about it, and besides I put it
gingerly.  I told him it couldn't be _that_.  But I did bless you when
you shouted for me, couldn't have found anything else to say, either of
us, not for anything! so I just ran!"  Sir Evas laughed till the tears
ran down his face.

"Edward Lang won't forgive you in a hurry, besides, I daresay he does
like you, and he's not half a bad fellow, only rather extravagant, and
given to----  Ehem----"

"That's it, he wants to pay his bills, that shows he's honest, anyhow,
doesn't it? but I haven't as much liking for him as I have for Jim.
That can't be love, can it, uncle?"

"I should surmise not."

"But you might know, because you once made love, didn't you?"

"Ye-es--but it was different.  We weren't romantic in those days."

They went on in silence for a little while, then Toney remarked,

"Do you know, Uncle Evas, you might have told me about a pretty romance
going on near us."

"Whose, Toney?"

"It's Mr. Waycott.  I guess he's awfully in love with Maud Hamilton.
Don't you think that that will be a very, very happy romance?  He's so
real nice, isn't he? and you see, she's very poor, so it isn't for money
only, but just because he loves and admires her.  We'll give them a
scrumptious wedding present, won't we, uncle?"

"As it's a secret better say nothing; but, as you remark, he can't be
marrying for money!"

"I expect he'll tell me some day.  He always has been so chummy with us,
hasn't he?"

"Well, yes, Lewis Waycott is a first-rate fellow. Now let's trot home
quickly."




                            *CHAPTER XVIII.*

                          *A GENEROUS COUSIN.*


Lewis was looking at the newspaper in the dining-room one morning whilst
waiting for his aunts and cousins to come down to breakfast.  The
postman had just left the letters when Maud entered. She looked very
bright and pretty, and Lewis thought to himself what a pity it was he
could not feel towards her as he did for Toney. Everything would be so
easy as Maud was not an heiress. Aunt Delia's wishes were so carefully
hidden that happily Lewis did not recognise them, still he knew his
aunts would easily consent.  Maud held a letter in her hand.

"Oh, Lewis, imagine what has happened!  Mother always said it would!"

"I did not know Aunt Delia had the spirit of prophecy."

"She has!  You know Cousin Seaton Hamilton lives in the Argentine?"

"I thought he found living rather a difficulty."

"Mother always said he would make a fortune and think of us, and he has!
So nice, too, he won't say it's him.  Just imagine a present of two
hundred pounds for each of us, to go and study music in Germany!"

Lewis laughed heartily.

"Oh, Lewis, you don't believe it!  Look for yourself!"  She held out her
letter which certainly contained a draft for two hundred pounds.  Jeanie
walked in with a similar letter in her hand.

"Isn't it lovely?  Imagine such a thing happening to us!"

"Seaton Hamilton must have found a gold mine! When was the last time he
wrote to you?"

"It was just when--Jeanie was playing with----"  Maud left off, she must
not mention the discarded lover, but Jeanie blushed as she murmured,

"Mother is always right!  She said he would remember us when he was
rich, and he has."

Mrs. Hamilton and Miss Honoria entered together, and there was a chorus
from the girls whilst Lewis stood by the fire smiling.

"Really, Delia, this is the first time I have known your prophecy to
come true.  And he puts it nicely," said Miss Honoria.

"I wonder he doesn't sign his name," said Lewis.

"So full of good feeling.  He always admired you two girls so much,"
said their mother.

"Poor Seaton, money was always like water in his hands."

"Nonsense, Lewis, he never had any, so your simile is quite wrong, but I
always said he _would_ make money some day, and would remember the
girls."

"Let's eat our breakfast in his honour then," said Lewis, sitting down.
"Shall you accept it, Jeanie?"

"Of course.  Mother, when can we start?"

"We must thank him first; but isn't it tiresome there is no address
except that of the Argentine lawyer?" said Maud.

"You must thank him then," said Lewis, "he'll pass it on."

"I think Lewis does not half believe," said Jeanie.

"I believe in the money as the cheque looks good enough; to me the
miracle seems to be in Seaton. He never could make money, and wasn't
very generous."

"How could he be on nothing?  Poor Seaton! I always believed in him,"
repeated Mrs. Hamilton, "but I don't think Maud can go to Germany just
now."

They discussed this some time when suddenly Lewis exclaimed,

"Why there is Toney cantering across the park! You must tell her of your
good fortune."  Lewis went to the front door to warn her.  She ran up
the steps leaving Jim to hold the horses, and Lewis thought he had never
seen her looking so happy.

"Will you forgive me coming so early?"

"Forgive you?  Why, it's a great pleasure to see you, Toney."

"Is it?  Well, that is nice of you.  I never know if people care----"

What an opportunity!  Lewis nearly said, "I care more for you than for
anybody in the world," but the fifty thousand a year popped up before
his mental vision like a number on a music hall platform.

"Everybody does," he altered it to, "but I came to tell you that Maud
and Jeanie are in the seventh heaven of delight over poor Seaton
Hamilton's gift of two hundred pounds each.  You are too generous,
Toney."

"You are glad, aren't you?  You won't scold me? I know you like Maud to
have advantages.  Keep the secret, won't you?"

"Of course, but what brings you?  Has Lady Dove given you notice to
quit?"

Toney laughed.

"Oh no, not yet; but she is very angry because--another _avant garde_
came yesterday--such a quaint little old maid whose father was at
Balaclava, and then finished up all his money before he died, and she
has kept her mother for years by working at a little school, and now she
is going blind."

"Did one little old maid rouse her anger?"

"Somehow it did, when it really was an honour to shake hands with Miss
Phipps; but I want to know if I may have the farm at once and rig it up
for interviews.  I could put Miss Phipps and her mother there, and she
could be sort of interviewing secretary."

"But you say she can't see?"

"Her mother could see for her and they could do it between them.  Mr.
Staines is so slow about the lease, and he and your lawyer are having
_chasse croise_ about everything, and--if you don't mind lending it to
me straight off till it's paid for we could send an army of work-people
and do it up from top to toe."

Lewis looked at her bright eager face, and he felt it was also an honour
to shake hands with her, but he could say nothing but,

"Of course you shall have it, only it's giving in to Lady Dove's
selfishness."

"Pups said it was not seeing through other people's eyes that made us
selfish.  I read last night about Brother Leo's dream, and I did wish
Aunt Dove could hear it, but she would think it rubbish. He saw a lot of
brothers with loads on their backs trying to cross a river, some got
half-way and some nearly to the shore, but in the end all were drowned;
and then he saw others with no loads and they got over easily, and St.
Francis explained that the loads were the riches which they could not
forsake."

"Lady Dove has a pretty good heavy load, I fancy!" said Lewis rather
savagely.

"I'm sure Pups hadn't any.  That's why he got to the other side so
easily.  Then I may see about the farm this very day, may I?"

"Yes, this very day, I'll come with you directly after breakfast; but
come in and hear about the Argentine cousin."

"You swear to keep the secret, won't you, Mr. Waycott?"

"Certainly, by the seven gods if you like."

As the two entered the dining-room, Miss Honoria thought she had never
seen two faces looking so perfectly happy.

Never had Jeanie Hamilton appeared so much excited as she did now as
both sisters recounted their good fortune, to which Toney listened with
a smile on her lips.

"It will pay for a whole course of Herr Ludowic. Imagine such luck!"

"Jeanie is really worth the lessons, but I'm not," said Maud humbly.  "I
think she had better have it all and then she can become a
professional."

"Cousin Seaton wouldn't like that," said Mrs. Hamilton; "you can keep it
and see what you really want.  I always said he would make money and
that he had a generous heart," and Toney put in,

"If he has made a lot I expect he finds it just a great pleasure to give
it away.  Now I'll go on to the farm and take notes."

The farm was a most picturesque place with old black woodwork outside,
and within panelled rooms with lattice windows, but it all needed
repainting and papering.  Toney was in her element, as pencil in hand,
she planned out something very pretty.  She had not done before Lewis
appeared, and with his help she put down the names of the tradesmen she
should apply to to transform the old farm into something that would be
very pretty and attractive, and where some of the future dwellers in
Toney's palace should lodge.

"I am going to call the palace 'Stone House' after my General," she
said, "and you must name the farm, as it is really your gift."

"My gift when I am selling it for a handsome sum!  It will be a chapel
of ease I think."

Toney laughed.

"Indeed it won't.  Everybody connected with it will work hard.  Pups
said hard work was like salt to dried herrings!  But I do wish we could
get on with the palace.  It's going to be built of stone of course, with
mullion windows and airy rooms, and very hygienic and--oh, I must ride
home, for Mr. Russell will be wanting me.  He takes Aunt Dove's part,
and she is really quite nice to him."

At that moment Maud made her appearance.  Her mother had sent her to
invite Toney to lunch, but in the back of her mind it was to report how
Lewis conducted himself with the heiress.  Maud found them only busy
over the names of many tradesmen.

"I'm glad you came," exclaimed Toney, but not laughing.  "I want you to
help Mr. Waycott to choose a name for the farm.  It will be nice if you
both help."

Maud was beginning to admire Toney very much; ever since the birthday
party she always took her part when her mother and Jeanie abused her,
and now here was Toney saying something so nice.  At that moment,
however, the Squire's agent came to call him away on business.

"Oh, Toney, it will be lovely to have your palace so near to Lewis,
because he does take so much interest in it."

"It is very good of him and you.  If you both care it will get on."

Maud wondered why Toney put it like that; happily, Mrs. Hamilton had not
let Maud become acquainted with her plans, and as she herself had never
seen any attention, other than cousinly, on Lewis' side, the idea of
marrying him had not entered her head.  In this Mrs. Hamilton had shown
her talent.  She knew Lewis would resent the idea of having his wife
chosen for him, but some day he would fall in with the idea and all
would be well, but it did no harm to prepare the matrimonial path by
telling other people about it.

"Toney, dear, I want to make a confession to you," said Maud, leaning
against the gate whilst Toney sat on the top of it.

"Confession to me!  I'm the worst person, for if I were a Roman Catholic
priest I would never listen to confessions, but absolve them all.  I
should feel rather mean to hear people's bad thoughts, wouldn't you?"

"Well, you must listen.  I think we were all horrid about you, I don't
know why, at least I think when you first came I was rather jealous of
you."

"Jealous of me when I first came!  Why, I was only a poor relation."

"Yes, but you could ride and play tennis, and you always said things
straight out, which I never, never can!"

"It was only Pups' teaching."

"But I want to say I've changed my mind, Toney, and I do like you very
much now, and will you let me help you in your work?  Jeanie and I do
seem to lead such useless lives.  Of course now with Cousin Seaton's
present it will be better.  Jeanie will go and get really good lessons
and be a success, and I shall give her my share, as it will be much
better for her, and then I thought that perhaps you would let me help
with your poor people."

"Well, now that is scrumptious of you, Maud; you're the first woman that
ever wanted to help except Crumpet, and she's got her Henry.  If you
really mean it, you could come and help Miss Phipps here.  Mr. Waycott
laughs because she's nearly blind--and there'll be so much to do at
first about accounts and other things."

"Let's call it 'The Haven.'"

"Yes, and you shall visit the Haven every day. That will be beautiful,
and you won't mind being a paid official, will you, as I think paid work
is more satisfactory.  I'll give you one hundred pounds a year, and it
will be a real, real help."

"Oh, Toney! but----  Yes, I won't be proud because the money will be so
useful to me.  It is silly our being afraid of saying we are poor. Since
I've known you, Toney, I see how foolish we are."

Toney took her hand and clasped it

"That's a token of our agreement.  The Kanakas did that when I tried to
make them promise to leave off a bad habit; but I think they liked
clasping hands, as they so often forgot and had to begin again!"  They
both laughed, and Maud's eyes began to shine with new hope and pleasure.
She was going to be useful.

"And there's another thing I want to ask you about.  You know Jeanie
always looks so miserable; well, it's because she is constantly thinking
of Frank Weston.  She rejected him because he wasn't a gentleman born, I
used to think she was right, but now--I begin to feel it's we that were
silly and foolish. How can it matter what a man is by birth so that he's
_really nice_.  You don't know what a wonderful musician he is, and what
a very, very nice man.  I think Jeanie broke his heart, or nearly, and I
believe she is breaking hers, as she is so cross if I mention him.  Oh,
Toney, can you help her?  You got Miss Crump married.  Lewis says it was
all your doing."

"Gracious stars! but I do love a real, real romance. Of course I'd marry
a pig-sticker if he was real nice, but I'm not a Hamilton--I'm only just
Toney Whitburn.  But, Maud, let's think out a solution, and thank you
very, very much for being so nice to me! I'll never be jealous of you!"

"Jealous of me!--how could you be, Toney?"




                             *CHAPTER XIX.*

                              *A REFUGE.*


The transformation of the farm seemed to take place by magic, for Toney
spared neither trouble nor money.  She wished to have some place where
her visitors might be received with kindness and courtesy, two things
which were a very uncertain quantity at Aldersfield, that is if Lady
Dove was in the vicinity.  Besides all this time, Toney was constantly
writing to the architect about plans for "Stone House," and to Mr.
Staines about the purchase of the land.  It was in all these ways that
the girl's real ability was soon visible; what she did not understand
she grappled with till, as she expressed it, daylight came.  Even Mr.
Russell began to feel that his employer was not only a mere girl with
whims and fancies, for that had been his first opinion of her.  He was
often surprised at the grasp she had of subjects not included in a young
lady's education, and a faint spark of enthusiasm began to appear
occasionally in his work.  Certainly there was a great deal of
secretarial work to do, but Toney's masterly scribbles on the letters to
be answered were seldom at fault, though expressed in somewhat quaint
fashion.  She appeared to remember cases in an extraordinary manner
without their being tabulated, for she possessed a royal memory, bred of
early training and a perfectly healthy life.

Ten days later Toney rode off alone to the farm to see to last touches,
for Miss Phipps and her mother were to come that very afternoon.  The
door was opened by Mrs. Thomas, who had been a cook, and Mary, now a
tall girl, was to wait on the ladies, whilst Mr. Thomas was to see after
the garden and make himself generally useful.  As the whole family
adored Toney, there was no fear of the wheels not going round easily.
She had made them think they themselves were going to confer great
benefits.

"I do think, Miss Tonia, everything is ready!" said Mrs. Thomas.

"And I've put flowers in the sitting-room," added Mary.  "I knew you
would wish them to have flowers."

"And we shall have a fine dairy, miss," added Thomas, "'twill supply all
your big house when it's built."

They all accepted Miss Tonia's big house quite naturally, and they all
meant to have a hand in its success.

Toney made a last inspection, her quick eyes seeing everything.  Then
she returned alone into the parlour to await Maud who had gone to meet
Miss Phipps.  Toney and Trick sat on the wide window seat looking into
the garden, in which beautiful chrysanthemums were to be seen, and
curled up here with Trick in her arms she had a good think.

It was very sweet of Maud to want to help her, she loved her for it, and
she loved her because Lewis loved her, and the two would perfect as
master and mistress of beautiful Waycott Hall with all its art
treasures.  It was very nice of Lewis never to have thought of money at
all, as Lady Dove had formerly said he would, it showed he was what
Toney had always thought him, one of King Arthur's knights.  She did
wish they had told her herself because she could have assured them how
perfect she thought it, and she would try to be awfully nice to Maud for
his sake.  Of course it was his influence that had made her so much
nicer, and now so willing to join in Toney's work.

As for herself, her work was marked out quite plainly, and she must
think of nothing else; it would be years before it would run on all
fours, and till then she must keep a watchful eye over everything and
must not think of personal pleasure.  Then she would be following in her
father's footsteps, and doing her duty to her neighbour as General Stone
had expected of her.

The bright face was quite grave as she leant against Trick's shaggy
locks.  The burden felt just a wee bit heavy this morning, and the
future, just like a hill that went up and up a long, long way, and no
top visible at this moment.  Then suddenly she shook herself and Trick
to get rid of these grey thoughts.

"I do wish Pups could appear to me as the Brothers of Poverello did so
often to each other.  I shouldn't be a bit afraid, as of course he is
working hard somewhere, and of course he sees me and does care about my
work.  But the Brothers of Poverello were so very, very good and always
praying, so that they were fit to see the saints, and I'm not."

At this moment, happily for Toney's spirits, a fly drove up and she flew
to receive her first visitors. Maud was there looking quite transformed
from the discontented girl she had been into a woman with a purpose.

"Here we are, Toney, and Mrs. and Miss Phipps are very cold and tired
after their journey."

Then all Toney's sadness flew away like a bird of evil omen, and she was
once more the joyous creature that scattered delight about her.  Mary
Thomas was helping the ladies as if they were princesses, and Thomas was
dealing with their boxes, and Mrs. Thomas was saying that tea was ready
in the dining-room.  Mrs. Phipps was a bustling, kind old lady devoted
to her nearly blind daughter and telling her how beautiful everything
was, and Miss Phipps was as cheerful as possible, talking and praising
everything.

"The work will be quite easy," said Toney, "and Miss Hamilton will look
in every day to help you, and there are four spare rooms for anyone who
wants to come and have a real good time, and you will make them very
happy I know, and Mary is just a treasure."

So the party sat down to tea, and they made Mrs. Phipps take the head of
the table because this was her home now, and she was to entertain
everybody who came, and she looked quite capable of it, and already
vastly proud of her position.  And yet a month ago the workhouse had
been staring them in the face, because all their little savings had
gone. But they did not feel like paupers here, they were to work hard so
as to make less fortunate folks as happy as they were.

At last Toney rose and said good-bye, and Mrs. Phipps murmured some very
grateful words, but Miss Phipps just took Toney's hand and kissed it,
and Toney felt a tear on her hand, so she ran away, quickly followed by
Maud.

They were going down by the lane across to Waycott Hall, and for a few
minutes they were silent, then Toney exclaimed,

"Gracious stars!  Maud, aren't my Poverelli just ready-made saints, and
it's so dreadful their thanking me, and I can't explain to them exactly
how it's really nothing to do with me, but with General Stone, and
really also Mr. Waycott, who let me have all this land and this lovely
farm, and you too for helping me.  Do you know it's so awfully nice you
two being sort of bound up together in a work."

"We two?"

"Yes, you know, you and--your cousin."

"Oh, Lewis, you mean.  I do think he is so very--I suppose I oughtn't to
say so because he's my cousin--but he has altered so much, and thinks
such a lot about his people now, I can't understand it."

"I always think he is one of Arthur's knights, and not a bit proud or
stuck-up, though of course he might be, living as he does at Waycott
Hall, which is so beautiful.  I like to think of--the future."

Toney paused, she dared not go on as Maud wouldn't tell her straight
out.

"Well, I am thinking of the present, Toney! You can't think how the idea
of working has done me good.  I told mother that Lewis had sold you the
farm, and she is quite pleased at my helping you.  I didn't tell her
about your giving me a salary for it, as she has old-fashioned ideas,
but you know we are poor, and I do want it."

"Of course I know."  Toney said to herself, "She wants to save for her
trousseau, and it's quite right of her to work for it."

"I do mean to be in earnest this time," continued Maud, "looking back I
never seem to have done anything in downright real earnest as you have,
not even my music--Jeanie was the cleverest, and I knew I could never be
first-rate as she will be if she works."

"But now of course you will have a real reason for bucking up.  Wanting
to be a little like Pups helps me awfully."

"My father wasn't like yours, he somehow spent all our money."

"But you will want to be like your cousin," said Toney, making an
effort, trying to rub this idea well into Maud.  Of course she must
become worthy to be the mistress of Waycott Hall!

"Yes, seeing Lewis so much in earnest is a real help.  By the way,
Toney, as I was walking here I met Mr. Lang, and I asked him why he
hadn't been to tabulate lately!"

"Did you?  He's had enough of it," said Toney, pretending Trick was lost
and needed a loud whistle.

"He seemed rather low, and said you didn't want him any more, and--he
really is a nice fellow, Toney. Do you know that someone told mother
that he wanted to marry you!  I wonder if he does?"

"Not _me_!" said Toney laughing.  "Aunt Dove is quite right, no one
would care to marry me, only General Stone's money.  I'm not sweet and
pretty like you and Silvia Hales, and I'm not anything of a lady, and
your mother sort of sniffs at me I know!" Toney laughed very happily.

"We were brought up to think ladylike ways covered all our sins.  I see
it differently now, and I don't mean to be a slave of that idea any
longer."

Toney suddenly pulled a newspaper cutting out of her pocket.

"Look, Maud, I want you to read this.  I've got an idea."  She handed
Maud an account of the splendid reception given to the great musician,
Frank Weston, in London.

"How interesting!  He is a real genius.  I hope Jeanie won't see it.  I
believe she loves him all the time, and it's that which makes her
miserable, but--you know--his parents once had a shop."

"So did Lord Courthouse at home.  I used to help him a bit when he was
hard put to it."

"But then he was Lord Courthouse!"

"Now that's right down silly, isn't it?  Two people do just the same
things, and yet because one is born a lord he can do it and people
praise him, and the other man whose father was an honest tradesman is
sniffed at."

"Yes, it is foolish.  I wish you could see him, Toney.  He has a
beautiful face and perfect manners, because he is so earnest and
straight to the point. But Jeanie refused him.  I'm sure he would never,
never ask her again, and there are no end of girls who would marry him.
I wonder he isn't married by this time."

Toney stopped still to laugh.

"I must own up, Maud, I've asked him to come and play at Aldersfield.
He thinks I'm a great lover of music, as I've offered him _carte
blanche_ as to price! and you know, Maud, I don't know one note from
another!  How I shall sit out the concert I don't know, only it's going
to be one of my romances."

"What do you mean, Toney?" Maud looked distressed.  "Has he accepted?"

"Yes, to-day.  Mr. Russell is sending invitations for a concert at
Aldersfield House--supposed to be Aunt Dove's--all over the place, and
you'll get one.  Now, mind, no refusals--and--I'll do the rest."

"Whatever did you have to pay?  He nearly always refuses private people,
he hates to be patronised.  But you should see him.  When he has his
violin under his chin he is just inspired and you feel--lifted up almost
to heaven.  Oh, why did Jeanie refuse him?  I know I never could have!"

Maud laughed and Toney joined her.

"You were destined for something better, but I am scheming how to do
it."

"Toney! was it really all for Jeanie?  If she knew he was going to be at
the concert she would not come."

"Well, mums the word.  They'll see each other comfortably at
Aldersfield.  I haven't invented any more yet!----  Isn't it perfect,
that little party at the farm and that sweet blind woman who has worked
all her life will be very kind to my _avant garde_ folk."

"I wish you had a romance of your own, Toney. If Mr. Lang----"

"Gracious stars!  I hope he won't.  Just imagine me as the future Lady
Southbourne having to do the civil to the county, besides--he would want
my money."

"But you would like him to have it."

"No, I shouldn't!  You see, Maud, it's dedicated."

"But you could do good with it together."

"But _I_ might be out of it, besides I couldn't love him.  I'm just
going to be an old maid and look after the declining years of Aunt Dove
and Uncle Evas!  By the way, Aunt Dove has had a serious difference with
Miss Grossman.  I do hope she won't go.  She is her discipline."

"I don't think anyone can stand it long," said Maud smiling.

"My Chum stood it fifteen years; ouf!  Good-bye, Maud, and keep my
secret.  I'm going to have a good think about it," and Toney
disappeared, and Maud was left to grieve over her sister's dead romance.




                             *CHAPTER XX.*

                          *SHAPING A ROMANCE.*


Jeanie and Maud Hamilton shared a bedroom at Waycott Hall, and out of
this opened a pretty sitting-room where they practised their music and
wrote their letters.

The next morning Jeanie was reading an invitation written especially to
her by Toney.  Maud had brought it up to her.  It ran thus:--


"MY DEAR JEANIE,

"Aunt Dove is giving a concert here next week.  Will you come as you are
so musical?  A violinist is coming and perhaps you will like to play too
afterwards?  Aunt Dove says she is very musical, so she likes the idea
of collecting the neighbourhood to hear really good music.  I shan't
know if it's good or bad.  Will you and your sister come and help me,
and stop the night here, as I don't know what to say to musical people,
and as you are soon going to Germany you might like to discuss your
masters with them.  Please come.  Aunt Dove says she loves Dvorak, but
Uncle Evas declares she has never heard anything by him.  Anyhow, bring
your violin and you can play when the visitors have gone.

"YOUR AFFECTIONATE TONEY."


"What a long letter about this concert," said Jeanie.  "Why can't Toney
send out proper cards of invitation like other people?"

"She thinks you are a great player and sends you a special note.  It
will be nice to go and spend the night there, won't it?"

Maud looked out of the window and not at her sister.  She felt very
nervous over Toney's new idea!

"No, I don't think so.  It will be very tiresome. Mr. Russell is
musical, but you know, Maud, the others have no music in them.  It's
dreadful playing to people who only hear a noise, isn't it?  Besides, I
expect they have got hold of some second-rate fiddler.  I would much
rather stay at home.  You had better go."

"I do think we ought both to go.  Toney is so anxious to give you
pleasure before you go away."

"I hate Toney's ostentatious lavishness.  Mother says she will ruin the
neighbourhood."  Maud blushed.

"Oh, Jeanie, aren't we very horrid about Toney? I wish----  Well,
anyhow, I shall go.  Most likely they will have some great man, and
you'll be sorry afterwards."

There was only one great man in Jeanie's estimation, and of course he
wouldn't come to a private house.

"I want to work hard till I go away, so inferior concerts are waste of
time."

"What's the good of all your work if mother hates you earning money.  If
you played at this concert it would do you good.  I don't see why we
shouldn't work like other poor people."

"Mother expects us to marry," said Jeanie, "but _I_ never shall."

"Oh, Jeanie, I really believe you--still love Frank Weston!"  Maud
expected something dreadful to happen but only silence followed.

"You were just made for each other and he worshipped you."

"He's forgotten me now," said Jeanie bitterly.

"Of course he can't forget the--the snubbing he got."

"I want to practise," said Jeanie, and seizing her violin she drowned
further remarks in wild melody. Her sore heart could find relief only in
music.  Yes, she knew well enough now she was fretting her life away in
useless regrets.

Maud crept away with a smile on her lips.  Would Toney succeed?  Frank
Weston did not know that the Hamiltons were staying near Aldersfield
House, he could never guess he would meet face to face his old love who
had used him so ill.  If he knew, Maud felt sure he would at once throw
up the engagement, for he could afford to please himself.

Maud seized her hat and went off to the Haven as she did every morning
now.  It seemed the nicest hour of the day, for there it really was a
haven of peace.  The Phipps were always cheerful, always so happy over
every little flower they found in their path.

Most mornings also Toney met her there.  She was arranging for three new
inmates, the deaf Captain Grant and Mr. and Mrs. Harris, and the Phipps
were full of plans for their comfort.  Toney had indeed chosen well.
To-day, when their business was done, Toney seized on Maud.

"Come along and lunch with us, I want to show you all the arrangements
for our romance.  I do hope it will succeed, only you must help me,
Maud."

Then Maud related what had taken place that morning.

"That is all on the right road.  Aunt Dove is delighted because all 'our
county friends' are coming.  Can't think why lords and ladies please her
so much.  I never can learn her table of degrees." "There is Lewis,"
exclaimed Maud.  "Oh, Toney, do tell him."

Toney was not surprised.  Of course Lewis Waycott knew Maud went every
day to the Haven, and of course he sort of happened to be often in the
way.  He shook hands as he said,

"So, Toney, we are all booked for your concert to-morrow.  Who is the
star you are preparing for us?  Nobody knows!"

"It's Aunt Dove's concert, please; she is so smiling to-day, and she and
Mr. Russell have been discussing all the musicians beginning with Tubal
Cain.  Maud has promised to pinch me at intervals in case I go to sleep.
Only 'Sound the loud timbrel' sort of thing keeps me awake, but I guess
I'll keep awake to-morrow because----"

"Why, pray?"

"You are safe I know, Mr. Waycott, and I want you both to know."

"Both?" asked Lewis.

"Yes, you and Maud of course, you will both be so pleased--if it
succeeds."

"What is this surprise, Toney?  I am a little nervous," and Lewis
laughed.

"It's a romance--about Jeanie.  You know, Mr. Waycott, that she loved
someone once, but she chucked him up because his father kept a store
somewhere."

"Oh!  Jeanie's romance!  You don't mean to say, Toney----"

"Yes, I do.  I've got him, and no one knows but you two."

"Knows what?

"Don't laugh please.  He's coming, and all the musical people will be in
a seventh heaven, and then Jeanie will come in looking beautiful and
sad--and he will see her and she will see him--and----"

"Good heavens!  Toney!  What do you think will happen then?"

"He'll speak through his violin.  Books always say that, though that
language would be of no use to me!"

"I don't think a musician could make you an offer, Toney," said Maud
laughing, "you would hurt his tenderest feelings."

"Anyhow, I wouldn't chuck him up because his parents kept a store."

"And what will happen next, Toney?" said Lewis, "pray tell us."

"That's what I can't quite settle in my own mind.  They are both going
to stay in the house to-morrow, and I think there must be sort of
opportunities----"

"It's too delicious, but I think they will both send for a carriage and
depart."

"Together?" said Toney laughing.  "Oh, I hope they will do that."

"No, on opposite sides!" answered Lewis.

"I shall work hard and see.  Chum is coming with her Henry as they are
both musical, and I want to introduce her to some nice people.  Clergy
folk want rubbing up."

"Poor Mrs. Faber, she goes through a good deal for your sake, Toney!"

"But you'll just both help me, won't you, and make people talk and
introduce anybody to anybody.  It takes too much time to remember who
may speak to who, according to Aunt Dove, that it's better to forget it
all."

"Poor county!  You are going against its most cherished ideas," said
Lewis, secretly glorying in Toney's courage.

"I can't help it.  Mr. Russell is studying the Peerage this morning and
he'll cover up my mistakes.  Anyhow, I may count on you two?  Now I'm
off as there are several things to think out for the great romance!
First I am going to meet _him_ at the station and drive him home alone.
Good-bye. You'll have a nice walk home."

Toney disappeared swiftly as usual, and Lewis walked a few minutes in
silence by his cousin, considering why Toney classed them together so
pointedly.  Maud had not noticed it, her mind was full of another idea.

"Oh, Lewis, I believe Mr. Lang is in love with Toney!  Wouldn't it be
lovely if she became chief lady in the county!"

"Edward Lang!  What nonsense!  Who said it?"  Lewis dug his stick into
the ground rather savagely.

"I put two and two together."

"Do you think Toney would--marry him?"

"If she could be persuaded he cared about her and not her money."

"But does he?"

"I think you are prejudiced against him.  He is rather a nice fellow."

"I wish you girls wouldn't use the word nice for everything," said Lewis
somewhat crossly; but Maud's answer was cut short by the appearance of
her mother as they walked up on to the terrace of Waycott Hall.

"I've just persuaded Jeanie to accept Antonia's invitation.  I hear the
county is coming and they expect something good, but no one knows.  Do
you, Maud?"

"Toney wants it to be a secret," said Maud.

"Ah, I see, you two always take Toney's side. Maud, what a colour you
have.  Morning walks agree with you, don't you think so, Lewis?"

Lewis looked up and noticed how pretty Maud was looking.

"Maud is developing into a beauty, aunt!"

"You silly boy!  I don't want my girls to be beauties."

"Then you must find out some way of stopping it!  Jeanie's pensive air
is most becoming, and Maud----"

"Ah! poor Jeanie, I think Germany will cure her low spirits."

Lewis remarked he had to go to town on business that afternoon but he
could be back for the concert. He wanted to get rid of his ill-temper.
Maud's unfortunate remark had been the cause of it. Would someone else
seize the prize he was too proud to win--and would that someone else be
Edward Lang?  Certainly fine feelings would not stop him trying to grasp
at wealth.

Maud was dreadfully restless that afternoon and insisted on Jeanie
turning out her wardrobe to see what suitable dress she should wear.

"Your pale blue dress is pretty," remarked Maud. "Oh, we have both worn
those pale blue dresses till people must know them."

"There is no time to get a new dress, I'm afraid."

"I shan't waste a penny of my money on dress and mother says she can't
afford it."

"Then your white muslin, Jeanie dear."

"I don't feel like white muslin.  I shall wear my black dress.  No one
will notice us, Maud."

The sisters stood rather sadly looking over the beautiful park from the
Elizabethan windows. Nothing is more depressing than to be surrounded by
wealthy friends and yet to be too poor to take the position you are
entitled to.  Suddenly the butler entered.

"A gentleman to see you, Miss Hamilton."

Their Aunt Honoria and their mother had gone out to pay calls; they were
alone.

Jeanie flushed.  "A gentleman to see her" made her heart beat, but the
gentleman that entered was quite unknown.  He bowed very politely and
looked at the sisters critically.

"Excuse me, ladies, but five minutes will suffice."

Five minutes!  The sisters looked at each other in dismay.  Had Miles
let in a lunatic?

The stranger looked at a letter he held in his hand.

"Surely I am not mistaken.  Two Miss Hamiltons at Waycott Hall.  The
order to be executed immediately.  I shall take the next train back to
town and twenty individuals are put on at once on each dress; by
to-morrow at ten o'clock you will have two creations.  If you will
permit me."  A yard measure came swiftly out of the gentleman's pocket,
and before the astonished girls could speak, their measures were taken
and the gentleman bowed low and retired.

"Oh!" exclaimed Jeanie, "it's Aunt Honoria!  She heard me say I had
nothing to wear!  But she might have asked us what colour we wanted."

"As she didn't, we had better say nothing about it.  Perhaps she sent
the measures and the gentleman wanted to make sure," said Maud.  A faint
idea had entered her head, but she would not for the world have told
Jeanie.

"Yes, you are right--I must say it's nice of her. I should have been
ashamed to play in that old blue or white muslin!--Not that it matters
much."

When Aunt Honoria came in she found Maud waiting for her.

"Did you--order a dress to be sent to us, Aunt Honoria?"

"A dress?  No, dear.  Your mother said you had some that would do
nicely, as there will be such a crowd, she hears."

"Would you mind if some dresses come not saying anything--I'll tell you
why another day.  It's a surprise for Jeanie."

"Oh! indeed!  But I can't accept the credit--who is the donor?"

"Please, please, accept thanks if--you don't mind just for one day----"

Maud retired to solitude thinking to herself.

"I'm sure it's Toney, it's part of her plan!  She's ordered something
lovely for Jeanie and couldn't leave me out!  It would break her heart
if Jeanie refused her gift.  Dear Toney's romance must not be spoilt."




                             *CHAPTER XXI.*

                          *PLAYING WITH FIRE.*


"Uncle Evas, I want you particularly," said Toney next morning after
lunch.

"Your aunt does too.  She and Mr. Russell are tabulating guests.  I hear
some great man sleeps here to-night."

"I'm just off to meet him, but you will be very nice to him, uncle, at
dinner to-night, won't you, and mind you see he takes in Jeanie
Hamilton.  They will talk of music all the time and save us a lot of
trouble."

"Very well, but your aunt will pair him off with Lady Southbourne.  He
seems to be no end of a swell.  For my part I never can find a word to
say to these geniuses."

"Dear, ducky uncle, they are none of them so nice as you are, gospel
truth, but I wish you were just a wee bit curious."  The heart of Sir
Evas felt warmed. He realised now what an immense difference Toney's
love made in his life.  To him it seemed as if he had been in a grave
till her arrival, and then had slowly crept out of it.

"Curious, eh?  Well, so I am."

"You never asked me why I wanted you particularly."

"I'm a trifle nervous when you do!" he answered laughing.

"You always were a bit of a coward, weren't you? Well, I'll tell you.
You must let Maud Hamilton go in with Mr. Waycott, I think it's all
right."

"Good Lord! what's all right?"

"Why, they are!  I wonder they don't announce it, but I expect Miss
Honoria doesn't like it."

"Like what?"

"You know!  I think they're engaged now.  He nearly always comes to meet
her at the Haven."

"Toney, your romantic nature should be curbed. I don't believe a word of
it."

Toney looked up with wide-opened eyes.

"That's just like a man--awfully opaque.  Well, I'm off, I'm going to
drive the motor to the station, and come back in the dog-cart."

"You'll take Jim?"

"No, I'm going quite alone.  I want to make friends with the great
musician."

"I say, Toney, I don't think that's quite _comme-il-faut_. Now you're a
lady of property you mustn't be quite so--so----"

"Oh, Uncle Evas, you do disappoint me!  It's Mr. Russell that is
spoiling your natural disposition. You're downright snobby!  What harm
can I do to a poor stranger that comes here to give us pleasure? He's
not a wild beast.  Good-bye, and wish me luck."

"You won't let--your aunt see you, will you, Toney?"

"No, you bet!" and Toney flew off laughing heartily.

"Can't get the fear of Aunt Dove out of his constitution, poor darling,
sort of chronic disease," she said to herself.

Happily the day turned into a dull drizzle, and the county magnates
stayed indoors, or they might have seen a flying machine guided by the
heiress, dashing up to the station.  Toney timed herself always to be
exact, with no time to spare.  Her face was radiant.  She had settled
her plan of campaign, and as she walked up and down well "reefed in"
with a serge coat and skirt of the simplest description, no one would
have guessed that she was the envy of all the impoverished aristocrats
of the county.  She looked more cheerful than she felt, however.
"There's many a slip between the cup and the lip," and that tiresome
proverb would float about on the surface of Toney's brain.

The train flustered in with a great show of consequentiality, the slow
porters had on the look of "Take it easy, pray," as Toney ran up and
down looking for the great man, whose father had once kept a shop.  For
a moment she thought he had failed to appear, then from the other end of
the platform a tall man with a very remarkable face came slowly towards
her.  He carried a violin case, and a man-servant followed him laden
with other luggage.

Toney knew at once this was her man, and she seized the porter.

"Mr. Smith, will you please get a fly and put that gentleman and all the
luggage in it.  I'm driving the other gentleman in the dog-cart."

The porter touched his hat with a grin, he was not accustomed to being
called Mr. Smith, nor to hear a man-servant called a gentleman.

Then Toney began her campaign.

"How do you do?  I know you are Mr. Frank Weston, because--there's no
one else, is there--I've come to drive you home.  I'm Toney Whitburn, so
now we're introduced.  Lady Dove's giving the party, but I take all the
trouble.  There's a fly for your man, and if you want the violin with
you I'll put it behind us."

Frank Weston had been much dissatisfied with himself for accepting the
munificent private offer for playing in a private house.  The money had
tempted him, as he had lately heard of a broken-down violinist who had
nothing but the workhouse before him, and he had infinite pity for
failure and poverty. For himself--now his parents were well provided
for--he cared nothing at all.  The one romance of his life had failed.
He had loved once and once only. Jeanie Hamilton had touched his heart
with her beauty and her talent, and strange to say her pride, but when
her mother had told him her daughter refused his love, and had intimated
that their social positions were too far removed, the genius had lifted
his head more proudly than any aristocrat.

"I offered her my heart and my music," he had said, "they are worth more
than anything she may possess."

"Yes, yes--you--and your genius but--your people are not our people,"
Mrs. Hamilton had murmured with the softness of a purring pussy.

Frank Weston's face had turned paler if possible than usual, and he
walked away without answering. The iron had entered into his soul.  But
in spite of this he still loved his first love, though her name had
never again passed his lips, and he hated other women because of her.
No other should spurn him, and though many had wished to marry him, he
had never asked any.  His music was the gainer, for after that people
said Frank Weston was inspired in his pathetic movements, and now Toney
was going to play with fire.

Frank Weston's face was one not to be easily forgotten.  His features
seemed to be cut in alabaster, his hair reached his coat collar in soft
curling fashion, but there was no affectation about him.  He was far too
true a genius to descend to small advertisements.  Music was his only
interest in life, but even a dreamy genius stood no chance with Toney.
She piloted him out of the station and both stood by the side of the
dog-cart.  Frank Weston looked round hopelessly.  He could not drive,
and looking down at the slight girlish figure he doubted if she could,
when he saw Jim holding the thorough-bred.  Toney answered his look.

"Oh, yes, I'll drive you.  There's a dry place for your violin.  You can
trust me.  This is my own horse and we understand each other.  It's
awfully good of you to come to us.  You don't usually, do you, but I did
so particularly want you."  Frank Weston gradually took in the
situation.

"My agent said a Miss Whitburn--wanted----"

Toney jumped in and he had to follow.

"Yes, that's all right, that's me.  When your agent said, 'It will only
be a big price that will tempt him,' I said, 'Go ahead!'"  Toney spoke
so simply that Mr. Weston smiled.

"I may as well own it at once," he said.  "It was the money that tempted
me.  There is a poor friend of mine whose career is cut short in a
terrible manner.  He has creeping paralysis coming on from over-work.
He's too young for the charitable societies to come to his help, so----"

"So you are going to do it!  Oh, isn't that lovely!  I am glad you told
me, I'll just double the fee if that will set him up."

Frank stared at this unusually generous girl.

"Oh, but you are already paying a very heavy fee for--a very short time.
I expect you are one of the amateurs who have all the fine feelings of
the professional--finer often, because unconnected with public
recognition."  He lifted his head and smiled, then became conscious that
Miss Whitburn was flying along the country roads at a furious pace.

"Oh, gracious stars! don't think so for a moment about me!  I don't know
one note from another, but I've got a friend who feels all that, at
least I suppose so.  I do want you to be--sort of friendly with her,
because I've got it all up for her."

"All for your friend?  How extraordinary!" said the genius, "but,
forgive me for asking, is your horse running away?  I'm no good with
horses."  There was a touch of anxiety in his voice.  He heard a
rippling laugh near him.

"Don't you like it?  I'll pull him in, but it's the pace I like!
Suppose, Mr. Weston, you were driving with your--say your intended,
would you be afraid for her?"

Mr. Weston turned towards Toney with a look of dismayed surprise.

"I--have not--got one--I really can't say."

"I'm awfully glad, I half feared you might be engaged, you know----
People say you are tremendously run after.  If you had been, of course I
should have asked _her_ too.  You don't mind my saying this, do you?
I'm only an Australian girl, and out there we don't mince matters so
much as people do here, and I once heard that--that you were going to
marry a girl and that she----"  Toney cleared her throat.  She glanced
at the genius whose marble-cut face was lifted towards the sky with a
hard strange look on it.  No one had ever dared to speak to him about
that episode since it happened, and here was a strange girl introducing
the subject! The very boldness of it put him off his guard.

"You heard rightly, Miss Whitburn; the only woman I ever loved jilted
me, because I was not as nobly born as she was, and now----"

"I expect she's just mad with herself that she was so silly!  A hundred
to one it was her mother, sort of old pussy cat I shouldn't wonder.  Why
didn't you ask her again?  I should if I were a man!  I would not take
no, not for Joe!"  Toney was so excited that she flicked Colon with her
whip and he, to show his surprise, suddenly reared and then bolted
forward.  The genius turned towards his terrible driver in mute appeal.

"It's all right, indeed it is, Colon's as gentle as a child, but I was
thinking so much about your young--lady, that I touched him with the
whip.  He's awfully proud and that was his way of remonstrating. Here's
the gate----  Will you hold Colon a minute, or----"

"Let me open the gate," said the genius, suiting the action to the
words; not for the world would he have held that horse, his precious
Stradivarius was behind him.  Toney smiled, but indeed Colon stood quite
quietly whilst she remarked,

"I told you he's like a lamb--but you will let me help about your
friend?  It will give me so muck pleasure, and I shan't feel this
concert is wasted if you do."

"If I let you pay twice over?" said the genius, now quite under the
spell of this extraordinary heiress, whose generosity was as surprising
as her driving.

"If you and my friend don't enjoy this concert--"

"I shall do my best for your friend after your great kindness.  Is it--a
man?"  He believed it was Toney's fiance as her mind ran on that
subject, and he felt in a soft mood, though he could not have told why.

"A man!  I should think not!  Mr. Russell--he helps me with my
letters--he's musical, but then he doesn't think much of me!"

"His taste must be bad," said Frank, actually making a compliment.  "He
would have more confidence in you if you drove him back from the
station."  Frank Weston had forgiven her and Toney realised it with joy.

"Ouf!  Here's Aldersfield House, I'm glad the drive is over.  Will you
promise, even if you don't like my friend, to take her in to dinner and
to talk music to her?  She'll love that.  The other people wouldn't
understand it--and you won't try it on me, will you, or on Uncle Evas?
He'd want to be polite, but he wouldn't know what to answer."

"I think you can trust me, Miss Whitburn, not to bore the unmusical.  I
shall do my best to please your lady friend, because all the time I
shall see Arthur Mullins' face when he hears of his luck."

"That's all right!  I'm awfully relieved.  You'll like to go to your
room now at once, won't you, and rest?  I'll send you up some tea, and
then you won't have to answer foolish questions."

"That would be most kind," he said gratefully. How very extraordinarily
thoughtful this young heiress seemed to be.

Toney was saying to herself, "Then they won't meet till dinner-time, and
she'll just be looking so beautiful that----"

"Gollywogs!" she exclaimed as she jumped down and Jim came running up,
"There's visitors just come. Jim, take Mr. Weston in by the garden door,
and tell them to take him to his room and give him tea."

In this way Toney smuggled in the genius and she herself stepped into
the hall to find the two Hamiltons there taking their wraps off.

"I am glad you are come early for tea.  I'm sure Aunt Dove will want
some help about the Peerage. I'm no use at all.  If a man has got all
his legs and arms, and he has a nice face and lots of genius, I don't
care how he came into the world."

Maud laughed, and as Jeanie walked towards the drawing-room Toney seized
her.

"Maud, he's come, he's in his room, they won't meet till dinner."

"Oh, Toney!" gasped Maud, "but do you know anything about some lovely
dresses that came for us this morning?"

Toney laughed.

"Don't betray me!  Pups used to say a general overlooks nothing to win
the victory."




                            *CHAPTER XXII.*

                               *FAILURE.*


A few select guests were expected at Aldersfield for an early dinner
party before the concert.  Lady Dove was radiant.  She was giving a
grand party at which all the honour and none of the expense was going to
fall on her.  Even Miss Grossman had come in for smiles as she read a
novel whilst her ladyship's hair was arranged, and for once punctuality
was rewarded, for Lady Southbourne arrived very early with many
apologies, which she hoped dear Lady Dove would accept.  Her husband and
son had gone to town on business and might be a little late, so she had
come on first and they would come later in a dog-cart.  Lady Dove was
charmed.

"It is so kind of you, Lady Southbourne, to come at all this foggy
evening.  I am always ready early in case a guest does come.  My husband
and Antonia are usually late, but of course to-day there has been a good
deal to arrange.  We have turned the barn into a concert-room, and it is
really very pretty.  I wanted all our friends of North Downshire to
come.  The country has been a little dull lately."

"Miss Whitburn has told me your party would be a great success.  The
star's name is a secret, I hear."

"Yes, one of Antonia's little secrets!  Of course I never interfere with
her plans now she is of age, but I must say I feel rewarded when I look
back on the training of the wild colt she was when we first took her,
little dreaming of the result."

"It must be an immense pleasure for you--though a girl with money is a
responsibility, isn't she?"

"Ah! no one knows how many anxious thoughts I have had on that subject."

"And that was what I really wanted to ask you about, dear Lady Dove.  I
want your--help and sympathy."

For the great Lady Southbourne to be asking her help and sympathy made
Lady Dove happy.

"You can always rely on my help, indeed you can!  Mutual help is our
greatest duty."

"I need not say that if you have a niece, I have a son to have anxious
thoughts about--and I want you to know a little secret."

"Indeed!"

"Yes, but I don't doubt Miss Whitburn has already confided in you.
Edward has proposed to her, but----"

"Oh, what an honour for Antonia, but, indeed, Lady Southbourne, yours is
a family any girl might be proud to enter!  Of course much above her in
rank."

"Edward has no foolish ideas about birth, almost a Republican on that
subject, but--I see that you do not know Miss Whitburn refused him and
Edward is heart-broken."

"Antonia refused the----" Lady Dove gasped.

"She is young, she was startled, but with your help and advice she
might--reconsider it.  Edward is more bent on it than ever."

If Lady Southbourne had been sitting in the palace of truth she would
have said her dear boy had just lost a large sum on the turf.

"Trust me, Lady Southbourne, you shall have my influence, and Antonia
owes us so much.  I hardly think she will reject so much happiness."

"Thank you a thousand times."

At this moment other guests began to arrive, but where was Antonia and
the great man, and where were the Hamiltons?  Happily Sir Evas was
working hard and making everybody welcome regardless of their place in
the peerage.

Edward Lang and his father came in time, belying the fears of Lady
Southbourne, and Lady Carew and her correct husband followed.  An
Honourable or two, and a Colonel and his wife, made up the party of
people worthy of meeting each other.  Toney had only begged for the
Hamiltons, Mr. Hales and Lewis Waycott, but this latter Lady Dove had
refused as "that tiresome Miss Waycott would have to be included."  For
the concert everybody was coming, and a supper was to end this grand
party.

But Toney was too much occupied to give a thought to the county
magnates.  Rose, who came to help her to put on her white dress, was not
allowed to stay long.

"I'm all right, Rose; I want you to go to the Miss Hamiltons' room and
beg them to come here before going down.  I've got them some lovely
flowers."

"There's some come for you too, Miss Toney," said Rose, holding out a
lovely bunch of white lilies.  "It was left at the back door, and was
specially to be given to you."

"Oh!" exclaimed Toney.  "How lovely; I wonder who sent them.  You see, I
haven't a young man, Rose."

"Cook said as how you ought to have one, Miss Toney; specially you being
so rich now."

Toney paused as she held the flowers lovingly; she always had reverenced
flowers.  Oh, dear! even the servants associated money with love.  It
was dreadful!  Then she resolutely thrust away thoughts of self, and
looked at her two bunches of roses.  Then, pinning in her lilies, she
waited a little anxiously.  Time was flying.  She had arranged with the
footman to call Mr. Weston at the last moment, and she must get the
Hamiltons down before he came.  There was a knock at the door, and
Jeanie Hamilton stood in the doorway, a vision of beauty in a soft cloud
of pale blue silk and chiffon, whilst Maud looked nearly as much
transformed in rose.

"Oh!" exclaimed Toney, "how just awfully beautiful you look, Jeanie!
May I say it? and here are some flowers I got uncle to steal for you!
Let me pin them on."

Jeanie could not help admiring herself, and her spirits rose.  Never had
she had such a dress.

"Wasn't it generous of Aunt Honoria?  It's the most beautiful dress I
have ever seen; and, look at Maud, isn't hers pretty too?  They must
have cost a small fortune."

"You both look perfect."

"We must tell you about the gentleman who took our measure," exclaimed
Maud, trying to hide her nervousness by talking.  "But, oh, Toney, look
at the time; we ought to go down."

"Yes.  We'll all go together, and if you go in first Aunt Dove's
big-wigs will be so struck of a heap with you that they'll forget me.
They do seem so very extra civil to me now, all because I've got so much
tin.  Oh! they don't know the trouble of it; but in any case I don't
stick bank-notes on my clothes, so I can't see why I'm more interesting
than I was before.  Come, let's run!  No, you can't with those clo'."

But all the same, the three girls did run, seeing an anxious look on the
butler's face as they entered the hall.

The door was thrown open for them, and, as Toney had predicted, the two
Hamiltons made a sensation, especially Jeanie, whose face was so full of
pathos, and who looked especially beautiful. Toney crept in behind them,
but was seen by her aunt.

"Toney, how dreadfully late you are!  The musician--what's his name--has
not come down yet.  Tell Thomas to fetch him at once."  Toney nodded.

"It's all right, Aunt Dove; I've done it.  You know musical people are
not like others."

Sir Evas knew he had to obey orders, and got hold of Jeanie.  He held
the list of the other pairs in his hand, but several gentlemen came up
to talk to this vision of beauty.  Maud kept close to Toney; she could
not talk, she could hardly see. What would Jeanie do? and what would he
do? Why had Toney done this?  How terrible; suppose there was a scene;
suppose----

The door flew open and Mr. Frank Weston was announced, but Jeanie was at
the other end of the room and did not hear the name.

Toney flew up to the genius and introduced him right and left till
dinner was announced; then she paused.

"You remember about--my friend, Mr. Weston?"  The genius had bowed right
and left in rather a formal manner.  He was so often introduced that he
barely listened to the names of the people introduced.  He was thinking
of Miss Whitburn. The big-wigs were pairing off, and solemnly marched
away like a regiment of newly-trained recruits, when Sir Evas suddenly
introduced him to a lady whose name he did not hear.  He held out his
arm mechanically; ladies were nothing to him, and he only saw a
beautiful dress.  A symphony was floating through his brain, he was only
acting in a dream, till suddenly he felt the arm he held tremble. He was
recalled to earth.  They were crossing the hall, and the noise of voices
was great Various scraps of conversation about hunting and the weather
reached him, and his own name--the great Frank Weston; what a surprise,
no one expected him!  He looked down and exclaimed--he knew not what.

"Let me go away," she murmured, "you----"

"Impossible!  Miss Hamilton, pray remember we are both guests--no one
knows.  If my presence is so--distasteful to you----"

"I did not know."

"Neither did I--but this chance meeting might have happened anywhere."

"Yes----"  Jeanie straightened herself, and they both walked on in
silence.  They were shown their places, and Frank Weston glanced at the
name on his other side; Mrs. Arbuthnot.  Jeanie had Colonel Arbuthnot on
her other side.  They need not speak to each other.  How terrible!
Jeanie searched for Maud, but she was on the same side and could not be
seen.  Her heart beat so fast she could hardly speak.  She looked for
Toney, someone to appeal to.  Was she near Frank?  Yes, Frank was here,
sitting beside her; but of course he hated her.  Of course, he was
wishing himself miles away; of course, he would _never_ forgive her,
never, never love her again.  Never--never, she repeated to herself.

Toney's eyes, which saw so much, were looking at them; she could see
they were silent, and she noticed they each turned to their other
neighbours. Oh! her plan was failing, had failed, and she had risked
everything on this dinner.  Maud was looking deadly pale, but in spite
of all this the talk was loud, drowning nearly everything.  Mr. Hales at
her side broke the spell.

"You are very preoccupied this evening, and yet you have secured the one
man everyone wants to hear," he said.  "Are you not satisfied?"  His
voice had a new tone in it, which made Toney look up wonderingly.

"Oh, yes, I am preoccupied; so would you be if you had conspired
tremendously and your conspiracy was no good."

"Indeed!"

"Mr. Hales, help me!  Mr. Frank Weston isn't talking one scrap to Jeanie
Hamilton."

"He has come to play the violin, and I daresay he is not a good
conversationalist."

"It's not that, you don't know her story; he was in love with Jeanie
once, and she loved him really, but she sent him away because his father
had a shop and sold something, and now she's just frightfully sorry she
did it, and--but he doesn't look as if he was forgiving her.  What would
you do?"

Mr. Hales smiled.

"I should never have hazarded the meeting--never."

"Was I wrong?  Oh, but of course she _is_ sorry, and--but I wish they
would notice each other.  If I were her I should just say I knew I was a
born fool when I said no."  Mr. Hales laughed.

"I don't think _you_ would ever have said no for that reason!"

"I couldn't, because my father sort of kept a shop; we were always
selling drugs.  Oh look, Mr. Hales, just out of the corner of your eye,
I see Jeanie looking up into his face, and she has just refused oyster
patties."

"But do I understand you did all this to--bring them together?"

"Yes.  I did so want them to be happy, besides it would make Maud and
Mr. Waycott happy."

Mr. Hales was silent.  He was considering whether Toney would ever
consent herself to say yes to somebody.  A dream of a larger sphere of
work floated before his mental vision, a dream of a young wife who would
devote her money to their work, for in every mission-field money was
needed, money and workers.  But love seemed very far removed from
Toney's ideas at this moment, and so he was silent.  Then he asked after
the work at the Haven.

"Miss Phipps is doing wonders, and some of my first friends come
to-morrow.  Two of the _avant garde_ and the deaf man.  He has no one to
take care of him."

"You will indeed have the blind and the deaf," said Mr. Hales smiling.

"Yes, but I do wish we lived in the days of St. Clare and Sister
Ortolana.  For when St. Francis sent them to sick people they made the
sign of the Cross, and immediately restored them all to health."

"And by their prayers, Toney, I think."

"Yes," answered Toney, "I suppose that's where we fail; but oh, Mr.
Hales, I did pray ever so hard about Jeanie and the genius!  Do you
think--they will make it up?  We have come to the cheese and they have
said nothing!"  Mr. Hales hid a smile.

"Perhaps the music will work the miracle.  Don't despair."

"Perhaps it will, though that is a mystery to me. Mr. Hales, you will
keep near me, won't you, as I see the Honourable Edward looking at me
sideways. I'm so afraid he'll want to talk to me privately."

"But perhaps----"

"Oh no!  I couldn't possibly think of it!  Besides, I'm afraid it's true
what Aunt Dove said.  He wants the--money, and you see it would be a
dreadful disappointment to hear that it--was not to be had. I thought
money might make two people happy, and here are the ices and they
haven't yet melted!"

Everyone soon rose to proceed to the barn, and in that interval Toney
flew to find the genius.




                            *CHAPTER XXIII.*

                             *TEN MINUTES.*


The carriages rolled up to the barn door in quick succession, and Lady
Dove did indeed feel proud as she received her guests at the entrance of
the fairy bower, now styled the concert-room.  Never had such an
entertainment been given there by her before, and now a wireless message
went round the guests that Frank Weston was the star they had come to
hear.  Such a treat had not been imagined, for crowned heads had to
petition him, not to command.  How had he been persuaded to come and
give a private concert at Aldersfield House?  Words of gratitude were
heard on every side.

"How kind of you, Lady Dove!  This is an unexpected treat; Lord Dashwood
tried in vain to get him!  He is very proud and very original.  I heard
the Emperor of Germany could not get him to play last year.  The Germans
say we have never had such a genius.  Quite a poor man was he? Genius
plays strange freaks.  They say he can make as much money as he
likes--Lady Gwen Steward was dying to marry him they say--but he
wouldn't look at her.  They say he was once jilted and that turned him
into a misogamist."

Lady Dove tried to answer appropriately and was all smiles.  She kept
Mr. Russell near her, he was so clever and so useful, and Sir Evas was
neither!

"How kind of you to come this wet evening. Yes, Mr. Frank Weston is
really here, he dined with us--such a charming fellow--genius written
all over him"--and so on whilst the crowd rustled into seats. Where was
Toney?

Directly dinner was over, Toney flew to find Jim, who was always ready
to do her bidding.  She interviewed him in the housekeeper's room.

"Jim, I want you to see after Mr. Frank Weston. Show him to the
waiting-room we have rigged up, and stay at the door, and don't let
anyone come in or out unless I tell you.  I haven't any ring, that would
be the right thing, but look at this glove, Jim, you see it has one
green finger, I was getting a nosegay in a hurry--if someone brings this
glove, let them in!  The people won't be seated for a quarter of an hour
yet, and Jim--is your young woman still faithful to you?"

"Yes, miss," said Jim quite gravely, touching his cap.

"But if she wasn't what would you say?"

"Knock 'im over, miss."

"But if there wasn't a him, only she just thought you not good enough?"

"Get another, miss."

"Oh, Jim, that isn't at all having fine feeling. You'd have to be true
to her, and wait till she thought better of it, and then you'd not be
proud, would you?"

"Can't say, miss."

"You'd just forgive and forget, wouldn't you?  I want you to say so--if
you really think it."

"Yes, miss.  If you was to tell me I'd forgive and forget."

Toney laughed and then hurried Jim off.

"Remember my glove with the green finger!"

"Yes, miss," and Jim flew off to obey.  If Toney had told him to run
twenty miles he would have gone.  Next, Toney went to find the
Hamiltons; she did not think they would go to the barn at once and she
was right.  In the little second drawing-room where the lights had been
lowered, she was conscious of soft murmuring tones, and rushing in she
heard Maud's voice.

"Oh, Jeanie darling, don't, don't cry like that! What shall we do?"

The beautiful vision in blue was hiding her face in the sofa cushions
and sobbing.

"It's only me," exclaimed Toney coughing.  "Is anything the matter?"
Jeanie jumped up.

"No, no, thank you, I did not feel very well.  I think I would prefer
going up to my room."

"Oh! and miss Mr. Weston's playing!  Please come and hear him, and after
that you can go--and--and----"  Poor Toney was non-plussed.

"Forgive me," said Jeanie, her pride giving way, "I was upset; I once
knew Mr. Weston and--we were great friends, but we quarrelled,
and--he--won't forgive me."

"Is that all?  Did you say you were sorry, Jeanie?  It's best to be
quite straight out, isn't it? No use beating about the bush, and let me
see----  Oh! he's in the little waiting-room now, I'll go and ask
him--won't you give me one of your flowers or something?"

"Oh no, no, I can't--he would--throw them away--and I should deserve
it."

"He looks awfully nice, Jeanie, such a good strong face; no nonsense at
all.  I expect he did feel a bit hipped, but--look here, if he sends you
your flowers back again, you'll know he can't forgive, but if he sends
you the white camellia I gave him, then you'll know it's all right, and
go at once to the room.  I'll send Jim, he's awfully safe.  Will you
wait here?  There's crowds coming, and Aunt Dove and Mr. Russell are
saying a lot of nothings which people like, so there's time yet."

Maud unpinned her sister's flowers with trembling fingers as Jeanie sat
up, clasping her hands.

"Toney, you are kind, but you don't understand. I behaved so horridly to
him.  I let mother insult him, and he must have hated me.  I deserve it
all and now--now--it's horrid to say so but I would not be so unhappy if
only he could forgive me, but he never will; he is proud too--as proud
of his people as I am about mine, and I threw it at him.  Would you ever
forgive that, Toney?  He never spoke to me, only once--just to ask me to
have something.  I nearly died."

Toney seized the flowers, there was so little time.

"Look here, Jeanie, I'll just go and reconnoitre. Here's my glove with a
green finger, if you get the camellia take my glove and Jim will let you
in.  All those old sillies would want to get at him, and one of his
conditions was a quarter of an hour alone before the concert."

Toney flew off leaving the sisters alone.  Jeanie again hid her face,
but she no longer sobbed, and Maud knelt by her holding her hand.

"Oh, Jim, is he in there?  I've only ten minutes," said Toney.  Jim
nodded.

"He said no one was to come in, Miss Tonia."

"But I _must_ go, I'm just like Queen Esther.  I do hope he'll hold out
his sceptre."

Jim opened the door, and Toney stood face to face with the genius, who
was pacing the narrow limits of the small waiting-room.

"Oh, please forgive me!  I've come to tell you that Jim, who's a great
friend of mine, says he could forgive and forget if I told him to do
so--I thought I'd better tell you to--forgive and forget."

No one could have resisted a smile at this speech, even Frank Weston,
who was smarting from the opening of the old wound, smiled, then sternly
he said, "I--did not want to see anybody."

"I'm not anybody, indeed I'm not.  Just a poor relation of Sir Evas,
till I got a lot of money left to me by the dearest old General.  He was
good, you bet, and _he_ would have forgiven anyone, especially if--they
sent these flowers."

There seemed to be no need of an explanation between these two.  Frank
Weston had now realised Toney's conspiracy.

Toney held out the lovely bunch of roses she had herself tied up for
Jeanie.

"Look, please take them--exchange them--if you forgive her.  She is just
sobbing her heart out and calling herself no end of names, I believe she
is heart-broken, and says she only wants your forgiveness."

The genius turned away and there was silence.

"There is so little time, Mr. Weston, can't you make up your mind?"

"You hardly understand, Miss Whitburn," he said turning suddenly towards
Toney, who held the flowers in her hand.  "I loved Miss Hamilton with
all my heart.  She made me believe she loved me, and then she threw me
over because my father had honestly earned his living in trade, because
he had nobly scraped every penny from his hard-earned money to give me a
musical education.  I can never make you rich people understand what I
owe to my father, and when Miss Hamilton----"

"Oh yes, don't dwell on it, I told you it was the old pussy cat, her
mother--Aunt Dove would be just the same--but you must not think Jeanie
is like that now--Pups--(that's my father)--did everything for me and I
quite understand, but then he would have been the first to tell me to
make it up. Wouldn't your father?"

"He often has told me to try again, but he did not understand."

"Then that's easy----  Oh, please, there's awfully little time--and just
to please me, will you play one of the pieces you used to play together
at the end of the concert.  I've got her fiddle here and she would be so
awfully happy, and she has a lovely dress, and----"

Toney's words were as if the Dam of Assouan had given way and had let
through the waters of the Nile, and then all at once she stood on
tip-toe, for the precious minutes were flying and with deft fingers she
unpinned his camellia.

"You needn't say anything, the camellia will speak; there!  I must fly,
you've got eight minutes and then you'll have to come.  There's a chair
left for Jeanie in front, it will sort of inspire you, won't it?  Oh,
thank you a thousand times."

She opened the door and flew past Jim with the reminder, "and, Jim, when
time's up, don't go in, only knock loud," and ran in the dim darkness
towards the house--but at that moment she ran against someone.

"Oh!--why it's you!  How very, very nice."

"I was coming to look for you, Toney.  Lady Dove is getting rather----"

"Yes, of course.  Will you, please, go and give this camellia to Jeanie.
Maud is there, and will you tell Jeanie to go to Mr. Weston.  He wants
to see her about some music--and then will you take Maud into the
concert-room.  Oh, that's all, but please run."

"All right, Toney," said Lewis laughing.

In another moment, Toney herself was entering the concert-room looking
very red and hot, but smiling graciously and shaking hands with
everybody who came in her way, in spite of Lady Dove's loud whisper,

"Antonia, how very rude to come in so late. What will people think of
you!"

"So sorry--I had to see about Mr. Weston's duet. It will be just the
best thing of all!  How do you do?  Isn't this lovely?  He is a great
genius and I don't even feel a bit sleepy!"

Five minutes to the time, Jeanie, like a cloud of blue, appeared at the
waiting-room door, holding a lovely camellia, and a discoloured white
glove.  She held it out to Jim but could not speak.

"All right, miss, but there's only five minutes."

Jim then opened the door and closed it quickly. Jeanie looked like a
beautiful ghost in the half-lighted room.  Her heart beat so fast that
for a moment she could not speak.  With one hand she grasped the back of
a chair, and with the other she held out the camellia.

"Frank--forgive me--I--can't forgive myself, Miss Whitburn _made_ me
come--I----  Oh, Frank, I'm so miserable, I'm not proud any more."  Her
head drooped and Frank Weston only saw a beautiful head of soft golden
brown hair; then the greatness of his character triumphed over his
pride, for suddenly he put his strong arms round her.

"Jeanie," he said; "Jeanie----"  He only heard a sob, and his answer was
a passionate kiss imprinted on her golden hair, for her face was hidden;
then a minute of exquisite silence and then a loud knock which made them
fly apart.

"If you please, sir, time's up."

"Jeanie, _she_, Miss Whitburn, asked us--will you play that last duet we
played together, do you remember it?"

"Remember it!  Oh, Frank, I can't, I've no violin."

"Yes.  Here it is, she brought it here."

"It's all Toney."

"Miss Whitburn is a very wonderful person. Come, she said a chair was
ready for you.  Oh, my love, my love!"

Jeanie fled to the side door, then she sank into a chair that was close
by.  The next moment Frank Weston appeared on the platform amidst a
storm of welcome.  He did not smile or bow, but at once took his violin,
nodded to the accompanist who had come by a later train, and began to
play.  All those who had a soul for music seemed to be lifted to another
sphere, and even those who had not, watched with breathless wonder the
face of the great musician.  He saw only, sitting before him, Jeanie
Hamilton, and she never took her eyes from him, for her there was no one
else in the room.

Right at the other end of the barn Lewis Waycott sat next to Maud, who
was still trembling with excitement.

"Oh, Lewis, it's too, too wonderful.  The camellia you brought was his.
It's all Toney's doing.  I think she is the most wonderful person I have
ever known----  _You_ always appreciated her, you have nothing to be
sorry for."

"Yes, I always did.  How did she manage this?"

"I can't think how.  He was so proud--I think Jeanie would soon have
died--of a broken heart."

"There are no such things, Maud."

"Hush!" she said.  "Listen!"

That concert was talked of for many a long day. Those who knew said that
Frank Weston excelled himself, but something else wonderful happened.
There was still ten minutes of the allotted time when he had finished
his last piece.  He put down his violin, walked down the steps and
offered his arm to Jeanie Hamilton.

There was another storm of applause.  Miss Hamilton, whom so many
present knew was considered worthy to play with the genius--and how
beautiful she looked!  How was it no one had sooner recognised her
beauty and her talent, and what a lovely dress!  Jeanie was still in a
dream. This was happening all long ago, when she and Frank had played
together, of course it was for the last time--but she must play her
best, she must not disgrace him in public, though it was the hardest
thing she had ever done.

"Now," he said softly, looking at her, and then they began.  How kindly
he moderated his pace to hers, how thrilling were the tender notes.  It
was a little bit of heaven, and then it was over!

What a storm of applause followed, but Jeanie fled and Frank Weston
followed her after simply saying "Thank you" to his audience.

Jim was keeping the door as they passed in, and when Toney arrived Jim
had seized the situation.

"I think, Miss Tonia," he said, touching his cap, "I think Miss Hamilton
must be _his_ young lady."

"Yes, she is, but in ten minutes tell them to come to supper at the
House.  Mind, only ten minutes, Jim, for I'm just dying to congratulate
them."




                            *CHAPTER XXIV.*

                           *LEWIS' DECISION.*


How did the secret come out?  It was whispered, then murmured, then
everybody seemed to say at once, "Isn't it romantic!  The great Frank
Weston is just engaged to Miss Hamilton.  Didn't they look a perfect
pair as they played.  What a sensation it will make--an old romance.
Quite charming"--and so on.

And among these buzzing remarks Toney flitted about at the stand-up
supper, where everything was of the best, and where everybody seemed to
enjoy themselves, but none so much as Toney herself. She had not dreamt
of reward, but she certainly had it this evening.  First came Maud with
dewy eyes, she had not yet got over her fears.

"Oh, Toney, is it true?  I have not seen her.  It is all your doing.
Tell me everything."

"Ouf!" said Toney, "I thought it was all white of egg at first, but--oh,
Maud, it's just the most perfect romance there ever was, that is only
second to my dear Chum, who is here, and I haven't had a moment to talk
to her, but of course you'll both sleep here to-night and see him off
to-morrow. Hasn't he a face of--iron, will sort of prop her up all her
life.  He hasn't a mean idea in his brain.  I say, Maud, you'll be true
to me and not let it out, won't you?"

At this moment Mrs. Hamilton and Miss Honoria came up looking much
flustered.

"Antonia, there you are!  My dear child, do you know anything about
this--report?  Where is Jeanie?  Maud, do you know?  Toney, what is
happening?"

Toney shook her head.

"They are in the waiting-room; looks true, doesn't it, Mrs. Hamilton?
Jim is keeping guard so I expect he let it out.  Jim's got a young woman
himself, so he's rather cute over the subject."

"My dear, you are so amusing!" (she meant vulgar) "but of course Frank
Weston is quite the rage, and Jeanie will help him so much--socially I
mean."

Toney lifted her head and shook her curling hair in a sort of indignant
manner.

"Mr. Weston is a real genius, Mrs. Hamilton, and he doesn't care two
pins for society, so I guess that word would just make him rage.  It's a
great honour to--to know him, and a tremendous honour to be engaged to
him."

"Of course.  I must find dear Jeanie, it's in everybody's mouth.  Such a
surprise, so clever of them, I knew nothing about it."  She passed on
none too pleased with that terrible Antonia, but Miss Honoria thought
differently.

"I am wondering, Toney, if this surprise hasn't something to do with
you?" she said, taking Toney's hand.  "I've just seen Lewis and he
smiled when I suggested it."

"I couldn't have done it alone, they were both deeply in love, and
wouldn't have married anyone else.  But didn't she look lovely playing,
I expect ever so many men wanted to ask her.  There's Chum, she'll be
awfully interested," and Toney flew off and Miss Honoria turned to Maud.

"It's true, Maud, isn't it, it is Toney's doing? But these dresses--I
hear a London man came down to measure you?"

"Aunt Honoria, don't say anything, it's Toney again, but she doesn't
want Jeanie to know, she's so proud.  I think it's a lesson against such
odious pride about our ancestors, you know how nearly they both missed
this happiness."

"Of course _now_ he could marry anyone, but your mother thinks so much
of birth."

"If I fall in love with a grocer I shall not wait for mother's leave,"
exclaimed Maud; the lesson had been burnt into her nature too deeply by
knowing what her sister had gone through.  Then suddenly there was a
little stir at the door as Frank Weston entered with Jeanie, who looked
very shy and frightened, but also very happy.  Maud flew to her.

"Jeanie, tell me, is it true?"  Jeanie nodded and Frank answered for
her,

"We are so glad now for the waiting time," he said with suppressed joy,
"we understand each other much better than we could ever have done
without it."

Like all people of big natures, when he gave in he gave in entirely.
There was no looking back on time wasted, no more reproaches.  "But
where is Miss Whitburn?"  He lowered his voice, "We owe it all to her."

"Jeanie, you do look so beautiful!  I am glad it was this evening.
Toney says we are to sleep here, and mother is all right, and----"  The
Honble. Edward interrupted her sentence.

"Miss Whitburn is asking for you, Miss Hamilton; she is at the top of
the room."

Jeanie went off with Frank, but she reflected sadly there was no need
now of courage to follow him. She would never forgive herself the pain
she had given him, whatever he might say.

Maud looked up at Edward Lang with a radiant face.

"You have heard, haven't you?  It was an old romance gone wrong, which
Toney set her mind to right, and she has succeeded.  I wish
_her_--romance could end as happily!"

The two remained talking together whilst Jeanie enjoyed a triumphal
procession.  When they reached her Toney held out both her hands and
whispered,

"Mr. Weston, isn't she beautiful?  You do look as if you had forgiven
me!"

"Forgiven you!  But for you we should have----"

There was no time to finish the sentence for Mrs. Hamilton had glided up
to them.

"Jeanie, my darling!  Oh--Mr. Weston--this is indeed delightful, but
this is too public a place to say more."

Jeanie kissed her mother in silence, then she had to move about in a
dream and answer questions and smile, and see that Frank had some
supper, repeating to herself, "But for Toney I think I should have
died."  Remembering her little darts at Toney she was still more
humbled, and humility is good for such souls.

Toney was giving Lewis some supper and wondering why Maud left him
alone.

"You are glad, aren't you?"

"Glad--yes--I think I'm even curious."

"Why!  You couldn't be curious!  I knew you could be so happy about it
because of Maud."

"Yes, indeed, she has been so unselfish about her sister, and you have
done good to both."

"Good to myself.  I do get pleasure out of it, and if it hadn't been for
the dear General I couldn't have bribed Mr. Weston to come."

"He gets huge sums I hear."

"But this concert money is all going to a poor musician whose music is
mute----  Isn't that just noble?  How could Jeanie have ever doubted
him?"

"But the way is plain now--and I--I am thinking of going abroad, Toney."

"Going abroad, oh, why?  What will--your aunt and Maud say?"

"I shall leave them in possession--I don't think----"  He paused.

"Well, that is queer, I am sorry, I thought you----"  Toney did not
often flounder, but she found herself in a bog.  How _could_ he leave
Maud and go abroad?

"Not for long?"

"Oh, I don't know--till things get clearer."

"Is there a hitch, Mr. Waycott?  Can't I make it straight, is the old
pussy cat----  Oh, I beg your pardon, she is your aunt!"  Lewis laughed.

"You mean my aunt won't want to turn out because of this wedding coming
on."  Toney didn't mean that, but she nodded.

"I really can't stand a wedding--but they are welcome to use my house."

"But what about the Stone House?  It will want you awfully."  Toney
clasped her hands and looked really distressed.

"I think you will find another--many other helpers."

Toney was called for, but she felt a little lump in her chest; then with
a great effort she said to herself, "The old pussy thinks Mr. Waycott
isn't rich enough for Maud, or that he must be tested like poor Frank
Weston!  If it's only money, perhaps I could square it--but oh, I don't
think Aldersfield would be anything without him!"

Now the rest of the acts of the lovers can be easily imagined this
evening, and how, when the last guests were gone, they retired to the
small drawing-room, and Toney, as she passed the door with Mrs. Faber,
heard some wondrous soft music coming out of it.

"Listen, Chum, he's talking to her, I wish I was a musician; words are
poor things for telling people you love them tremendously."

"I wish it were _your_ romance, dear Toney!"

"That's a vain wish, I'm going to be a real match-making old maid.  Do
you know, Chum, Mr. Waycott is in love with Maud, and something has gone
wrong, I can tell by his face, he's bothered about it, I wish I could
make it smooth, for he and Uncle Evas are, and always have been, my two
props, and I should feel halt and blind without them.  But he says he's
going to travel.  Maud will sort of go to nothing like Jeanie if he
does; it's Mrs. Hamilton's fault--I'm sure.  She is a pussy."  Mrs.
Faber laughed.

"As to Mr. Waycott, it does seem strange.  Are you sure, Toney?"

"Oh, yes, quite sure.  He so often comes and meets her on her way home
from the Haven and----  But things must have gone very wrong with him;
he looks so glum.  Never mind, I'll have a good think, and see if I
can't make things come right. There is Maud.  Doesn't she look like a
china shepherdess, and won't he have a sweet wife at Waycott Hall?
She'll fit in exactly when she leaves her mother.  I never could cotton
to her. Isn't it funny, Chum, Miss Grossman won't be bullied, and Aunt
Dove says she has no sympathy."

Mrs. Faber was puzzled, so she waylaid Maud on her way to bed, for Toney
had declared she was too sleepy to wait another minute, and only Sir
Evas and Mr. Russell were left to look after the genius. Maud gathered
up her rose creation and waited for Mrs. Faber.

"Forgive me for stopping you, but--I do want to say how glad I am about
your sister's engagement, though I don't quite understand what Toney
did!"

"Nor anyone else quite!  She went to meet him at the station and
prepared the way, but they were both taken by surprise, and then----
Oh!  Toney did it!"

"I wish one of Arthur's knights could come and claim Toney!"

"Indeed, so do I!  She hasn't told you, but Mr. Edward Lang wants to
marry her, and she--won't hear of it.  I had a long talk to-night with
him, and he is really a good fellow, only rather extravagant. He was so
open, and told me about it."

"Mr. Lang!  Oh!  Toney would seem very far away if she married him."

"But Lady Dove wants it, she told me so to-night----  I wish I could
help it on."  Mrs. Faber shook her head.

"Toney would never be happy as a grand lady--and her money----"

"Of course he knows people will think he wants the money."

"I suppose that is true," said Mrs. Faber simply. "Good night, Miss
Hamilton.  Toney is so glad about the success of her plot."

Maud went on to her sister's room.

"We have talked it all over," said the radiant Jeanie.  "He won't stop
my going to Germany, but he will be there too, and--in fact he wants us
to be married at once.  He says he has waited long enough, and of course
it must be just as he likes."

"Mother won't like it at once," said Maud.

Jeanie raised her head defiantly, she belonged to Frank now.

"Mother is my mother, so I won't say anything except to you, Maud, but
she was the cause of all my great misery, and nothing will make me go
against Frank again.  Is there another man on earth who would have
forgiven me as he has done?  The least I can do is to----"

"Let him have his own way entirely," laughed Maud.  "Edward Lang says
his wife shall do exactly as she likes!  How I wish Toney would say
yes!"

"Toney!--Edward Lang!" said Jeanie astonished. "Oh, that would be odd,
almost ridiculous, besides, he's so extravagant everybody says."

"Everybody says it and that helps him on.  I told him he could marry
nobody if he went on as he is doing."

"_You_ told him that, Maud?"

"Yes; I do want to help Toney, and of course she has too much sense to
marry a man like that, though I believe he _could_ make a woman happy!"

"No, not Toney, they have nothing in common."

"Except riding."

"But you can't ride all the time when you are married!  Just look at us,
music will always be a link, we couldn't ever get bored with each other!
Oh, Maud, to-night he played me one of his own compositions which no one
else has heard----"

"I'm tired and sleepy, Jeanie darling, so don't go off again on
Frank!--but all the same Toney has worked a miracle!"

"Yes, a miracle.  Frank told me how angry he was at a stranger daring to
talk to him about--me, and then, somehow, she got over him and he felt
he simply couldn't say _no_ to her!"

"Or to you!" and then at last the happy girls fell asleep from sheer
weariness.




                             *CHAPTER XXV.*

                            *SHORT NOTICE.*


When Toney woke the next morning she remembered first, that she was very
happy about Jeanie and the genius; secondly, that she was very unhappy
about--oh, it was that Lewis Waycott was going away and she should lose
all his help and----  Then she called herself horridly selfish, and
lastly she felt very sorry for poor Maud, who would lose both her sister
and her lover.  Toney hugged Trick and told him she couldn't understand
some things, and that sometimes life was all askew!  Trick licked her
hands vigorously as if to agree with her. But Toney had to speed the
parting guests, and had little time to think of herself.

Jeanie came down to breakfast with a changed expression on her face.
Frank Weston had no eyes but for her, with now and then a side glance at
Toney.  Happily, Lady Dove was tired, so did not appear.  She
particularly disliked lovers.

"We want to be married as soon as possible," said the genius after
breakfast to Toney, "will you help us?  Jeanie says you can work
miracles, and then I will take her to Germany."

"That's just what I should like; I hate grand weddings.  I'll tell you
what, Maud, if you will give me leave I'll manage it all: will a week be
short enough?"

They looked at each other and laughed,

"Would it be possible?  Mother----"

"Oh, I know she'll say she can't afford it!  Aunt Dove always does when
she doesn't want anything. I'll order your trousseau from the man
who--from a very quick and ready firm, and then Mr. Hales will marry you
in the early morning.  We'll have a record wedding, but I must have my
poor friends there."

Maud laughed, and the lovers smiled as Mr. Weston answered,

"It sounds delightfully original, but indeed we could not give you all
this trouble.  Jeanie has some money from her cousin abroad and----"

"The money was given for music.  It isn't fair, is it, to use it for
anything else?  Do let me do as I like, Mr. Weston, to show you forgive
me!  Maud will help me."

"Frank has engagements this week he cannot put off now.  It is
impossible," said Jeanie, looking at her lover.

"Of course, that's why you'll let me do everything. Come back to-day
week, Mr. Weston, and then you'll find everything ready.  It's just what
Pups would have done.  Once he got a couple married straight off,
because he was afraid the man would change his mind--I don't mean it as
an example."

Everyone laughed, and the farewell seemed quite cheerful, especially as
Toney sent the pair in her motor to the station, and then she and Maud
went off to the Haven.  Toney was so happy in planning everything and
getting Maud's advice on the subject of clothes, that for the moment she
forgot her own little load of sorrow.

"That nice man must come down and take orders!  I'll give him _carte
blanche_, Maud, but I must choose colours and style.  I'll telegraph
to-day. It's wonderful what money can do in hurrying people up.  How
shall we break it to Mrs. Hamilton?"

"I don't know--but oh, Toney, I don't think we ought to accept all this
from you.  I--don't believe now that Cousin George was in the business
at all and--mother ought not to accept.  However, she really has no
ready money so she would like to linger a long time over
this--engagement, and Jeanie might----"

"Fall ill or something might happen, and she would never forgive us,
would she?  But I do want to say one thing, Maud--I'm so sorry that--Mr.
Waycott's----"

"About Lewis, what about him?" asked Maud, leaning on the gate of the
Haven.

"About his going away!  I know it will be hard for you, but he _must_
stay for Jeanie's wedding if it's so soon."

"Lewis going away!  How odd, he has said nothing about it."

"Gracious stars!  I ought not to have told you!" Poor Toney blushed.
"But of course I thought you would know."

"It's quite right he should," added Maud quickly. "he has worked so hard
over the estate lately, and he really wants a change, he is rather
down."

"You are jolly over it.  Forgive me for letting it out.  When you are
married I'll do the same for you, Maud, as for Jeanie, if you'll let
me."

Then the two girls went in, and Toney had to interview the Harrises and
Captain Grant till it was time to go home.  No Lewis met them to-day.
Toney felt still more uncomfortable at having let the cat out of the
bag, but admired the way Maud took it.  So noble not to be the least
jealous that Lewis had told her first, she thought, but very
heavy-hearted herself she went to her study to work with Mr. Russell.

However, even business was exciting to-day, the plans for the new Home
having come, and everything had to be looked into.  Each inmate or
couple were to have a bedroom and sitting-room, besides the joint
dining-room and drawing-room, and though everything was to be simple,
nothing was to be mean. Even Plantagenet Russell warmed up, but to
herself she said, "I want Mr. Waycott's opinion, he always has good
ideas, I must go and ask him--perhaps he wants to give all his time to
Maud.  Why is he going?  I expect I've taken too much of his time."  Mr.
Russell interrupted her thoughts.

"Here is a letter from Mr. Staines, Miss Whitburn. He says you have been
spending too much lately. Your parties and the Haven, and----"

Toney laughed.

"Isn't that like a lawyer, they never can bear your spending all your
income; but it's better he should ruffle up a bit now, he'll have more
provocation soon when the house begins.  Now, Mr. Russell, telephone to
the firm of Woods.  Can they make a trousseau in four days?"

Mr. Russell gasped.

"A trousseau in four days?"

"Yes, perhaps I'd better hitch on myself.  Hulloa, hulloa, hitch on to
4004.  Miss Whitburn is on and is in a hurry."

When communication was established, Toney began,

"Send off same gentleman as before at once. Want first-class trousseau
in four days."

"Quite impossible, madam.  Very busy."

"Oh, then hitch me on to someone who can. Why not multiply workers?"  A
pause and then the firm gave in.

"Very well, madam.  Have things in stock which will help.  Mr. Woods
will be with you this evening."

"Thank you, very much.  Must hurry up at times; couple can't wait."

Then Toney decided she must go to Waycott Hall to prepare Jeanie and
Mrs. Hamilton, and the plans must be seen by Mr. Waycott.  She called
Trick, and not waiting for motor or horse dashed off across the park.

"One must stretch oneself when there is a sort of lump on one's chest,"
she said to herself.  Even the plans seemed to have lost some of their
delight--Toney did love to feel happy.  She gave a run when she came to
the gap, and she and Trick bounded over together, and to her dismay she
nearly fell upon Lewis Waycott, who had just turned a corner. Both of
them laughed and Trick danced round his heels but only looked at them.

"I'm awfully sorry!  I was coming to see Jeanie, and--to see if you and
Maud would look at the last plans?  How strange you should be here.
It's all right, to-day week: you _must_ stay for it, won't you?"

"Stay for what?" asked Lewis.

"Didn't Maud tell you?  Haven't you seen her?"

"No, I've been out all the morning miles away. The cottages in the
Stanmore Lane must be rebuilt."

"Oh--I want to make an awful confession."

"You, Toney!----  Are you--no--what is it?"  He looked so grave that
Toney laughed.

"Don't be frightened! it's bad, but might be worse!  I let the cat out
of the bag and told Maud you were going away!  Of course you ought to
tell her first."

"She'll know soon enough----"

"Oh--but wouldn't it be nicer if you told her?"

"Told Maud?  I suppose I ought to tell Aunt Honoria first.  She'll be
rather cut up, and--Toney, is it true that Jeanie is really going to
marry Frank Weston at once?"

"Yes, that's the other thing.  I've undertaken it--in a week!"

"You are not an undertaker, Toney."

They both laughed like old times.

"You see Mrs. Hamilton will say this and that and the other.  I expect
she isn't overpleased. Aunt Dove would be the same, so I've promised to
see it through--in a week, clo' and all!  I'm just delighted--you see it
would never do to fail after one's hard work."

"Will they be happy?"

"Happy! you should have seen Jeanie's face, it was like----  Oh, I don't
know what it was like! All the troubles fled away and just nothing but
love in her eyes."

The path was narrow and Lewis fell back.  He clenched his right hand.
Why couldn't he just say, "Toney, let me see love in your eyes," but all
the county would declare----

"You've done it all," was all he said.

"It's a great privilege--isn't it?  but I was thinking of Maud and you
too.  The clo' is ordered.  It was fun!  But you will stay for it, won't
you?"

"I don't know--I think I've taken my passage."

"Passage! where to?"

"To Somaliland."

"Maud said you wanted change."

"Did she?  She is so taken up with her sister, she sees nothing else."

"I'm sure she does, but she is very noble-minded. But why not wait for a
week--and here are my plans finished and you must look them over."

"Oh, I can do that, Toney, before I go."

"You are always good and kind.  When will you come back?"

"I've no plans, it depends."

"On what?--on Maud, of course."

"Of course, if Aunt Delia and Maud go away I can't stay away too long."

"Why should they go?"

"No reason, so I expect they'll stay."

"Maud is very unselfish."

"Yes--but unselfish women are not always easy to deal with."

They turned into a path leading to the front of Waycott Hall, and Toney
remarked,

"I think this is the most beautiful house I have ever seen.  How can you
leave it!  Your people will miss you--and--" she wanted to say, "and
Maud will be lonely," but he evidently would not discuss Maud with her,
so she stopped.

"Oh, it will be all right----  There are some things one can't stand too
long."

"Of course, repairs of gates and tenants' grumbles and--I know I always
wonder at Uncle Evas' patience over it all.  Now I will go and find Mrs.
Hamilton.  Will she churn a bit?"  Lewis smiled.

"I expect she'll be not too pleased because she--was looking out for a
good match."

Toney flew into the drawing-room, where in the pleasant room full of old
treasures, the two ladies sat working.  Maud and Jeanie were not there.

"How do you do, Mrs. Hamilton, it's all beautiful and I want to tell you
that----"

"That you are a deep conspirator," said Miss Honoria.

"It was so beautiful, wasn't it, all music----  I couldn't hear it, but
people said he played out of his heart, anyhow, it's fixed up and I'm
going to help them with the trousseau.  You don't mind, do you? It's
such a pleasure for me to manage.  I think some ancestor of mine must
have been a store manager."

"But really, Antonia, I can't allow it, I can't accept--they must wait
till----"

"Till they lose sight of each other again!  Oh, it's not possible.  He
just worships her."

"Jeanie was very much admired last night," sighed Mrs. Hamilton.

"If you give leave you needn't trouble one bit. It's to be quite quiet
and simple, and you'll just drive to church and half an hour will do
it."

Mrs. Hamilton was torn by conflicting thoughts. Toney's generosity was
splendid, but Jeanie might do better by waiting.

"Please say 'yes,' or I must telegraph to stop Wood."

"You must have your way, silly child.  You always do!  Oh, here's Lewis.
Have you heard of Antonia's generous offer?  I really doubt but----"

"Toney's quite right.  They've waited long enough.  By the way, I'm
sorry, Aunt Delia, but I have settled to travel a little and I shan't be
here. I'll give the wedding breakfast anyhow, and my blessing."

"Lewis, what do you mean?" exclaimed Miss Honoria.  "Impossible!"

"You must stay," said Aunt Delia.

"Impossible!" echoed Lewis and turned away but added, "I'll look over
these plans, Toney, and let you have them back."




                            *CHAPTER XXVI.*

                            *ANOTHER OFFER.*


Toney could not make it out at all.  Lewis Waycott had not come near her
for two days, though he was still at home.  The world seemed out of
tune.  He had returned the plans with one or two remarks, and with her
usual precipitation Toney had given orders that the building was to be
begun at once.  But he might have brought them himself!  Maud was
naturally his first thought; she was claiming all his spare time, but,
oddly enough, Maud did not miss her daily visits to the Haven.  Toney
decided that Maud was tremendously honourable.

In the meanwhile she had the wedding to plan for, and Toney loved
planning.  She had given private orders to Mr. Wood, who had ascertained
Mrs. Hamilton's ideas of colours, Lc.  Miss Honoria was going to pay for
the wedding dress, and Lewis had ordered the wedding breakfast, but it
was all kept private.  Mrs. Hamilton was silently aggrieved. Everything
had been done without her, and she defended herself by saying she could
not interfere any more, with the result that both her daughters looked
supremely happy.

On the third day Toney drove up to the Haven in her motor-car, for she
had to go on to the Vicarage afterwards to see that all was "real fixed
up."  The wedding was to be next Thursday, and to-day was Monday.  Maud
came out to greet her. Toney wanted to say, "Why hasn't Mr. Waycott come
to see me?" but the words stuck in her throat. Toney wondered why she
should be afraid of saying anything?  This was another puzzle.  Maud was
smiling and very cheerful; that was odd too.

"I'm off to Mr. Hales to see it's all right!  I'll be back as soon as I
can, Maud," said Toney.

"I have the week's accounts to add up, so don't hurry!  Dear Toney, it's
no good trying to say 'Thank you,' but Jeanie's face ought to repay
you."

"You'll see, Maud, it will be perfect!  It's my pet romance.

"Jeanie says you are much more worthy of Frank than she is."

"Ouf! the music would be a penance!  But I expect Mr. Waycott
appreciates your music."

"Yes, he does--in his way.  He's very busy; we hardly see him.  He's so
much with his bailiff, draining and repairing cottages, and you don't
know what heaps of kind things he does and lets nobody know."

"I guess he does!"

"He's quite changed, somehow; just now he's rather silent.  He says he
will stay in London to buy all sorts of things for the wild places in
Somaliland he means to go to."

"He might stay for the wedding to please you," said Toney thoughtfully;
"I never knew he liked lions before."

"And mother and Aunt Honoria are both a little offended.  Jeanie doesn't
mind, because she doesn't heed anything now.  Frank writes every day.
Last night the letter didn't come, and she was so miserable."  Maud
laughed happily.

"Mr. Waycott won't write every day, will he?"

"Lewis!  I should think not!  He hates writing letters, so I told him we
shouldn't worry if he promised to write when he is ill."

"That's fine--you are not like Jeanie."

"Not a bit!"

Toney spun the wheel round and flew off.  She wanted to go fast, very
fast, so as not to think too much.  Evidently Lewis and Maud had perfect
trust in each other!  Yes, that was fine!

She found that Mr. Hales was visiting some cottages at the other end of
his parish, so she sent Jim to Wynchley for some purchases and walked on
alone, fast, very fast.  She felt in a mighty hurry to-day.  At the edge
of a fir wood she saw the Vicar coming out of a cottage.

"So glad to see you," she exclaimed; "may I stop you a minute?"

"Of course, Toney, as many minutes as you like."  His voice was kind and
soft, and Toney felt comforted. Anyhow, Mr. Hales could not go hunting
lions.

"It's all right about Thursday, isn't it?  Special licence is all right.
Mr. Weston's seen to it.  Vastly convenient if one is in a hurry."

"You like things done quickly!" said Mr. Hales smiling.

"They want no fuss and no one in church, but I begged for my poor
friends.  They love a wedding, I'll send my motor to bring the pair at
nine o'clock. You'll fix it up sharp, and they will go back to a real
breakfast and off by twelve.  I've ordered flowers and music."

"You think of everything, as usual," said the Vicar musingly.  "Toney,
have you ever thought of your own future?"

"Of course!  The Stone House will take all my time and mind!"

"But have you ever thought of--wider work for the Church, or of helping
another with your love and energy?"

Toney opened her eyes.  Mr. Hales looked so odd.

"It's no use thinking, Mr. Hales; I've been walking like mad to stop my
thinking to-day."

"Why shouldn't you think?--Toney, I want to ask you a question.  Will
you let me take care of you, and together we should do a great work for
the Master.  Your money, I need not say, should be for the Master's
cause.  Will you be my wife, dear Toney?"

Toney stood transfixed.  This idea had never entered her head in
connection with Mr. Hales.  He was her embodiment of all that was good,
but far out of her sphere, poor Harum Scarum Toney.

"Gracious stars!  You don't mean it?"

"Yes, I do."

Toney shook her head.

"I wish I could, I do wish I could say 'Yes.'  You are so good and just
a holy man, but--I'm going to be an old maid--I saw Jeanie's face when
Mr. Weston was near her and--then I knew--I could say love, honour, and
obey, but even that wouldn't be the real thing!"

"Thank you, Toney--" he said, taking her hand; "you're honest, as
always; but we shall be friends still?"

"I should think so!"

"Forget the rest.  I had had a vision of missionary work and the great
harvest waiting for workers, but I am content to wait here."

"You saw a vision?" repeated Toney, "and I'm just ordinary flesh and
blood, and not at all like a vision--Good-bye!  I'm going to 'The
Haven'--you won't tell anyone, will you, not Silvia or Mrs. Hales?  They
wouldn't understand how much I love my dear old master."

Without waiting for an answer, Toney jumped over a low stile, and took a
short cut back towards the Haven.

"It was only a vision, just like St. Francis had visions; I don't think
the real Toney was in it!" she thought, laughing happily.  Somehow she
felt happier.  Someone had made her an offer who did not care for
money--then she stopped--after all, the money had formed part of the
vision.  That was it, it would _always_ come in the way!  That was part
of the price she had to pay for having the means of helping other
people!  The hard part was that her Path of Perfection was paved with
gold.  She loved Mr. Hales, but she could never, never love him like
that.

Toney was just emerging from the wood when she was conscious of hearing
voices, and looking down a path at right angles she saw Maud talking
to--yes, how strange, talking to Edward Lang; but Toney, feeling it was
not honourable to spy, turned the other way and got back to the Haven by
a longer detour.  Maud appeared soon after.

"Did you see Mr. Hales? and is it all right?" Toney nodded.

"Yes; it will be just as they like it, with some music."

"Music!  That never entered my head!"

"It wouldn't do for two musicians to be married without music, so I
telegraphed to the great Dr. Mayo, who is a friend of Mr. Weston, and I
said he should be motored down here in a jiffy if he would come, but it
was strictly private, and he says 'yes.'  Mr. Russell has been so
helpful over all this. He's getting quite understanding and no longer
argues!"

"Toney, I want to ask you a question, may I?"

"Of course, why not?"

"If--Mr. Lang asked you again, could you----"

"Oh!" thought Toney to herself, "she was hatching that!  It was for me!"
Then she laughed.

"Never, Maud, so don't conspire!  I'm going to be a real old maid.  The
jolliest old maid that ever was.  Remember the Stone House."

"You are quite, quite sure?"

"Just about sure!  Golly!  I wouldn't be the Honourable Mrs. Edward Lang
at any price."

As she walked home Toney was in a very meditative mood.  She blamed
herself for this sadness, for her romance had succeeded beyond her
greatest hopes. What was the matter with her?  She looked up and in the
near distance she saw Lewis walking with his bailiff.  Her heart beat
faster.  Would he see her?  She wanted to talk to him very badly, but
his back was turned to her.  She might have called to him, but she
wouldn't or couldn't.  Well, she was a silly, a downright silly!

But fate interfered.  The bailiff saw Miss Whitburn and touched his hat,
and Lewis turned.  He half hesitated, but as Toney stood still, he was
obliged to come forward.

"Are you going home?" was all he said.

"Yes," answered Toney.  How stupid they both were, she thought.

"I've had a hard morning with Selby.  He's not been here long, so I have
a great deal to explain before going away."

"Do stay till after Thursday!" said Toney.  "It's quite a quiet wedding,
only just flowers and music, and Jeanie would be so pleased, and
especially Maud."

"Sorry, Toney, but I really can't!  All my plans are made.  I go
Wednesday evening, and I shall be at Charing Cross Hotel for a week
more, and that is a very short time for all my preparations."

"To prepare for the lions?" asked Toney seriously.

Lewis laughed.

"Yes, if you put it like that."

"It's a pity there are not lions in England."

"There are lions in my path----"

"Guess you, mean a pussy cat--sort of relation to tigers anyway.  You
know I will help you--if I can."

"You can't, Toney, thank you."

"Anyhow, I'll take care of Maud."

"You've done wonders for her as it is.  I don't know how you manage it."

"I've done nothing except--of course I cared--because of--because I
did."

Why couldn't she say straight out because you are going to marry her,
but she couldn't.

"That is the secret, I suppose that caring doesn't always
answer--anyhow, Toney, I hope by the time I come back the Stone House
will be built."

"Oh! it will take a year, a long year," sighed Toney.  Everything looked
grey and dull.

"Yes, I shall be away as long as that, and when I return there will be
changes I expect.  Most likely you will be----"

"Oh, I shan't go and kill anything," interrupted Toney laughing, and
determined she would be natural.  "Of course Maud and your aunt and Mrs.
Hamilton will be very dull without you--and there are your poor people."

"Honour bright, Toney, I have thought of them. Selby has _carte blanche_
to do anything he can.  But there are some farms unlet, and the estate
is not improving."

"When you have shot enough lions you will come back?"

"I must--of course----  Now, good-bye, I mustn't stay here talking."

"Only two days and three-quarters more.  How strange!  I wish we lived
in the Middle Ages, and you were going to the Holy Land to shoot the
Turks," said Toney thoughtfully.

"Lions are more troublesome.  I shall have time to think anyhow."

"Will you write sometimes?" said Toney slowly.

"I'm afraid I shan't have time--and there might be----"

"Oh, I see, jealousies at Waycott Hall.  Of course.  Maud says you don't
like writing letters, but of course you'll write to her."

"She'll write to me! and I shall hear all the news. Good-bye, Toney."

"Oh, we shall meet again."  Toney's heart went thump, thump!

"Perhaps, but I have so little time that perhaps--we shan't."

They shook hands quite solemnly, and parted without another word.




                            *CHAPTER XXVII.*

                          *A TERRIBLE SECRET.*


To Toney the next two days passed as if the hours were leaden-footed,
for no Lewis appeared again.  She was very restless and immensely busy.
Her energy was appalling, and Mr. Russell showed signs of rebellion.
His young mistress heaped work upon him, for the Stone House was really
begun, and the parish was invaded by workmen.  Toney realised at once
that there was not enough accommodation for them, and had ready-made
Norwegian cottages sent down by return from a firm who kept them in
sections on the premises.  The contractor thought the heiress was mad to
bother about the men, but he found it vastly convenient and so did the
men!

Sir Evas too was kept occupied.  Toney would not let him go out of her
sight, and he was really in his element.  Only Lady Dove complained.
Energy was most displeasing to her--except her own--but just now she and
Miss Grossman were in accord, and this lady agreed to her strong
assertions concerning the iniquity of young people possessing money that
should by right have belonged to others.

"I nourished a serpent in my bosom, Miss Grossman, when I invited
Antonia to come and live here----  We are beggars, whilst she throws
money to the winds."

"Miss Whitburn never thinks of a rainy day," said Miss Grossman; "I
always do, I never give anything away.  Charity begins at home, and if I
did otherwise, doubtless I should be helping the undeserving."

"Quite right, I often say so to Sir Evas, but he is weak, very weak, and
I must say weaker since Antonia's arrival.  She is not a girl, she is a
whirlwind.  Just look at her now tearing down the drive."

It was true Toney was tearing down to meet Maud.  It was Wednesday
afternoon.  This evening Lewis Waycott was going to town, and Toney had
not seen him!

"Oh, Toney, I've come to tell you all is ready. Jeanie's dress is
lovely, and her other things----  She wants to thank you."

"When?" said Toney; her face was flushed, and there was no smile on it.

"Lewis won't have any visitors to-day.  He said so, but he goes this
evening."

Toney felt a big lump in her throat.  Surely _she_ was not a visitor!

"But I'm not a stranger."

"I said so, and Lewis said he didn't want _anybody_. So unlike him!"

"I understand----  He wants you all to himself. What train does he go
by?"

"The seven o'clock express."

Toney nodded.

"I shall meet Mr. Weston at 7.10, so I'll come early."

"Do.  We shan't go to the station, Lewis doesn't want any fuss.  Aunt
Honoria is very much upset by this sudden determination, but I quite
understand it."

"Of course----  You are brave."

"Oh, no.  Indeed I shan't miss Lewis till later. We have had such hard
work unpacking your lovely things and packing up again.  Toney, I have
never seen Jeanie look as she does now!  She walks about the house with
a smile on her face, and sings softly to herself all the time."

Trick came trotting out to look for his mistress. Toney snatched him up.

"Dumb friends are very comforting, aren't they? Sort of understand.  Is
Jeanie coming to Winchley Station?"

"No, I think it is rather hard on Jeanie Lewis going like that.  You'll
stay for the breakfast to-morrow of course, Toney, and we'll give them a
good send off."

Toney shook herself and hugged Trick closer.

"Yes, we'll finish up the romance properly.  I've got heaps to do so I
shan't have a minute till I go off to Winchley.  I think to-morrow I
shall go to London to see Mr. Staines on business."

"Poor Toney! you are hard worked.  I hear the Stone House has been
begun.  You will let me help you still more, won't you?  I am so happy."

Maud went off singing an air out of _Il Trovatore_.

"Well, gracious stars, she is one in a thousand," murmured Toney, "and
I'm a horrid wretch to mind his going when she takes it so grandly!"

She stumbled over Sir Evas.

"Oh, Uncle Evas, it is nice to have you.  We are good comrades, aren't
we, always have been?"

"Yes, of course, but I'm afraid that means you want something more of
this poor, overworked man."  He looked supremely contented however.

"Yes, ever so much more."

"To be your good comrade, Toney, isn't a sinecure, you know!"

"If you really took up 'the Path of Perfection' you'd have to beg your
daily bread, uncle!  I can't see you doing it at all!" and Toney
actually laughed in spite of her sore heart.

"You're not good enough yet, uncle, but listen, have you ever shot
lions?"

"Nothing bigger than a pheasant--not my line, I'm sure the lions would
make a meal of me before I had time to aim at the right place."

"You know Mr. Waycott is going to shoot lions in Somaliland.  Maud
thinks it all right, and is very unselfish about it."

"Are you sure about Maud?" said Sir Evas scraping his muddy boots, a
custom he feared to forget, as Lady Dove might be looking out of the
window.

"Of course!  I've promised to look after her, but, uncle, I want him to
have awfully good rifles and all the right things for shooting wild
beasts. The kit is tremendously expensive.  Couldn't you run up and
order it for him and pretend it's _your_ present?  You know he's done a
lot for my affairs and it's difficult to----"

"Oh, I see; well, I was going to town.  I'll go after the wedding and
spend a night there."

"He's at Charing Cross Hotel.  You might stay there too----"

"So I might."

"And you'll manage, won't you, ducky, and not hurt his feelings.  He's
rather proud.  Sort of in the blood I suppose."

"All the Waycotts always were as proud as Lucifer."

"But you are so understanding.  Ouf!  I shall feel less under an
obligation too if you get a first-rate rig-out for killing lions and
tigers."

"Can't think why he has taken that idea into his head."

"I think I know.  Lions are next door to tigers, and tigers are same
family as wild cats, and wild cats turn into pussies, and, I bet, he has
not hit it off with the old pussy at Waycott."

"Good heavens, Toney!  What reasoning powers you are developing, but the
old pussy, as you call that worthy lady, can only be too delighted about
the engagement.  Rather foolish to keep it so quiet!  I expect Honoria
Waycott objects to cousins marrying.  Always was a sensible woman.  I've
great regard for Honoria Waycott."

"I'm sorry for her, she just adores her nephew. Now I must run.  You
won't make a mistake will you, uncle?  Say--you must compose anything
you like."

"Not much of an author, Toney, but I'll do my best----  Call it a
wedding present?"

"Oh, no!  He's determined not to let it out yet, so it wouldn't do.
It's a great pity to be proud, isn't it? 'by that sin fell the Angels,'
but Lewis Waycott is awfully nice otherwise."

"Very much altered of late.  First-rate fellow, but--yes, certainly
devilish proud.  Beg pardon, Toney, my language is not quite choice
enough for an heiress."

"There you are at it!  Heiress!  Uncle, I shall go up with you to town
and see Mr. Staines on business, and come back in the evening.  I shall
want a rest after the wedding."

"And come back alone!  Not quite the thing!"

"The thing!" repeated Toney scornfully, and ran away.

Everybody was kept going that day.  Toney's untiring energy made Mr.
Russell think seriously of resigning his post, and he was glad to see
her starting off alone in the motor at half-past six.  She was going to
meet the bridegroom, and in her heart Toney hoped to say a real good-bye
to Lewis Waycott, but the fates were all against her, for the express
came panting in before the dog-cart dashed up, and Lewis only had time
to jump in, leaving his luggage to follow.  Toney caught sight of a
flying vision of him, and he did not even see her----  She stood quite
still as the train rushed out of the station.  A feeling as if the sun
had gone out of the sky, and as if life were not worth living came upon
her, then a great contraction in her throat--a feeling of numbness all
over her.

She had to wait for the 7.10.  She must pull herself together.  What did
this mean?  Why had Lewis been so--unkind?  He might have just come to
say "Good-bye, Toney, I'll not forget you among the lions"--or words to
that effect.  He might have just given her one of his kind, jolly looks,
which made one trust him with everything, he might even have smiled a
little scoffingly as he did over some of her plans!----  He had done
none of these things, simply, he had gone away as any stranger might
have departed.

"Lewis, Lewis, Lewis," she repeated to herself though to his face she
always said "Mr. Waycott."  Then something strange happened.  She walked
into the first-class waiting-room which was deserted and looked at
herself in the glass.  "Toney," she said, "Toney I--do believe--you are
a downright--horrid girl--I do believe--gracious stars!  I believe you
are--no."  She shook herself like a Newfoundland dog just come out of
the water.  "I won't be--so horrid.  What would Pups have said?  To care
so awfully for someone else's lover!  Oh, Pups!  I never guessed it till
now."  A tearless sob shook her, but at that moment the 7.10 steamed in
and Toney had to dart out to meet the genius.  Never in all her life had
she made such an effort to call up a smile, but of course Frank Weston
must be received properly!

"Oh, Mr. Weston, there you are!  I've told Jim to call for the luggage.
Come into the motor at once. So sorry it's only me, but Jeanie isn't
here.  I think the puss--I mean Mrs. Hamilton--didn't like her coming.
Sort of not proper to be seen in public. Odd, isn't it?  But she knows
I'm looking after you."

Frank Weston was smiling all over his face.

"I told her not to come," he said.  "She might catch cold, and besides
she says she is very busy, and Maud is overworked."

"Everything's ready as I promised, you know."

Frank looked at the heiress and he thought her face was changed.

"You look tired, you have done too much for us--but I'll just say it
once, Miss Whitburn."

"No, say Toney; I shall be sort of sister now, shan't I?"

He laughed.

"Well, Toney, I'll just say it once, that we owe all our great happiness
to you, and that we can never forget it.  Jeanie isn't demonstrative,
but she never forgets."

"She never forgot you, did she?  But you needn't say 'thank you' because
I'm grateful to you.  If it hadn't been for what I saw in your faces I
might have made a great mistake."

"Is there----?"

"No--but I may as well confess.  Sort of relieves me.  I might have said
'yes' to the wrong man."

"The right man will come," said Frank softly. "You deserve the best."

"No, he never will come--he--oh, it doesn't matter, but I shall never,
never marry--only I'll try and make it awfully nice for lovers
because--I--I think I know, and you'll not say anything about it, even
to Jeanie?"

"You may trust me, but if ever you want me--you may claim my help at any
time--and I will come."

Toney looked up at the strong face and knew he meant every word.  How
could Jeanie have ever doubted or hurt such a man?  How glad she felt
she had cleared the brambles out of his path.  It was not the music that
was so wonderful, it was the man himself.

That evening Toney instead of being restless was very quiet, and in her
face there was a new look of suffering such as had never been there
before.  She had learnt a terrible secret.  She loved a man who belonged
to another--and only now she realised that she had _always_ loved him.

"Oh!  Lewis, Lewis!" she cried out alone in her room; "You shall be
happy if I can do anything--and you shall never, never know my
secret----  It's no good blaming myself because--I never knew what it
meant till now.  The path of perfection is awfully stoney and rutty."




                           *CHAPTER XXVIII.*

                        *LILIES AND A WEDDING.*


"There's no peace or harmony in the presence of some people," said Lady
Dove after dinner to the famous genius.  Her eyes involuntarily turned
towards Toney, who was talking in low tones to Sir Evas.  "Now, with
Jeanie Hamilton you are sure of proper dignity."

Frank bowed and smiled, nothing could ruffle him now.  He had sent off a
letter to Jeanie, and a second diamond ring and a few other tokens, as
he did not wish to go to Waycott Hall himself. Mrs. Hamilton's company
recalled his past suffering too much.  Toney, on the other hand, was
associated only with his joy and gratitude.

As if to prove Lady Dove right, a hooting, tooting motor was heard
approaching, and Toney started up.

"It's Dr. Mayo," she said, looking at Mr. Weston.

"Dr. Mayo!" he exclaimed, "coming here?"

"Yes, for your wedding!  He plays to-morrow morning.  It's only
fitting."

Frank Weston's eyes beamed.

"You are a magician!" he said, "he wouldn't do it for royalty!" and he
hurried out to greet his friend.

"Oh, I wish I could hear all they hear in music," sighed Toney.

"Your ears are sharp enough, anyhow, Toney," said Sir Evas.  "By the
way, what's the matter with you this evening?  You are pale--most
unusual!"

"Nothing--but a bit anxious about this wedding. There's many a slip,
isn't there, uncle?"

"Humph, you've got the man and the woman; not much chance of slipping.
You're going too fast, Toney, that's what it is."

Toney laughed.

"Gracious stars!  Fast!  I'd like to go faster. Stone House will keep us
busy, uncle, won't it, and--have you thought about the lions and what
you'll say?  You mean biz, don't you?"

"I shall have to deviate a bit from the path of truth, Toney, but I'll
manage it.  Melina, I must go to town to-morrow and--sleep there, on
business."

"On Antonia's business, I suppose?" said Lady Cove tartly.

"No, oh no--forgot a few things I had to say to Lewis Waycott, who's off
after lions.  I'll return early on Friday."

"I hope you will, there are plenty of neglected things on your _own_
estate, Evas, but of course----="

Happily the two great musicians came in together, and Lady Dove
recognising that she would be envied by the musical portion of the
county, turned on a smile of welcome, whilst Mr. Russell hastened to
make himself agreeable, but in reality Lady Dove felt angry because
Toney was the centre of attraction this evening.

"I should never have dared to suggest it," murmured Frank Weston to his
friend.

"Nonsense!  Why didn't you?  Miss Whitburn said it was my duty, and of
course my pleasure, and that your wedding could not take place without
me----"

Everybody laughed.

"In a sort of way it was Jeanie who suggested it to me," said Toney.  "I
thought our organist would do, but she looked so reproachfully at me,
and said, 'I don't want any music, thank you--short of Dr. Mayo--Frank
would run away if he heard our organist!'"

"Do you always get what you want, Miss Whitburn?" said Dr. Mayo.

Poor Toney turned pale but no one noticed this.

"I like other people to have what they like, and I sort of try to get it
for them, that's all."

"Ask Weston to sing, Miss Whitburn, and I will accompany him.  Weston's
voice is something out of the common, but he has refused to sing for
some years."

"Do," said Toney, "I think I like singing best, especially when you can
hear the words."

Then followed a rare musical treat, till Toney, saying she was very
sleepy, excused herself and went to bed.

She paced her small room like a lion in a cage; she felt she must rush
up to town to-morrow and call at the hotel, so as just to see him once
more, but then she argued this would be wrong knowing what she did know!
Perhaps--such things did happen--she might meet him in the streets.
That wouldn't be wrong, because she could not help that. Was it wrong to
wish it?  Anyhow, she couldn't help it.  She must turn for comfort to
work, work and prayer; and yet neither of these two words seemed to be
able to stop the pain.  But they must; she, too, would fight with a
lion.

She opened her "Little Flowers of St. Francis" to try and find some
balm, and her eyes lighted on these words:--

"There came unto him (St. Francis) a youth, noble and tender, and said
unto him, 'Father, right willingly would I become one of your brothers.'
Replied St. Francis, 'My son, thou art a youth, tender and noble, it may
well be that thou couldest not endure our hardships and our poverty.'
And quoth he, 'Father, are ye not men even as I? Wherefore, as ye
endure, even so shall I be able with the grace of Jesus Christ.'"

And Toney seemed to be comforted by these words, "As ye endure."  That
was it, to endure nobly, that meant she must not be beaten by her pain.
Ah, she too would endure as did that young noble.  Of course, endurance
was easy when everything went right, but the only thing worth a rag was
to endure when everything went wrong!  And Toney looked this great
sorrow in the face and made up her mind, oh, if it were possible--and it
was possible--to endure _cheerfully_.  Then, knowing she must be up
early, she went to bed and fell asleep.

She awoke to the sound of marriage bells through the open windows; for
one moment her face was all joy, then suddenly the pain returned.  She
dressed very quickly in a plain white serge dress, and then ran out to
find the motor.  Jim was ready with it.  He looked beaming.

"I want to see if the church is properly beautiful. When you get
married, Jim, I'll do the same for you. When is it to be?"

"We're in no hurry, Miss Tonia, there's time enough."

Toney laughed, Jim did not feel as did Frank Weston evidently.

At the church there were busy helpers, and several men from London.
Large hampers of lilies were being unpacked.

Next, Toney motored to Waycott Hall and interviewed Maud, and then went
home to early breakfast.  Jim and the motor were to be kept busy.

The actual wedding was simple in the extreme. Only the Waycott Hall
party, Miss Waycott, Mrs. Hamilton and Maud; and from Aldersfield, Sir
Evas, Toney, the bridegroom, and Dr. Mayo.  As the party entered he was
already playing divine music, but the church was full of poor people and
of white lilies.  Never had the little old building looked so beautiful;
Jeanie paused at the entrance.

"Oh!  This is the most beautiful sight I have ever seen!" she whispered
to Frank.

Mrs. Hamilton looked at Toney and then at her sister.

"Honoria, what extravagance, but how beautiful!"

"It's Toney all over," said Miss Honoria.

As to Frank Weston, he thought, "This is as it should be, no fuss, only
poor people and flowers and heavenly music."

There were no jovial young men fussing and talking, no hustling, no
disgraceful pushing, no whispered conversations.  To the poor it was
nearly as good as a funeral as they listened to Mr. Hales' strong manly
voice, and saw his face full of mystic joy.

If Jeanie Hamilton had wanted any more reforming she had it then.  How
could pride exist in this sanctuary of beauty?  She looked like a lily
herself in a white afternoon dress, not a ball dress to be minutely
described in the newspapers, Jeanie, belonging to one of the oldest
families in the county, was marrying a self-made man, but as she looked
up at his strong face, full of manly joy, she knew that she, not he, had
the best of the bargain! She was only proud now of belonging to him.

Mrs. Hamilton was touched by the beauty and the originality.  There was
no vulgarity to hurt her pride, and she forgave Maud's first words in
the vestry,

"Oh dearest Jeanie, you are a lucky woman. Toney, it was quite, quite
perfect."

"You shall have the same, Maud, when you marry," answered Toney smiling.

Maud laughed and looked guilty.  How pretty she appeared in her white
dress, looking not unlike a bride herself.

The poor people remained seated till the pair came out together, but
Toney stayed behind with a little army of helpers.  All the lilies were
to be tied in bunches, and each poor person in the church was to take
home a bunch.  Toney therefore missed seeing an uninvited guest at the
church door, who shook hands cordially with the wedding party.

"Forgive me, Mrs. Weston, I was not invited, but I heard a whisper of
your original wedding and----"

Jeanie smiled.

"It's Miss Whitburn's idea.  Could anything be more beautiful?"

He was by Maud's side now and he said quite gravely,

"I took note of everything, Miss Hamilton."

"Oh," said Maud smiling, "it would not do for _your_ tastes.  Hanover
Square and a rowdy audience!"

"Indeed you are unjust.  This is the first wedding I have enjoyed----"

Mrs. Hamilton was smiling, but, thinking Edward Lang wanted to make up
to Toney, she did not invite him to the breakfast.  Only Maud lingered a
minute to say something, and then the poor people came trooping out, and
when Toney reappeared she was too busy talking to them to see anything
else.

The breakfast at Waycott Hall was a great trial to Toney, but she fought
against this lion and no one found out she was in a battle.  Dr. Mayo
acted as best man, and his speech was short but to the point.

"The bridegroom being a friend of long standing, I rise to drink his
health.  The bride I have only seen to-day, but I congratulate her from
the bottom of my heart.  To be the wife of Frank Weston means to be the
wife of a genius--that is nothing, he was born a genius, he couldn't
help himself--but it also means to be the wife of a man who, having a
grand profession, has always ennobled it, and who has never, by thought,
word, or deed, lowered the high standard he set before himself, and I
think Mr. and Mrs. Weston are wise to go at once to Germany, so as to
avoid such demonstration from the musical world here as might be
overpowering."

The bridegroom's speech was also very short.

"I thank my friend for his words, because I think he believes them!--but
I rise to drink the health of Miss Whitburn.  I believe she does not
like titles, so when we think of all she has accomplished, we mentally
say 'Toney'----  Round this word centres the gratitude of two persons
who can never forget her.  I am further asked by Mr. Lewis Waycott, to
say how much he regrets not being amongst us, but his plans could not be
altered.  He has ordered that all the cottagers on his estate are to
have a good dinner--he wishes us to accept that as his wedding present.
For my part he could not have offered me anything I appreciate more."

Toney felt her throat tighten again.  Lewis had thought of the nicest
thing possible--if only he had been there himself!  Maud was looking so
happy, but then she, of course, knew he was happy, and knew he could not
change.

Now Miss Honoria had something to say.

"I am very sorry that my nephew is not here in person, but he thought of
everybody before his departure, and he begged me to say that as all the
wedding arrangements were due to Miss Whitburn, he had asked all his
tenants to remember her when they enjoyed their dinner."

Toney actually blushed, and Sir Evas, who was sitting beside her, nudged
her.

"Come, Toney, say something.  Don't say you're shy!  Nobody would
believe that!"

Toney laughed and stood up.

"It's all a mistake.  I'm just doing nothing but please myself awfully
when I plan a romance, so there is no credit at all but----  Gracious
stars!  I can't spout any more."

There was a burst of laughter and the wedding ended in merriment.
Toney's one comfort was, "He did think of me anyhow."  As they prepared
to get ready for going away, she went up to Maud, his Maud.

"Maud, you do look sweet!  I want to kiss you. It will do me good."

It was so unlike Toney that Maud laughed.

"I want to hug you, dear Toney, it will do me good!  I am so happy."

Jeanie's thanks were simple.

"Toney, Frank says he'll always come when you want him--for a private
concert or anything, and so will I."

"How charming of you both, but I don't think there is another romance
for me to undertake except Maud's."

"Oh, Maud--must wait," said her sister.

"Yes, of course.  Well, now we're going to see you off in grand style."




                            *CHAPTER XXIX.*

                           *AN ANGRY LAWYER.*


Sir Evas and Toney travelled up to London directly after the wedding
pair had left in a private carriage ordered by Toney.  In the train the
heiress was very quiet.  Sir Evas put it down to weariness, and no
wonder after all she had accomplished this morning; so the "Good
Comrade" respected her silence and read his paper.  He was very
understanding as Toney always expressed it.  At Waterloo, Sir Evas
called a hansom for Toney.

"Toney, you'll only go to Mr. Staines.  Eh?  Why not come on to Charing
Cross Hotel later, and have tea or something?"

Toney turned away to find her umbrella.  The temptation was very great.

"I shan't have much time, uncle, and I'll get back by the first train
possible; Aunt Dove will feel dull and will want to hear all about the
wedding.  She doesn't quite approve of it, so she had a headache; but
she is dying to hear particulars I know!"

"You see, musicians are--well, I mean marrying out of your set wasn't
the fashion in her day."

"I wish I knew a nice sweep!" said Toney laughing, "but I don't; or I
might, perhaps, fall in love with him; anyhow, I'm booked for a
wallflower, so I shan't shock her!"

"Humph!" said Sir Evas.  "Well, good-bye, I'll do your commission for
you, Toney, in fact I'm going straight to Lawn and Alders now, to order
a 450-bore high velocity cordite rifle for Lewis' lions. Make your mind
easy and I'll be back to-morrow. Any message to Waycott?"

"No, nothing in particular.  Tell him it was mean to miss the wedding,
and tell him that Maud looked very pretty as well as the bride.
Good-bye, Ducky Uncle."

The cab drove off and Sir Evas was left on the platform looking after
it.

"There's something on the child's mind," he said to himself.  "It's not
Lewis Waycott, she could have come to hunt me up if it had been.  I laid
that trap nicely."

Chuckling at his own deep artfulness, Sir Evas went off to see about the
necessary kit for killing lions and tigers!

The clerks at Mr. Staines' office paid the heiress great attention.  It
annoyed Toney, and indeed she looked so young and so simple it was
difficult to treat her as a great lady, but they all knew she was worth
L50,000 a year!  You cannot be treated in an ordinary way if you are
worth that amount.  Toney was shown into the private room at once.

"How are you, Miss Whitburn?  Delighted to see you!  This is nicer than
the telephone."

"Yes.  Never quite sure who's hulloing," laughed Toney.  "I shan't be
long.  Do you know Stone House has been begun this week?"

Mr. Staines shook his head.

"It will swallow a large sum of--but you can afford it."

"I've given _carte blanche_ for everything about it The firm is honest
and I won't have scamped work. Pups said it never paid.  I don't want to
ruin the building either, and I want a margin for improvements."

"You have a very good head for business, Miss Whitburn.  Now, how can I
help you?"

Toney rose from the chair, she felt less cramped standing up.

"Why, ever so much!"  She took a paper out of her pocket which was
covered with figures.  "First, tell me how much I could live on suppose
I left Aldersfield House?  Not yet; but suppose Aunt and uncle died
suddenly, the place goes to a distant cousin who is a Judge in New
Zealand, and he has a large family?"

"You would then make a home of your own."

"Yes; but I wouldn't have a big place in a park. They sort of stifle me.
I want just necessities, because I haven't screwed up my courage to beg
yet."

"To beg!"  Mr. Staines thought his client had gone off her head.

"Yes.  St. Francis did, you know--but then at that time you weren't
taken up for begging as I should be now."

They both laughed.

"I think you would be put in a lunatic asylum begging with L50,000 a
year."

"That's just it.  Well, it's no good beating about the bush.  Stone
House will cost a heap to build, but now I want to make sure it's
endowed."

"Endowed!  Good heavens!"

"Why, of course, you can't live on nice rooms, can you?  It may take in
about forty persons double and single--then----.  Yes, I want all my
money to go to endow it, except just what will prevent my being a
beggar."

"When you die you mean," said the lawyer turning a little pink.  It was
like someone suggesting throwing a priceless picture into the Thames.

"No, now, at once----  You know, Mr. Staines, my will was only
temporary.  I told you so.  If I build and endow Stone House it will be
a real monument to the memory of the General and Pups."

"What madness!  You are so young, you will marry, and your husband has a
right to expect a large proportion of your fortune."

"There it is again," cried Toney.  "I won't marry; but if I did, why
should he expect my money?  If I'm not worth loving without, then--oh,
I'm glad I shall never, never marry--and if I give this away it will
save a lot of people the trouble of asking me for it."

"It's madness, utter foolishness," cried the lawyer, rising and pacing
about the room; "sheer, downright madness!  I won't be a party to it."

Toney turned pale.  Would no one help her? Would no one understand that
to give this away was real happiness, that she could never bear the
burden alone, and that by keeping it she was a temptation to every man
who required money?

"I think the General would understand, Mr. Staines, and so would Uncle
Evas."

"Though you are your own mistress, I must consult your uncle."

Toney shook her head.

"It's no use----  He wouldn't like to go slap against you!  Old family
lawyers are such tyrants."

Mr. Staines looked furious.

"Tyrants, indeed!  But for us half the owners of money would commit
endless follies such as you wish to do, Miss Whitburn!"

"You can't keep all that pile and remain on the 'Path of Perfection,'"
said Toney decidedly, "it can't be done.  I wish you would read 'The
Little Flowers.'"

"This is pure drivelling----"

"Look here, Mr. Staines, I've a real regard for you.  You wouldn't run
away with anyone's money, but--you don't understand.  Anyhow, I've told
you I mean to keep some, because there are always needy people, and then
I think I shall keep the Haven to retire to myself, and I could live
then on--there I do want help.  I've always lived on nothing before I
had this pile."

"Are you decided?"

"Quite, quite, quite--if you can't do it, hitch me on to a man that
will."

Toney stood now firm and strong.  The colour returned to her cheeks.

Mr. Staines could not possibly lose the handling of the money, so he
bowed to necessity.

"I must reserve enough for your private needs and casual charity," he
said.

"That's it.  I thought you'd come round to see it, Mr. Staines.  Only I
want it done awfully soon, and then I shall breathe again!  In fact draw
up something now, to make it quite secure.  One never knows.  I might
have a smash in the train to-day. You see I couldn't be sure about Aunt
Dove, she does love the coin.  Sort of madness, I guess."

"Cannot I first see Sir Evas Dove?" groaned Mr. Staines.

"It would make no difference; still, when it's done you can tell him.  I
like everything above board, don't you?"

"Above board" was the last thing suitable for his position.  The lawyer
did not answer.

"I'll go and get a mouthful to eat, Mr. Staines, arguing with you has
made me so hungry, and then I'll come back and sign."

"Give me discretion to keep a sufficiency for----"

"Yes--and if it's too much I can come again, but, gracious stars! it's
enough to stifle a poor girl having to decide all these questions.  Half
an hour will do for a preliminary canter, won't it, and make it sure."

Toney departed and took a cab to Lyons' Restaurant, Piccadilly.  All the
time she looked out at the passers-by.  By a bare chance she might see
Lewis Waycott walking about, and she would just nod a last good-bye.
What would he say to her action?  She didn't know, but she believed he
would say "Quite right, Toney, much better secure it for these people."

Of course he was the only man who would not reproach her!  Her heart
felt lighter.

The Lyons made her think still more of Lewis' lions!  She ordered some
tea and hot toast to try and get him out of her thoughts, but she felt
terribly lonely in the big place so full of people going and coming.  It
was like a miniature world full of persons thinking of their own
concerns or their own comfort. For the first time she began to
appreciate the lonely park at Aldersfield.  It was this busy world that
oppressed her now.  Was she changing?  She who had jostled against so
many persons, and who had been afraid of nothing.

She felt better after her tea and jumped into a hansom again, to return
to Mr. Staines.  How glad she would be when the deed of gift was done
and signed.

Once more she stood in the private room.  Mr. Staines looked really
distressed.

"You have forced me to go against my conscience," he said, unfolding a
big paper.

Toney could not help laughing as she sat down with alacrity to sign.

"I've kept a sufficiency," he said; "don't try me too much."

"You are really nice," she answered, signing her full name with a
flourish whilst two clerks came to witness the signature and retired,
little guessing what they had helped to do.

"I've endowed Stone House with L30,000 a year. That will be ample for a
whole colony.  The money you gave to Lady Dove has taken a slice of the
capital, and you have lived in fine style since then! Then the building
will take another large slice."

"When Aunt Dove dies I want you to settle the L2,000 on Miss Maud
Hamilton," said Toney.  "She is a great friend of mine and poor.  Oh,
I've had a glorious time, Mr. Staines, but I knew it was only for a
time.  St. Francis never kept things with the excuse of giving them away
again."

"Hang St. Francis!"

Toney laughed, and Mr. Staines could not help smiling.

"Well, good-bye, I've got to catch a train, and please, Mr. Staines,
will you accept a little personal present?  Not the firm----  Just to
show you forgive me, and _I_ won't say how _you_ are to spend it!  Oh,
it's from me and the General."

Then like a strange gleam of unearthly sunshine Toney was gone.  Mr.
Staines opened the envelope and discovered a cheque for a thousand
pounds. From another client it is doubtful if he would have accepted it,
but a strange smile passed over his face.

"They are going to shut up a wing of the Children's Hospital at
Margate," he said; "this will just save it; that girl sets a shocking
example, but I did my best----"

He was not yet happy, but, strange to say, he was somewhat comforted.

Toney walked into the Aldersfield drawing-room half an hour before the
dressing bell.  Lady Dove was listening to Miss Grossman's rather loud
voice. The novel was dull, and she was glad to stop her. Usually Miss
Grossman insisted on reading the whole hour before dinner without
stopping or allowing her employer to talk.

"Oh, Aunt Dove, I've had a nice afternoon.  I saw Mr. Staines and had a
jolly tea at the Lyons' Restaurant.  Uncle is coming back early
to-morrow, but I knew you'd be dying to hear about our wedding."

"Mrs. Hamilton has been here and told me all. I'm sure, Toney, you must
have wasted a great deal on flowers out of season."

"They did good all round, and Jeanie and Mr. Weston just seemed lifted
up by them.  So would you have been if you'd seen them."

"I never countenance useless waste," was the answer.

"Sentimentality is not sentiment," interposed Miss Grossman.

To herself Toney said, "Consider the lilies of the field how they grow;"
aloud, she added, "Anyhow Miss Honoria agreed that Jeanie and Maud
looked lovely!"

"Mrs. Hamilton really bored me about her daughters' perfections.  I said
I was sorry her son-in-law's escutcheon was a blank, but, of course, she
is going to keep Maud in her own set.  Lewis Waycott has as many
quarterings as the Hamiltons."

Toney's heart went thump, thump, again.  How horrid she was!

"Quarterings are no use at all to the Westons. They will be just perfect
without them," said Toney.

"But of course," continued Lady Dove, "I do wonder at her countenancing
the marriage of cousins."

"The future owner of Waycott will be an idiot," said Miss Grossman
decidedly.  Then Toney rushed away; the atmosphere of the drawing-room
without Uncle Evas suffocated her.  "If it weren't for him," she
thought, "I would fly to the Haven at once, but I can't forsake him, no,
I can't, he's so awfully good to me."

Happily everybody was tired that evening (Miss Grossman condescended to
dine with them as Lady Dove was alone, for Toney's companionship did not
count), and Toney did her best to rattle on about all sorts of things
till the early bedtime when all three were glad to retire to bed, little
guessing what the night would bring forth, but as Toney said her prayers
her heart seemed suddenly to feel light again.

"It will be easier to get to the other side," she thought, "without that
load, anyway!"




                             *CHAPTER XXX.*

                           *A FIERY ORDEAL.*


Toney was usually an excellent sleeper and it took a good deal to wake
her before morning, and she had gone through much in the last
twenty-four hours. The brain, however, can be powerfully impressed by
smell, and this must have been the reason why at two o'clock she heard a
soft whine close to her ear, then a short, sharp bark, and then Toney
started up in bed, fully awake.  Next she gave a sniff and then the
strong clear mind went straight to the mark.

"Powder me pink!" she exclaimed, then she jumped out of bed and dressed
quicker than she had ever done in her life before.  Her garments were
few and substantial, and she drew on a skirt and a flannel blouse.  Next
she seized a big bath towel and soaked it in her hip bath.

"It's shorter in the long run," she thought, then she cautiously opened
the door of her small room at the top of the house.  The passage had
smoke in it too, thicker smoke than in her room.  For half a second she
paused to think as she snatched up Trick in her arms.  "Maids up
here--the men in the other wing--bother, the telephone is down in my
room--worse luck!"  Then she dashed along the passage to the maids'
rooms, opening each door as she passed, and shouting, "Get up!  Fire!
Quick!"  At the end of the passage the cook opened the door, she was
dressed, having also been awakened by the smell of smoke.

"Oh, Miss Tonia!  It's fire--God have mercy on us!"

"All right, ring a bell out of the window, the men in the other wing
will hear it.  Shout Fire!--and, look here, tell the maids to dress
first, it's safer in the end."

The elderly cook felt that Miss Tonia was right, her words acted like a
strong restorative and brought back her presence of mind as the
half-dressed maids crowded into the passage.

"Dress all of you girls, thick jackets, it's cold; we are safe at
present."  Toney paused.

"Yes, all safe at present, take wet towels with you. I'm afraid it's on
the first floor, and these stairs don't look inviting!"

A volume of smoke rolled up now, and for a moment hid them from each
other.  Toney wrapped her wet towel round her head and shoulders and
once more called out,

"Keep together--shout loud--try the other stairs, not these.  I'll go
and explore, but you had better not.  Try the leads, you'll be safer
there.  Good-bye!"

"Miss Tonia! for God's sake don't go down those stairs, it's madness,
stay here," cried the cook.

"I can't, Aunt Dove and Miss Grossman, but look here, Rose, take Trick
and hold him tight, he will want to follow me and I must have my two
hands," then suddenly Toney disappeared in another volume of smoke.  The
maids shrieked and wrung their hands, but the cook had happily regained
her senses.

"Girls! follow me, the other stairs may be safe."

Clinging to each other they ran down the long passage, but at the other
end they found quite as much smoke, for the narrow stairs seemed to act
like two funnels.

"Let's go down, oh, let's go down!" cried the maids, "we must go before
it's too late!"

"Miss Tonia said, 'the leads'--I think, girls, she's right.  We can call
for help from there.  We might be suffocated in this smoke.  Make for
the trap-door on to the leads," and soon they were breathing pure air
and exercising their lungs with screams.  To their delight they saw that
men were already running about below and were signalling to them that
help was coming.

We must follow Toney on her dangerous exploration. She had one idea in
her mind.  The fire must have begun in her Aunt Dove's room or else in
Miss Grossman's, a few doors off, or else in some flue close by.  The
dense smoke pointed unmistakably to this.  Had they escaped?  Their
rooms were at the end of a passage, and they must go down it to reach
the central staircase.  The stairs down which she now forced her way
were rather steep, and ended at the opposite end of the Hall to where
was her aunt's passage, but Toney knew every step by heart.  It was
impossible to see even if there had been any light, the smoke was too
thick.  Should she meet the fire face to face and be driven back? Even
here she felt the stairs were hot and the smoke was terrible.  When she
reached the bottom, however, she paused; by some strange freak for a few
moments the smoke cleared, and she could breathe again!  Oh, the relief!
but this was only for a moment.  She had to keep her mind clear;
wrapping her wet towel still closer to her head, she made a dash along
the central passage.  Toney realised that this was passable, but dense
smoke came rolling towards her from her aunt's passage.  Oh, how could
she pass it?  She must, she must go on, for no one answered her
smothered cry of "Aunt Dove!  Aunt Dove!  Miss Grossman!"

Again she paused to take what breath she could. Her eyes tingled, she
felt choked, but as yet she saw no fire.

"I must, I must," she repeated and strangely enough came the words to
her mind, "the Path of Perfection."  Was this the Path?  If only Aunt
Dove were not locked in!  If only Uncle Evas had been here! if only--
"Now," she thought, feeling the towel was getting dry and smoke-laden,
"Now!"

Never had Toney made such a desperate dart down the passage.  Oh, the
heat! and the roaring and the smoke!--the smoke, that was the most
terrible part of it!  She hurled herself, blindfolded as she was,
against the door and it gave way, but how the smoke rolled in with her!
So immediately she shut the door, then she loosed the towel and called
out.

"Aunt Dove, Aunt Dove! where are you?  Speak, I can't see, Aunt Dove!"

"Help! help!" was the feeble smothered answer, but it was Miss
Grossman's voice.

"Where? where?"  She stumbled forwards across the big room and knocked
against the bath filled with water.  She stooped down and dashed her
head in it, towel and all.  What a relief she felt as she staggered
forwards.

"Miss Grossman, where is Aunt Dove?  Where are you?"

"In the wardrobe--we are suffocated!  Help! help!"

"Come out quick."  Toney seized another towel and dipped it in the bath.
"We can still cross--at least I think so."

The big wardrobe opened, and as Miss Grossman crawled out Toney threw
the wet towel over her; then Lady Dove emerged speechless from fear and
smoke.

"Miss Grossman, why didn't you go down?  I, think we can still do it."

"I ran in here, and then--Lady Dove would not follow me.  Oh, the
smoke--the window--open the window!"

"No, no, not yet, the draught--quick, oh, quick--Aunt Dove, take my arm.
You have only your dressing-gown--take a blanket--Miss Grossman, run
fast, we will follow."  Miss Grossman was feeling the relief of the wet
towel, she made a dash towards the door.

"Quick!  Aunt Dove, follow me--I'll drag you, we have only just time."

"I can't, Antonia--don't leave me--oh, I can't breathe!"

"You must, you must."  Toney dragged her a few steps, but fear had
paralyzed her; at this moment Miss Grossman had reached the door and
realised the danger of opening it more than once.  A dull roar was
heard.

"Are you coming?  For God's sake, I cannot go alone----"

"Go," cried Toney, "you have time--I think. Aunt Dove, come, for Uncle
Evas' sake come--pull yourself together.  In a minute we----"

The door was opened by Miss Grossman, whose muffled voice again called
out, "Come, come," then she shut it again, and Toney was left alone with
her aunt.  A terrible column of smoke had rolled in, and she noticed
that one tongue of fire tried to pierce the smoke in the big chamber.

"Toney, I can't--I can't walk.  Don't leave me--air--air--open the
window!"

"Yes, it's too late for the door, Aunt Dove, we must come back--I'll
open the window and call. Oh! they must be trying to save us now--don't
leave go--stick tight to me: they will hear us."  Toney felt a terrible
weight on her; would her aunt give in?  Here was one of the windows, the
red curtain drawn across it, she pulled it back, a sofa was against it,
she managed with superhuman effort to get her aunt on it, but it was
terribly difficult.

"Aunt Dove, I'll open now or we shall be suffocated--only--there is
danger--the draught--you know!  I'll not leave you.  Hold my jacket
whilst I open."  The window was locked, she could not find the bolt with
that weight impeding her, she wrapped her hand round the towel and
smashed the glass. Oh, the relief of the air! all danger seemed for a
moment swallowed up in that relief.  She was even able to unbolt the
latch and pull up the sash.

"Help! help!  Jim, ladders--help!"  She saw a crowd below, some holding
lanterns, some torches. She heard a fire engine gallop up, she even saw
a shoot.  "Here! here!" she called.  Were they saved?

"Aunt Dove, they are coming.  Put your head out of the window!"  Toney
said this because the roar behind them was increasing.  She saw the
tongue of fire very plainly now.  Was there time? The engine was there.
A great jet of water was playing on them, no, above them, they had not
yet located the fire and it was coming, coming.  Oh! the heat, the
terrible heat! but now the fire escape was there, it was placed against
the wall.

"Oh, Aunt Dove, don't give up--here they are!"

"Don't leave me!  I can't move, Toney! the fire--look!"

"No, no, don't look."  A ringing cheer, and a man was on the sill,
having run up a ladder whilst the shoot was placed in position close to
the window.

"Quick," he said, "not a moment to waste--one at a time."  Toney did not
hesitate, never thought of hesitating, as she dragged her aunt up to the
sill.  Her powerlessness had returned.  The long shoot was there, it
would have been so easy for Toney to step into it, but Aunt Dove was
utterly unnerved--no one but Toney could rouse her.

"Help her, so--Aunt Dove, you are saved, it is not difficult; you slide
down.  Get in--you must--think of Uncle Evas."  Lady Dove had clutched
Toney so tightly that she could not, or would not, leave go.  The
fireman had to wrench her hand away by main force, and precious minutes
were lost!

For God's sake--quick!  It was certainly a very undignified retreat, but
it was done; Lady Dove was saved!

But Toney, what of Toney? was there time?  A great flare of light seemed
suddenly visible behind her.  The fireman had disappeared, and Toney
could not linger another minute.  She jumped on the sill and stood for a
few seconds clinging to the sash above.  Then she saw there was but one
chance for her; she must let herself drop on to a kind of parapet below,
and then clutch the iron rod that was now at her feet--if she did not
miss it!  In the lurid light she was seen by everybody--there was a
breathless moment, then she let go--and without once hesitating clutched
and retained the rod.  A roar of admiration and horror mingled together
was heard; then suddenly, like a lightning flash, another form had run
up the ladder, and though it was not in right position Jim stretched out
both arms and supported her, in what was an untenable
position--because--Toney's sleeve had caught fire.

"Miss Tonia, hold on one minute.  Now"--with one hand he held her, with
the other he crushed the fire out, then--but for Jim there would have
been no then, Toney could not have held on--the next instant the shoot
was moved and again placed in position for Toney, and Jim straining
forward helped her to get in--alone she could not have done it.

"Miss Tonia, Miss Tonia--thank God, it's all right."  Then Toney heard a
great shout, a shout that permeated everywhere, and she felt herself
sliding down, down, always down; but the truth was that for the first
time in her life Toney had fainted, and when she came to herself she was
in the big barn where the grand supper had been served, and which was
situated on the side where the fire was not.

"Aunt Dove--and everybody?" she gasped.  It was Maud who was beside her,
and Dr. Latham was cutting off her sleeve and wrapping up her left arm
in cotton wool after having soaked it in oil.

"Oh!  Toney, Toney, all are saved; you did it; is the pain very bad?"

Toney shut her eyes a moment.

"Gracious stars!--I forgot--I thought I was going down and down, and the
fire was running after me!  Oh, all saved!  Maud!  I am glad. Where's
Trick?"  At this moment a poor, singed, bedraggled animal made a bound
and was on Toney's couch, licking her face and half wild with joy.

"I was so afraid we should never get aunt out! Trick, Trick, you gave
the first warning; you're just a hero!  Let me get up, Dr. Latham; I'm
quite fit--is my study burnt?

"No, all that wing is safe; the wind carried the fire the other way, and
the engines are keeping it down.  Lady Dove and Miss Grossman have been
driven to Waycott Hall; she revived wonderfully, but you were not ready
to go off with them."

"The maids were saved first," added Maud; "fortunately, they were on the
roof, and very visible, but till Miss Grossman appeared we could not
locate where you were.  Mr. Russell has done wonders. Oh, it was
dreadful!"

Toney's colour began to return; she insisted on getting up, and Maud
fetched a great ulster for her to keep her warm.

"We must telephone to Uncle Evas at once," she said; "he's at Charing
Cross Hotel."  To herself Toney thought, "Lewis Waycott will know I did
my best before he goes."  Then she shook herself to make sure her legs
were her own.

"Now I must go--where's Jim?  Oh, Maud, I couldn't have held on a second
longer without him!"

The two girls went out to the front of the house. It was four o'clock
now, and a great glare and volumes of smoke made lurid light, but every
now and then the water conquered the fire.  All the villagers were
working with a will, carrying pictures and valuables to safety, and,
strange to say, most ably directed by Plantagenet Russell.  He seemed to
forget entirely his own personality, and thought only of saving all that
was precious in the best possible way.  Every now and then a cheer was
heard, when something was brought out through the danger zone.  It was
on this scene that Toney appeared, and again there was a shout that
drowned all other sounds.  The old men and women gathered round her, the
others were working for all they were worth.

"Miss Tonia!  Miss Tonia!  Thank God! thank God!  You gave us such a
fright, that you did! when you stood up there.  Jim wouldn't wait; he
did his duty, did Jim.  There wasn't time to wait, though the fireman
said there was----  Here, Jim, stop a bit, and come and see Miss Tonia!"
Jim, looking like a sweep, touched his hat.

"It's all right now you're safe, Miss Tonia."

"It's all owing to you, Jim; I couldn't have kept hold another minute."

"You saved her ladyship, Miss Tonia; she was sheer dazed with fright;
the fireman said he couldn't have managed it himself.  Her ladyship was
very upset, and directly she heard you were safe she went off with Miss
Grossman.  We can't think how you managed that drop, miss; none of us
could have done it!"

"I had to, Jim, the heat was so awful!"

"I came just in time," said Maud.  "Oh!  Toney, to see you dropping down
from that ledge made me feel sick!  I shall never forget it.  If only
Lewis had been here!"  Toney turned to see the men again.

"Thank you very much for helping to save uncle's things; but please
don't go into danger for them.  Mr. Russell, how good you've been;
you'll take care of the men?  Now I think I'll go to Waycott Hall to see
after Aunt Dove.  Come, Maud."  Doctor Latham joined her.

"There's the carriage coming back.  I'll come too.  You will feel your
arm pain you more later."



"If you please, Sir Evas Dove, you're wanted at the telephone
immediately," said a sleepy waiter.

"Hulloa! what's up?  Is it Lady Dove?--Impossible--I'll come
immediately."

"Are you Sir Evas?"

"Yes; who is it?  Ah!  Russell, is it you? What's the matter?"

"Aldersfield is on fire; can you come first train?  Everybody saved;
Lady Dove much upset; Miss Whitburn has burnt her arm--Miss Hamilton
wants Mr. Waycott to know."

"What the Dickens are you all up to?  I'll come first train; never mind
if all are safe."

Sir Evas rushed to Lewis Waycott's room.

"Waycott, are you awake?"

"Yes; what's up?"

"I'm off immediately; Aldersfield is burning; Toney has been burnt."

"Toney burnt!  Good heavens!  I'll come with you."

"No need, only her arm; but Maud wanted you to know.  Good-bye; good
luck to your hungry lions."

But Lewis did not reply, he was hurrying into his clothes with greater
rapidity than ever before, and when Sir Evas stepped into the carriage
he did not see that Lewis Waycott jumped in too, just as the train was
starting.




                            *CHAPTER XXXI.*

                             *HOME AGAIN.*


Hardly had Maud, Toney, and Dr. Latham reached Waycott Hall in the grey
light of morning, than a rider galloped up.  It was Edward Lang, who
threw himself off his saddle to greet the girls.

"We heard such stories that I simply threw myself on Tempest and
galloped here.  You were reported dead, Miss Whitburn--are you hurt,
Miss Hamilton?  They sent me on here from Aldersfield."

"Toney's arm is burnt, I was only a spectator."

"The fire is being got under, but the left wing looks bad."  He kept
close to Maud and looked more at her than at Toney.  Maud told the tale.
Toney did not care to talk about it, so she left them to go and find her
aunt, and met Miss Honoria, Mrs. Hamilton, and Miss Grossman looking for
her.

"My dear child," cried Miss Honoria, kissing her, "is your arm bad?  You
must go to bed."

"We are all proud of you," said Mrs. Hamilton, conquered at last, for
personal courage was her special admiration, "Miss Grossman told us all.
Lady Dove has gone to bed and begged not to be disturbed, so you had
better not see her yet, she is much shaken."

"How did you get through?" said Toney to the companion.  "Aunt Dove
couldn't move, I think fear paralyzed her, and, gracious stars! the
shoot just finished her for a moment.  We had to use force, I couldn't
go down on her head, and by the time I could I had to move away from it
along the sill, out of reach.  But you know, Miss Honoria, Jim saved me.
I was holding on for all I was worth, but--oh, I couldn't have done it
half a minute longer."

Toney was simply bent on praising Jim, forgetting that these horrible
moments had been endured for Aunt Dove's sake.

"I couldn't have got through but for that soaked towel, Miss Whitburn,
you saved my life, I shall feel in your debt for the rest of my life,"
said Miss Grossman, who having washed and dressed looked quite normal.
Toney laughed.

"Oh don't, please, a towel is a very old joke, isn't it?"

"I find, to my surprise, that the obvious escapes one at such moments.
Lady Dove rang the bell in my room violently and, smelling smoke, I ran
to her without thought.  Once there I did the best I could for us both."

"Well, that was real lucky for her, but I guess you were nearly stifled
in that wardrobe," said Toney smiling.  "Tell me what Aunt Dove said
afterwards?"

"If you wish to know, she said it was the first time you had been of
real use."

"That's grand from her!  Now, Miss Honoria, I think I'll go and curl up
till Uncle Evas comes. I don't want to go to bed, thank you," she said
smiling bravely.

"Then just come to Lewis' study.  No one will go there to disturb you,
dear," answered Miss Honoria.

"All right, I'll go, don't come with me.  Maud's somewhere telling Mr.
Lang."

Toney washed her face and brushed her hair in Maud's room, then she
hurried towards the study. She would like to be there, quiet and alone;
she wanted to get rid of that horrible feeling of holding on to an
impossible position.  She had fancied herself braver.  Pups wouldn't
have turned a hair over it--neither would she formerly.  This life of
luxury was unnerving her; how glad, how very glad she was that her will
had been altered.  She heaved a sigh of relief as she opened the door.
Then she stood still thunderstruck!  The room was not empty, Maud was
talking eagerly to Edward Lang and they were close to each other and he
was holding her hand.  How horrid of Maud!  What would Lewis think?

"Ehem!" said Toney in a loud voice, and the two flew apart, Maud turning
round with a crimson face.

"Oh, Toney, we--I didn't think you would come here----  I was telling
Mr. Lang----"

"Oh I say, Miss Whitburn, I'll take a leaf out of your book----  I want
Maud to marry me and she won't say 'yes!'"

Toney nearly said, "How dishonourable," then by a sudden inspiration her
mind was illumined.  She must have imagined, all--the other thing?  A
great weight seemed to be suddenly lifted from her heart, she felt light
as air so that she actually burst out laughing.

"Oh!  Stars and Stripes!--Maud--you never told me----  Is it really
true--or----"

Edward Lang's eyes were so blue and so kind, he seized Maud's hand.

"She'll obey you, Miss Whitburn--tell her to say 'yes'--and you can't
say I love her for her money--because she has none, and if she will just
reform this extravagant personage we shall be as happy as----"

"Gracious stars!  Maud--do you----"

"He's most unworthy," said Maud laughing, "but I have a slight regard
for him only--it's all very well promising to reform but----"

"You can't tell unless you try me," he answered, looking really in
earnest, "but be witness, Miss Whitburn, 'pon my honour I will, Maud
says I must work, and really I mean in future to be less of a lazy dog,
but if Maud throws me up----"

"A gentleman always keeps his word, Maud," said Toney, "and indeed, Mr.
Lang, Maud won't always be penniless, I've just made my will, and when
Aunt Dove dies, you'll have two thousand a year, Maud--it's my wedding
gift to you."

The lovers stared hard, then Maud actually cried and ended by laughing.

"Oh, Toney!  We can't--he won't reform if I'm not a beggar!"

"Aunt Dove's got an awfully good constitution, so there's no hurry,"
said Toney, "but I'm so very, very glad, Mr. Lang, though of course,
Maud is too good for you, only----"

They all laughed, and Maud seeing Toney's tired look, suggested she
should lie down and be left alone.

"Yes, I think I'll curl up," said Toney, "I'm still a bit dazed--but,
oh, Maud--I never guessed!"

The lovers went out and Toney called Trick, then literally curled
herself round on the big sofa, feeling that it would take a long time to
re-adjust her ideas. Why had she believed Aunt Dove, and--oh, it was all
a mistake--what about Lewis' strange coldness? But even the new sweet,
strange puzzle, and the great lightness of heart, could not keep her
weary eyes open, though she did not want to sleep but to see Sir Evas
directly he appeared, so she took her little book out of her pocket and
opened it at the place where the little boy saw St. Francis in a wood,
surrounded with heavenly visitors, and she read how St. Francis,
returning home, stumbled over the boy, and then lifted him in his arms,
"as doth a good shepherd with his sheep," and Toney thought of the
terrible moments on the sill, and thanked God that she had been upheld
by the Good Shepherd till help had come, for she heard Jim tell someone
that it was a miracle how Miss Tonia had held on----  Then "The Little
Flowers of St. Francis" dropped from her hands and Toney fell asleep.



Sir Evas, getting out at Winchley Station, stumbled against Lewis
Waycott.

"Bless my soul, you came too, Waycott!  How can you spare the time?
There's a fly waiting, come with me, I wanted to talk about your lions,
but all this has driven everything out of my head."

"The lions will wait," said Lewis gravely.  Then Sir Evas spoke a few
words to the Station Master, after which both men hurried into the fly.

"It might have been worse, but Ingram says it was a near shave for
Toney.  However, now the fire is got under.  She saved her aunt's life,
Ingram says. What a fright I had, but Toney's safe; I'm as fond of that
girl as if she was my own."

"Of course," said Lewis, "I'm sure she never thought of herself."

"Always was foolhardy--but coming down I was reading a letter from
Staines, he's terribly upset. What do you think Toney did yesterday?"

"Yesterday!  Was she in town?"

"Yes, I forgot to say so--Staines said she insisted on making an
immediate deed of gift to that confoun--well, that Stone House of hers
of L30,000, and to think of all the time I wasted on that girl's money
affairs!  It's preposterous!  I don't wonder Staines is nearly off his
head!"

"A deed of gift of L30,000!" repeated Lewis turning towards Sir Evas
with a flash of joy in his eyes.

"Yes, I thought you'd be as surprised as I am. Worse--Staines said he
would tell me--out of the remainder, she's given my wife L2,000
principal and interest, and at her death it's to go on to your Cousin
Maud."

"To Maud!"

"Yes, Toney's very fond of Maud, and--you know I expect she thought it
would help you."

"Help me!  Why?"

"Oh she told me not to let the cat out of the bag, but I never could
keep a cat in anything.  She heard you were engaged to Maud--keeping it
quiet--much better--I wouldn't have mentioned it but for this money."

"Good heavens!  What else--she won't have much left."

"Confound it all--the rest, I suppose, will build Stone House, only----"
and Sir Evas chuckled,

"Staines has kept the coal mines as her share, and there's no knowing
what they are worth, unless the seam fails--there'll be pickings, but
only pickings. Such a fortune, a princely fortune.  Stone couldn't have
foreseen it."

"I believe he did, Sir Evas, I believe it was his fashion of dispensing
charity."

"I don't know, he was a queer fish himself, gave lavishly in secret,
but--it's really enough to turn Staines' hair white."

Here Lewis Waycott laughed aloud; Sir Evas looked at him a little
reproachfully.

"I don't see the joke."

"Forgive me, Sir Evas--I do--but what made Toney say that about Maud?
What an absurd idea!  I'm awfully fond of Maud--I think I told Toney
so--but I look upon these girls as my sisters. They're tremendously
improved, and it's Toney's doing."

"Then you're not engaged to Maud!  I always said it surprised
me--Toney's too cute.  Here we are--good heavens!  It's not pleasant to
see your ancestral home looking like this!"

The two men were surrounded immediately by responsible and irresponsible
people.  Sir Evas heard all that was known, and Lewis was shown where
Toney had stood and told how she had saved the lives of Lady Dove and
Miss Grossman.  Lewis Waycott looked away.  He was a strong man but at
that moment he felt faint.

"They are all at Waycott, Sir Evas," said Lewis, "I think I'll go on."

"Yes, do, say I am coming.  I must thank my people for saving so much of
my property.  There isn't a picture burnt, and much of the furniture is
saved."

Sir Evas had become very popular since Toney had rubbed his shyness off,
so now he went about among his tenants scattering kind words, and he was
almost overcome by their heartfelt sympathy. Though his treasures had
been at everybody's mercy, not the smallest thing had been injured.--"It
will soon be built up again, sir--'Twas a mercy everyone was saved--Her
ladyship wouldn't face the shoot at first, sir--If Miss Tonia hadn't
been there the two ladies would have been roasted alive--The ways of
Providence is wonderful!  'Tain't for such of us to understand them!"

On leaving Sir Evas, Lewis had stumbled on Jim.

"Jim, if you're not wanted, take me home in the motor--at least if it
isn't burnt."

"No, sir, the stables never suffered.  Miss Tonia asked after Colon and
the others, sir, and the little dorg went near mad with joy.  He tried
to run into the fire to find Miss Tonia.  Trick ain't like other dorgs."

"I hear, Jim, you saved Miss Toney--you know we shan't forget that."

Jim grinned broadly, he was going faster than any regulation speed, so
he could not do more.

"That wasn't nothing, sir.  I was so mad that they didn't move the shoot
quicker, I thought her ladyship must have stuck half-way, so I ran up a
ladder, and though it wasn't quite in the right place I managed, by
stretching out, to hold Miss Tonia for a minute till the shoot came.  If
it hadn't been for that she couldn't have held on, how she did it at
all, sir, is a miracle, but she's got such a cool head has Miss Tonia,
'tain't another like her anywhere, sir."

"You're right, Jim, there isn't another like her, anywhere."

"Thought you had started for foreign parts, sir."

"I haven't started yet--I may go next week--or I may not.  Tell me how
the fire began, Jim."  And Jim's ideas on this point lasted till they
reached Waycott Hall gates.

"All right, Jim, I'll walk from here--I don't want to disturb the
ladies--they are not expecting me. Go back for Sir Evas."  Lewis sneaked
into his own house like a thief.  His brain seemed spinning round with a
multitude of ideas, as if it were on fire.  He mentally saw Toney on
that ledge and--he muttered some savage words about himself for not
being there, adding, "Hang that Jim, he'll be unbearable for the rest of
his life."

No one was expecting him, the hall was deserted, he walked through it
and from habit made for his own study.  He wanted to calm himself before
seeing them all; of course Toney was upstairs--perhaps in bed.  Oh! he
could wait now.  If he told anyone he was here, Aunt Honoria would claim
him, and he should have to hear that horrid story again.  He opened the
door and stepped in.  He walked to the fireplace--then----  Good
heavens! there was Toney on his sofa, fast asleep, and there too was
Trick, who pricked up his ears and barked!

Toney woke up with a start, and with her right hand rubbed her eyes.

"Gracious stars!  Uncle--oh, it's----"  She sank down again because her
legs refused to carry her.

"It's only Lewis," he said sitting down beside her. "Toney--Toney, I've
come back to tell you what a fool I've been."

"You haven't yet killed all the lions in Somaliland, have you?" said
Toney trying to laugh in her old manner; but the laugh died away before
the look in Lewis' eyes.

"Let me tell you quick, Toney."  He took her hand, and Toney felt she
was dreaming, for never had he looked like that before, never had he
held her hand in this manner.  "I went away because I loved you--yes, I
have always loved you, and you only, but that beastly money came in the
way!  Lady Dove said I wanted your money, and my horrid pride couldn't
swallow the gold!  I sacrificed everything to it; then came the day when
I couldn't stand any more, I couldn't live and see you every day and say
nothing when I wasn't sure--of your feelings.  I wasn't worthy of you,
Toney; I might have trusted you, I might have known that the money would
never stay with you, and now I've heard; but, oh, my Toney, will you
believe that I was coming before I knew; I was coming to swallow the
whole fortune, and the _on dits_ of the whole county, only your uncle
told me, and, anyhow, I ask you now, will you be my wife, not for the
money, but for yourself?  If you say I don't deserve you, if you say you
don't care enough for me, I'll go off again and wait--and then, another
thing, Toney, you thought about Maud--how could you?  I expect it was
Lady Dove again, and now you have just saved her life, and
nearly--Toney--Toney."  He put his strong arm round her and she did not
resist.  "Speak to me and tell me--and then I'll face all those Society
lions."

Then Toney just laid her weary head on his shoulder, and there was a
lump in her throat and a great, great gladness in her heart.

"Don't go away, ever again--I've been very, very miserable, and I hated
myself because I thought you belonged to Maud----  Is it true, quite,
quite true?"

"It's awfully true--Toney, you won't go on believing about Maud?"

"Oh, gracious stars! no!" cried Toney lifting up her face that was so
pink, and her eyes that were so bright; "because she's just been
engaging herself to the Honourable Edward Lang!"

"Maud?" shouted Lewis, and they both laughed together.  "So you
knew--when?"

"Oh, here, just before I went to sleep.  Then all the horrid feelings
went away--and dear, dear Lewis, I sort of felt you would come back, and
I was so happy--and you won't mind my being rather poor, though Aunt
Dove says you ought to marry money; but even for you I could not keep
it, because it was all dedicated long ago to the poor and needy."

"My darling, I've proved I don't care, though in a stupid way----
Toney, say you forgive me for hurting you, and now--I claim the gift you
promised me long ago from the cottage window."

"Oh, Lewis, was it that? and I never guessed!"  Then a great content
fell on them both.  "I said I would give you what you asked, and I think
that I always have loved you, though I never knew it till--you went
away!  Oh! there's uncle--let me go--and tell him; he sort of guessed it
before I did!"

"He's more sense than I have," said Lewis laughing.

Then they stood up with shining eyes waiting for Sir Evas, and Toney
whispered,

"I was so lonely, so lonely, and the work seemed so hard, and now you'll
never leave me and we'll work together; I see now I can't do it alone,
and I do hope 'That is the way God would have us to go,' as dear St.
Francis said whenever he was starting on a journey!"

"We'll go, God helping us, all the way together, my Toney," said Lewis
as they stood together "and as for the lions, they may eat each other
up. Come and tell Aunt Honoria, and Maud and the others, they will all
be so glad!"

"They've been so awfully good to me, but--I am not _quite_ sure about
Aunt Dove's joy!"

"Hang her," muttered Lewis.

As they went out hand-in-hand together, they laughed the old happy
laugh, and met Sir Evas face to face at the hall door.

"What the Dickens!" he began.  "By Jove! is _that_ it?"

"Yes, you dear, ducky uncle," said Toney, throwing her arms round his
neck and giving him a bear's hug, "yes, _that's_ it!"




                                THE END.




                      Printed in Great Britain at
      _The Mayflower Press, Plymouth_.  William Brendon & Son, Ltd