A Virginia
  VILLAGE

  Reprinted by the Centennial Committee of the
  Falls Church Village Preservation and Improvement Society

  April 1985.

  [Illustration]

  "_Celebrating
  Our
  Centennial Year_"

  1885-1985


  _President_
  Sue Bachtel

  _Vice President_
  Rowland Bowers

  _Treasurer_
  Delores Cannon

  _Recording Secretary_
  June Douglas

  _Corresponding Secretary_
  Vivian Norfleet

  _Immediate Past President_
  Col. Merl M. Moore

  _Elected Directors_
  Louis & Sue Olom
  Mary Bowers
  Charles A. Hobbie
  Howard & Betty Hughes Melton
  Robert & Susan Wayland
  B.J. & Judith Segel
  Harry Cannon
  Florence Murphy
  Dick & Betty Allan
  Jerry Blystone
  Kenneth & Melena Huffman
  Harold & Ida Silverstein
  Raymond & Marie Stewart
  Martha Vinograd
  James M. Boren

  _Honorary Life Members_
  Ruby and Mel Bolster
  Leath B. Bracken
  Mrs. Edgar D. Brooke
  Mrs. Meres G. Brown
  Major General and
  Mrs. William Carter
  Elizabeth Graham (Mrs. John A.)
  Miss Helen MacGregor
  Mrs. Charles G. Manly
  Mrs. Paul Schlager
  Louise Shepard (Mrs. Ernest)
  Mrs. Calvin W. Smith
  Lorraine Williams (Mrs. Fonda)
  Pat Wollenberg (Mrs. Roger)


  Falls Church
  Village Preservation
  & Improvement Society




Dear Friends,

The Falls Church Village Preservation and Improvement Society (VPIS) is
pleased to be able to reprint _A Virginia Village_ by Charles A. Stewart
as part of its Centennial observance in 1985. We are especially grateful
to the Mary Riley Styles Public Library of Falls Church for permission
to use their copy of _A Virginia Village_ for the reproduction.

_A Virginia Village_ provides a snapshot of Falls Church at the turn of
the century, at a time when the predecessor of VPIS, the Village
Improvement Society (VIS) (pp. 16-18), was in full swing. Thus it is a
fitting backdrop to our year of special activities.

As you will note, many of the buildings and settings in the 1904 edition
have been lost or altered in the past 80 years. To make the book more
useful and enjoyable to current readers, we have added a Foreword,
Comments on the Structures Pictured, a Name and Street Index, and a
biographical sketch and photograph of the author. The new information is
not all inclusive and we invite you to cross-reference your reading with
the other sources listed in the Foreword.

The Society is indebted to several of its members who worked long and
hard to made this edition possible. In particular, we would like to
thank the chairman of the project, Colonel Merl M. Moore (a former VPIS
President); Mr. Edmund F. Becker, who wrote the Foreword; Mr. Henry H.
Douglas, who as usual is an indispensable resource on the history of
Falls Church; and Mr. Richard T. Allan, whose editing skills were
invaluable.

We hope this 1985 edition will become a cherished reminder of The
Society's 100th anniversary and a valuable edition to your personal
library. Sincerely,

  _President_

  Rowland Bowers
  _Vice President_

  Harold Silverstein
  _Chairman, Centennial Committee_

[Illustration]




ABOUT THE FALLS CHURCH VILLAGE PRESERVATION AND IMPROVEMENT SOCIETY


In 1985, its Centennial Year, the Falls Church Village Preservation and
Improvement Society comprises over 750 citizens and businesses dedicated
to improving the quality of life in Falls Church.

The Society recognizes that it is the inheritor of the civic purposes
and activities of the Village Improvement Society (VIS) of Falls Church
established in 1885 and which group was modeled after the famous Laurel
Hill Association of Stockbridge, Massachusetts, and that VPIS' purposes,
objectives and activities represent a continuum of the earlier organized
and volunteer civic organization and effort to improve and preserve the
historic tradition, residential character, quality of life and
appearance of Falls Church, Virginia.

The values articulated by the founders in 1885 have not changed to the
present:

  to preserve the historic and predominantly single
  family detached residential and village character of Falls Church;

  to preserve its historic structures and landmarks;

  to promote architectural harmony and aesthetic values;

  to beautify the community by planting trees, flowers,
    and shrubs; and

  to work with governmental bodies and community groups
    to promote and fulfill these goals.

Archives of the Society may be found in the Virginia Room of the Mary
Riley Styles Library, Falls Church, Virginia.




FOREWORD


Charles A. Stewart's _A Virginia Village_ is a charming depiction of the
early days of Falls Church. It is the earliest attempt to put on paper
the story of the Falls Church area. In addition to interesting stories
about people and organizations and life generally in the small town of
80 years ago, the book contains photographs of 107 Falls Church houses,
stores, and churches then standing. Reading it is a trip into nostalgia
for old-timers--but the book is more than nostalgia. It pictures many
elements which we associate with the community's lovely historic
character and interest, and which intrigues newcomers and older
residents alike.

Charles A. Stewart produced the book with the help of friends, including
M.M. Ogden, who wrote the preface, and Pickering Dodge, who took the
photographs. Joseph H. Newell printed it in a small backyard shop owned
by his father, which was located on what is today North Washington
Street next to the Columbia Baptist Church.

Not all of the structures standing in the town of Falls Church in 1904
are pictured in _A Virginia Village_. Some owners perhaps were not
asked, or they did not wish to pay the two-dollar fee, or they declined
for other reasons. A number of these absent structures were well-known
features of the community, including the two W.&O.D. railway stations
(East and West Falls Church, now gone), Mt. Hope, Shadow Lawn (or
Whitehall), Tallwood, Jefferson School (no longer standing) and the old
I.O.O.F. Hall (also gone). _Falls Church--By Fence and Fireside_,
published in 1964 by the Rev. Melvin Steadman, mentions many others,
such as Big Chimneys, which was still standing in 1904.

Of the 107 structures pictured, 24 were located near the present City,
particularly in what was then known as the "East End" or East Falls
Church. This former part of the town of Falls Church was returned to
Alexandria County (now Arlington) in 1936. A large number of homes,
stores, and other business establishments which constituted East Falls
Church disappeared with the building of I-66, especially that part of
the highway that lies between Westmoreland and Sycamore Streets in
Arlington County. East Falls Church extended from the present
City/County line down Lee Highway, and thus was located on both the
north and south sides of I-66.

A review of the available records and the recollections of older
residents indicates that 57 of the buildings shown are no longer
standing; of the some 50 not pictured, 14 are no longer standing. Thus,
of at least 157 buildings known to have been standing in town in 1904,
71 are known to have been lost (almost half).

The sources consulted (other than the book itself) include extensive
notes made about 1970 by Mrs. John C. (Frances Butterworth) Cline, who
died in 1979; _Falls Church--Places and People_, by Henry H. Douglas,
published by the Falls Church Historical Commission in 1981 (still
available in paperback); Rev. Melvin Steadman's _Falls Church--By Fence
and Fireside_, published in 1964 (out of print); Henry H. Douglas'
_Falls Church Historical News and Notes_, published between May 1970 and
October 1972; Henry H. Douglas himself, who has made a hobby of Falls
Church history; Mel and Ruby Bolster, charter members of VPIS; and many
others.

While the City has lost much of its rural village character and charm,
and has meanwhile acquired some ugly modernity in spots, the City's
preservation ordinance, adopted in 1984, throws a protective cloak
against further demolition around structures built as residences prior
to 1911. Other buildings, such as churches and historic sites, are also
protected by the ordinance, subject to certification by the Historical
Commission to a Register. In addition, the Falls Church Village
Preservation and Improvement Society and others continually seek ways to
restore what aesthetic features have been lost.

Much additional information about houses, people and events in and
around Falls Church will be found in the publications mentioned above
and in other publications and documents making up the Falls Church Local
Historical Collection in the Virginia Room of the Mary Riley Styles
Public Library. The Collection is a veritable treasure-house of
historical information waiting to be explored, and anyone looking for
more information concerning any of the persons or places mentioned in
this book is urged to consult the Collection in the Virginia Room.

  Edmund F. Becker,
  517 Meridian St.,
  Falls Church, Va.

[Illustration]




CHARLES ALEXANDER STEWART

Charles Alexander Stewart (1860-1950), who is best remembered in Falls
Church for his estimable little book, _A Virginia Village_, which was
published in 1904, was born at "Beechwood," the Stewart family farm at
the intersection of the Dismal Swamp and Northwest Canals. He was the
fourth in a family of five. His father, William Charles Stewart
(1810-1865), died at "Beechwood."

In 1887 Charles A. Stewart married Mary Isabella Tabb (1866-1939),
daughter of Dr. Robert Bruce Tabb (1833-1906) and Elizabeth Anne
(Warden) Tabb (1837-1891). Elizabeth Tabb Stewart, born in 1890, was the
eldest of ten children and lived in the family home in East Falls Church
from 1894 until 1971.

Mr. Stewart had a distinguished career in the United States Treasury
Department where he became chief clerk in the Office of the Comptroller
of the Currency, and was a bank examiner when he retired in 1930. He was
active in many community affairs. He was a vestryman of The Falls
Church, was chairman of the Falls Church School Board continuously from
1910 to 1927, was active in the creation of Madison School and, while he
was still living, the Charles A. Stewart Elementary School, on Underwood
Street, was named for him. He was a trustee of Oakwood Cemetery in 1918,
and was assistant secretary of the Arlington/Fairfax Savings and Loan
from 1933 to 1940.

(From _Falls Church Historical News & Notes_, October 1972.)




COMMENTS ON THE STRUCTURES PICTURED

These comments provide information on the present status of the 107
structures pictured. They are arranged in sequence by item numbers,
which correspond to the page numbers in the original book, and repeat
the names exactly as given. The people named were the owners of the
structures pictured. Present street addresses are given when the
building is still standing. In the case of the 57 buildings now gone
(they are marked by asterisks), the former or present street address is
usually not known, and in such instances the approximate location is
given. When the date of destruction is known, it is given; when a
destruction date is not given, it presumably was some time prior to
1969, when the City's Architectural Inventory was prepared. Construction
dates and other interesting details are provided when known, in capsule
form.

[Sidenote: Front] _The Lawton House._ 203 Lawton St. Also known as
Lawton Manor and Home Hill. Built in 1859 but renovated many times. Once
headquarters of Confederate Gen. James Longstreet and later the home of
Gen. Henry Ware Lawton. Formerly housed Mattie Gundry's "Gun-Well"
school. Yard formerly used by Louise and Ernest Shepard to hold the
first VPIS Attic Treasures sales. Threat to house stimulated formation
of VPIS in 1965. Owners: Donald Rice and Elizabeth Loker.

[Sidenote: Front] _Mr. A.M. Lothrop._ Still standing at McKinley St. and
Wilson Blvd. in Arlington. Beautiful estate known as "Fair Mount."
Owner: Randolph Rouse.

[Sidenote: *4] _Mr. E.T. Fenwick._ Was on Washington Blvd., East Falls
Church, at the end of 24th Street.

[Sidenote: 5] _Presbyterian Church._ 225 E. Broad St. Built in 1884 with
stone from the Tripps/Sisler quarry on S. Washington St., but the stone
trim was transported from Seneca Maryland via the C.&O. Canal. Additions
were built in 1968 from stone salvaged from the demolished old Columbia
Baptist Church, thanks to architect and member, Kenton D. Hamaker, who
died in 1982.

[Sidenote: *6] _Mr. W.M. Ellison._ Is the house built in 1852 by Wm.
Henry Ellison and later left to his son, Wm. McElfresh Ellison, who in
turn left it to his daughter, Fannie May, who married Carroll Shreve.
Once housed the Falls Church library. Was torn down in 1955 to make way
for the present Sunoco Gas Station on W. Broad and West St. (934 W.
Broad). Ellison owned at least four structures in the area, and Ellison
Street no doubt is named for him.

[Sidenote: 7] _Mr. George G. Crossman._ Built 1892. Located on part of
the former large Isaac Crossman farm near Lee Highway and Little Falls
St. at 2501 Underwood St. in Arlington. Plaque on house describes it as
the Crossman-Grey House. Home of Stephen B. Grey.

[Sidenote: *8] _Virginia Training School, Miss M. Gundry, Principal._
Was at 309 W. Broad St., immediately west of the present Post Office. On
the present site of the Winter Hill subdivision, formerly Tyler Gardens.
Formerly the Schuyler Duryee House. Its large metal outside conduits,
providing quick fire escapes for the mentally-handicapped inmates,
attracted the attention of curious passersby.

[Sidenote: *9] _Dr. J.B. Gould._ 120 E. Broad St.

[Sidenote: 10] _Mr. W.H. Nowlan._ 114 E. Columbia St. near the Crossman
Methodist Church. Built 1885. Now owned by the City, which converted it
for handicapped adults in 1981.

[Sidenote: 11] Mr. G.W. Poole. On N. Washington Blvd. in Arlington
County just behind what is now the First Virginia Bank, 6745 Lee
Highway.

[Sidenote: *12] _Mr. G.F. McInturff._ Was on N. Maple Ave. on the
present site of Garden Court Townhouses, adjacent to the George
Stambaugh house, which was located on Great Falls St. (See item 61.)

[Sidenote: *13] _Mr. M.E. Church._ Had a real estate and insurance
office and drug store on W. Broad St. facing the present Brown's
Hardware at 100 W. Broad St. Note windmill. On site of the George Mason
Square complex, now under construction. (See p. 89 for more details
about Mr. Church.)

[Sidenote: *14] _Mr. J.W. Brown Store and Residence._ Old store and
residence gone, torn down in 1959. Was on the N. corner of N. Washington
and W. Broad Sts., next door to the "new" Brown's store. Business
recently celebrated its 100th anniversary.

[Sidenote: 15] _Mr. Geo. L. Erwin._ 300 W. Great Falls St., on corner of
Little Falls and Great Falls Sts. A good example of what Falls Church
was like at the turn of the century. Owners: Polly and Adrian Richey.
Built 1893.

[Sidenote: 16] _Mrs. Emma Garner._ 211 E. Columbia St. Built 1894. Home
of David M. Garner, son of J.W. Garner. (See item 46.)

[Sidenote: *17] _Mr. E.C. Hough._ Was on E. Jefferson St. next to 215 E.
Jefferson on the left. E.C. Hough built this house in 1900. Parcel owned
by L.F. Jennings.

[Sidenote: *18] _Major M.S. Hopkins. Arringdon Hall_, as this impressive
house was known, was on N. Washington St. next door to the Village House
Motel, razed in 1984 to make way for the Kaiser-Permanente Medical
Center, now under constructions on N. Washington between Park and W.
Great Falls St. _Arringdon Hall_ was demolished in the mid-60s.

[Sidenote: *19] _Mr. S.H. Thornburg._ Was next door to the right of
present Nowlan/Pendleton House at 114 E. Columbia St. on the present
site of the Crossman Methodist Church parking lot (See item 10).

[Sidenote: *20] _Mr. Nathan Banks._ Was on the site of a present
condominium apartment house on the North side of the 6800 block of
Washington Blvd. in East Falls Church, Arlington.

[Sidenote: *21] _James A. Dickinson, M.D._ Was at 351 N. Washington St.
Demolished in 1963 to make way for the Columbia Baptist Church parking
lot. The owners were Mr. and Mrs. John H. (Frances Butterworth) Cline.
Their daughter, Elizabeth Hughes Cline (Mrs. Howard Melton) and her
husband are currently members of the VPIS Board.

[Sidenote: 22] _Dr. Geo. B. Fadeley._ 260 W. Broad St., corner of Little
Falls St. opposite the Post Office. Was his office and residence, later
the Falls Church Beauty School, and now the Potomac Academy of Hair
Design. Built 1890.

[Sidenote: *23] _Mankin Pharmacy._ Demolished and replaced by
tool-rental and restaurant businesses. Was on N. Washington St. to the
right of the present State Theatre at 220 N. Washington. It was a small,
real drug store, handling mostly drugs and pharmaceuticals, but may have
had a "soda fountain."

[Sidenote: 24] _Mr. Charles Crossman._ House saved from demolition in
May 1983 and moved from 421 N. Washington St., near the Columbia Baptist
Church, to 345 Little Falls St. Moved by Col. Lawrence Pence and his
wife Carol of Arlington, who are also renovating _Shadow Lawn_,
(formerly Whitehall) at 335 Little Falls St. Built 1871. Crossman House
was once affectionately known as _Aunt Pansy's_. Owners: Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Morde.

[Sidenote: *25] _Dr. J. B. Hodgkin._ Was on E. Fairfax St. on the site
of the present Southgate Shopping Center facing The Falls Church
(Episcopal).

[Sidenote: *26] _Mr. D.O. Munson._ Dr. Munson's house was probably part
of the Munson Nurseries near Munson Hill, just off Leesburg Pike (Route
7) toward Baileys Crossroads. He was also a Colonel, and planted the
silver maples that lined and overarched Broad St. House was demolished
to make way for the Lafayette Condominiums, at 6141 Leesburg Pike.

[Sidenote: 27] _Mr. Henry Crocker._ 319 N. Maple, near Thurber Ct. Built
1890. Owned by Mr. and Mrs. Ralph Vogel. Thurber Court is named after
James Thurber, who once lived nearby.

[Sidenote: *27] _Mr. E.F. Crocker._ Was at 321 N. Maple. Demolished when
Thurber Court was built.

[Sidenote: *28] _Mr. G.W. Mankin._ Was third building west of the
original Brown's Hardware at 100 West Broad Street. Was the home of Mr.
George W. Mankin after he moved out of the Clover House (not pictured in
this book; referenced in Falls Church: Places and People, pp. 76, 77).
Was approximately on the site of the present D&F Office Furniture at 134
West Broad.

[Sidenote: *29] _Mr. C.H. Buxton._ Was home of Charles Buxton, which was
at E. Broad St. and Buxton Rd., but now replaced by a newer home next
door to the Dulin United Methodist Church at 513 E. Broad St.

[Sidenote: *30] _Mr. Summerfield Taylor._ Lived over the Falls Church
Market, a grocery formerly at the south-east corner of E. Broad and S.
Washington Sts. Later replaced by the Falls Church Garage and Kent
Cleaners. The "Historic Triangle complex," created by the City, is being
replaced by the Independence Square Complex, now under construction.

[Sidenote: 31] _Mr. A.P. Eastman._ House still standing in East Falls
Church at 6733 Lee Highway. He was a charter member and treasurer of the
Village Improvement Society. Owner: Mrs. Charles R. Fenwick (Eleanor
Eastman). House known as _Everbloom_.

[Sidenote: 32] _Mr. Geo. F. Rollins._ 109 E. Columbia St. Large house
built in 1888. Also known as the Vosbury/Hall house. Owners: Dr. and
Mrs. George Hall.

[Sidenote: 33] _The Old Colonial Church._ Interesting name for The Falls
Church (Episcopal) at 115 E. Fairfax St. Has undergone considerable
enlargement and renovation. Present brick church built in 1769 and thus
the oldest church in the area. The City took its name from the church.
On the National Register of Historic Places.

[Sidenote: *34] _Mrs. C.E. Mankin's Store._ Mr. Mankin's store was on
the corner of N. Washington and E. Broad Sts. and was known as Mankin's
Notion and Dry Goods Store. Mankin's wife Valinda ran the store in 1904
after he died the previous September. He served in the Confederate Army
and saw Stonewall Jackson shot by his own troops. Now Robertson's office
building.

[Sidenote: 35] _Mr. Charles A. Stewart._ House at 6857 Washington Blvd.
in East Falls Church, Arlington. Author of _A Virginia Village_ and
other published and unpublished works. His daughter Elizabeth Tabb
Stewart lived there until 1971. Name of new owners is unknown, but it is
scheduled for demolition soon.

[Sidenote: *36] _Mrs. Charles A. (sic) Mankin._ Believed to be a picture
of _Home Hill_ which Charles _E._ Mankin built for his wife Valinda. It
was located across the street from the then I.O.O.F. Hall on the site of
the Post Office parking lot at 301 W. Broad St. The grounds were given
to Mrs. Mankin by her mother. (There was no Charles _A._ Mankin.)

[Sidenote: 37] _Mrs. Annie Eells._ 414 W. Great Falls St. Built 1885.
Known as the Eells/Roberts/Pierce Home. Enlarged and renovated. Owners:
Mr. and Mrs. Harold L. Pierce.

[Sidenote: 38] _"Eastover," Mr. Pickering Dodge._ 6763 25th St., corner
of Washington Blvd. and 25th St., East Falls Church. Mr. Dodge took the
pictures for _A Virginia Village_. Later owned by Mr. and Mrs. Hughes
Butterworth (daughter was Frances) from 1917-1933. Present owners:
Michael and Rita Flott.

[Sidenote: 39] _Mr. W.A. Ball._ 117 E. Columbia St. next to Rollins/Hall
house at 109 E. Columbia. Probably refers to Rev. Samuel A. Ball, who
was pastor of the Crossman Methodist Church across the street. Known as
the Ball/Jackman house. Built 1890. Owners: Mr. and Mrs. George E.
Jackman.

[Sidenote: *40] _Mr. T.B. Snoddy._ Was next to the N.E. corner of N.
Washington and E. Columbia Sts. Now occupied by an office building at
400 N. Washington St.

[Sidenote: *41] _Dr. T.M. Talbott._ Was located on a piece of farmland
across from the A.M. Lothrop place at the corner of McKinley Rd. and
Wilson Blvd. in Arlington. Christian Science Church, 809 N. McKinley
Road, now on the site.

[Sidenote: *42] _Mr. C.L. Blanton._ Mrs. Cline stated that this house
was then (about 1970) on Washington Blvd. in East Falls Church. Location
unclear. (See poultry ad on p. 108).

[Sidenote: *43] _Mr. Geo. W. Hawxhurst._ Was on the N.E. corner of N.
Washington and E. Columbia Sts., opposite the Charles Crossman House and
next door to Snoddy's. The garage once housed the beginnings of the
Falls Church library.

[Sidenote: *44] _Mr. W.W. Biggs._ Was on the corner of W. Great Falls
and Little Falls St., facing Little Falls St. on the site of the Falls
Church Community Center at 223 Little Falls. Later owned by the Cobb and
O'Halloran families.

[Sidenote: 45] _Mr. C.C. Walters._ 900 Park Ave. at Spring St. Built
1891. Owned by Philip Brophy.

[Sidenote: 46] _Mr. J.W. Garner._ 219 E. Columbia St. Built 1890. Owned
by Larry Lee Gregg and Cynthia Garner.

[Sidenote: *47] _Town Sergeant John N. Gibson._ East Falls Church. Was
located on the south side of Washington Blvd., east of Lee Highway,
between Moncure (p. 91) and Thompson (p. 97). Gibson, as town officer,
had many duties. House demolished when I-66 was built.

[Sidenote: *48] _Mr. J.C. Elliott's Store._ East Falls Church. Was at
Lee Highway and N. Fairfax Drive, with the electric trolley running on
Fairfax Drive. The W.&O.D. R.R. was on the south side. Was Snyder's
Hardware when it burned in 1948. It was replaced by the new Snyder & Co.
store, 6847 Lee Highway, Arlington.

[Sidenote: 49] _Miss Ada Rhodes._ 110 W. Great Falls St. Now known as
the Rhodes/Lennon House. Built in 1889 but has been completely renovated
after a substantial fire in 1975. Front yard has been terraced and
landscaped. Mr. Michael Lennon, the present owner, teaches renovation
and restoration procedures.

[Sidenote: *50] _Mr. W.W. Kinsley._ Was on Lee Highway in East Falls
Church, across from the present Continental Federal Savings and Loan, at
6711 Lee Highway, on a site now occupied by townhouses.

[Sidenote: 51] _Mr. H.A. Fellows._ On the S.W. corner of Roosevelt St.
and Washington Blvd. in East Falls Church at 6404 Washington Blvd. Harry
Andrew Fellows was for six years mayor of Falls Church. Wife Alice, who
died about 1971, at age 105, was very knowledgeable about Falls Church.
Owners: John and Marlys McGrath and three children, Michelle, Michale
and Megan. Current owners are trying to restore the house to what it
used to be. Now called Memory Lane.

[Sidenote: 52] _Residence of Mr. G.A.L. Merrifield._ 282 N. Washington
St. Large imposing house built in 1895. House at 210 W. Great Falls St.
also attributed to him. Was given an "Excellence in Design" award by
VPIS for outstanding interior renovation. Owned by Craver, Matthews,
Smith and Co., mail order and restoration consultants.

[Sidenote: 53] _Cottage of Mr. G.A.L. Merrifield._ 306 N. Washington St.
Built 1870. Skinrood Realty once housed here. Renovated and owned by
Craver, Matthews, Smith and Co., who own 282 N. Washington St., across
Great Falls St.

[Sidenote: *54] _Mr. Frank M. Thompson._ Was on south side Washington
Blvd., in East Falls Church, Arlington. Torn down for I-66.

[Sidenote: 55] _Mr. Thomas Hillier._ 116 S. Oak St. Built 1890. Now
owned by Mrs. Alvin Tasker.

[Sidenote: 56] _Mr. J.S. Riley._ 312 Park Ave. Cherry Hill farmhouse,
built c. 1840 on what was originally the 248-acre Trammell grant by Lord
Fairfax. Was the home of "Judge" Joseph S. Riley, responsible for
chartering the town of Falls Church in 1875, and of Miss Elizabeth
"Betty" Styles. Owned by the City and administered by the Historical
Commission. On the National Register of Historic Places.

[Sidenote: *57] _Mr. O.H. Billingsley._ Was on the North side of the 100
block of W. Broad St. near the present Brown's Hardware Store.

[Sidenote: *58] _Mr. A.O. Von Herbulis._ Was near St. James Church, on
site of St. Joseph's School at 203 N. Spring St. He designed St. James
Church and Rectory.

[Sidenote: 59] _Mr. Andrew M. Smith._ 316 N. Maple Ave. Built 1904, the
year _A Virginia Village_ was published. Also known as the Sheldon Cline
House (brother of John H. Cline). Now owned by the Columbia Baptist
Church.

[Sidenote: 60] _Major Jos. T. Hiett._ 115 E. Jefferson St. Built c.
1890. Hiett was an officer in the Confederate Army. Very unusual
construction. Owners: Donovan and Joan Miers.

[Sidenote: *61] _Mr. George Stambaugh._ Was at the N.W. corner of N.
Maple Ave. and W. Great Falls St., facing Great Falls St., now the site
of the Garden Court Townhouses. Note that it had a windmill.

[Sidenote: 62] _The Falls Church (Episcopal)._ A photo made during the
Civil War. (See also pp. 33 to 61 for another photo and descriptive
text.)

[Sidenote: 63] _Mr. Charles A. Marshall._ 215 E. Jefferson St., facing
Cherry St., on a 3-lot parcel. Built c. 1900. Owned by L.F. Jennings.

[Sidenote: *64] _Mr. John S. Garrison._ Was on the S.W. corner of
Washington Blvd. and Lee Highway in East Falls Church. Later the office
of Dr. Howard Berger. Demolished for I-66.

[Sidenote: *65] _Mr. F.A. Niles._ Was near Seven Corners on Route 7.
Later the home of the Duffys and Higgins.

[Sidenote: *66] _Dr. T.C. Quick._ Was on the N.W. corner of N.
Washington St. and W. Great Falls, across the street from the present
Trammell's Gate Housing Development. Tunis Cline Quick was a classmate
of President Taft, who spoke from the steps of another former Quick home
now occupied by the Ives-Pearson Funeral Home at 472 N. Washington St.

[Sidenote: *67] _Miss Ellen W. Green._ Was on the corner of N.
Washington and E. Columbia Sts., on the present site of the parking lot
of the Crossman Methodist Church.

[Sidenote: *68] _Mr. Jno. D. Payne._ Was at Seven Corners near Koons
Ford, located at 1051 E. Broad St. Payne's Corners (now Seven Corners)
was named for him. He was a former mayor of Falls Church, 1906-07.

[Sidenote: *69] _The Rectory. Rev. George S. Somerville._ Was the
Rectory of The Falls Church (Episcopal) from 1900 to 1912 on S. Oak St.,
next to 116 in the present parking lot of 803 W. Broad St. Both houses
were built by Thomas Hillier. (See item 55.)

[Sidenote: *70] _Dr. L.E. Gott._ Was on 15th Road, near the end of E.
Columbia St., in what is now Arlington County. Dr. Louis Edward Gott was
a surgeon in the Confederate Army. He apparently did not sign the
Ordinance of Secession and helped draw up the town charter in 1875.

[Sidenote: *71] _Mr. R.J. Yates._ Was located in the middle of the 100
block of W. Columbia St. on the present site of the Columbia Baptist
Church. It was once the site of the Forbes Institute, a private school
run by the Forbes family.

[Sidenote: 72] _Mr. S.A. Copper._ 206 E. Jefferson St. Built 1889. On a
very attractive lot. House and barn have been renovated. Owned by Mr.
and Mrs. Paul Quinn.

[Sidenote: 73] _Mrs. J.L. Auchmoody._ 400 Great Falls St. Built in the
1850s. Julia L. Smith was married to Walter Auchmoody and helped run the
Star Tavern, at the S.W. corner of Broad and Washington Sts. The Tavern
once also served as the post office. House then known as "Mother
Auchmoody's." More recently owned by the Hinman family and then Mr. and
Mrs. Malcolm Smith (now both deceased). Lot was subdivided under the
terms of an easement, and a large house was built next door by Robert
Daube. 400 W. Great Falls now owned by Elizabeth G. Warden.

[Sidenote: *74] _Dr. Samuel Luttrell._ Was at 133 E. Broad St. next to
the Murphy House that was once the City Hall (See item 86). Was also
once the home of the Edmonds family. Now on the site of the Bear's Head
restaurant.

[Sidenote: 75] _Mrs. C. Larner._ 329 N. Maple Ave. at W. Columbia St.
Built in 1850-53 but has had many alternations. Hip-roofed house painted
red. Still has a well and pump and said to have a ghost. Has an
underground room in back yard believed to have been a hiding place for
slaves during the Civil War. Minie balls have been found on the grounds.
Owners: Theodore W. and Mary Louise Jones.

[Sidenote: 76] _Mr. W.H. Barksdale._ 6403 Washington Blvd. across from
the Fellows house in East Falls Church, Arlington. (See item 51).
Owners: Col. and Mrs. Samuel Greenberg.

[Sidenote: *77] _Mr. Wm. B. Wright._ Was at 424 E. Broad St., but was
demolished in 1979 to make way for the Tollgate Townhouse Development.
Built 1870. Known as the Wright/Galpin House. Archeological
investigations as the possible site of the Wren's Tavern were negative.

[Sidenote: 78] _Mr. J.W. Seay._ 116 W. Great Falls St. Built c. 1890.
Known as the Seay/Porter/Oliphant/Kuhn House. Owners: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Beckham.

[Sidenote: *79] _Mr. J.W. Wells._ Was at 103 E. Jefferson St. across
from Dr. Macon Ware's home at 108 E. Jefferson St. which is still
standing with three new houses nearby.

[Sidenote: 80] Mr. M.H. Brinkerhoff. 200 E. Broad St. Built 1890 (?)
Owner: Mr. Lawrence Proctor.

[Sidenote: 81] _Mrs. A.V. Piggott._ 400 E. Broad St. Better known as the
Albert Brown Piggott House. Built about 1904, it basically is unchanged,
but looks different. Owned by Mr. and Mrs. Rene Ossorio.

[Sidenote: 82] _Mr. G.B. Ives._ 209 E. Broad St., next door to the Falls
Church Presbyterian Church, which now owns it. Known now as the
Westminster House. Built in 1855 by Mr. Ives.

[Sidenote: 83] _Mr. Nathan Lynch._ 304 E. Broad St. Built in 1898.
William Nathan Lynch had a two-level barn where he kept cows and sold
milk. A gazebo and fishpond were added about 1928 by his son William
Henry Lynch. Gazebo was built from the old Birch barn and the horses'
teeth-marks are still visible. Rear of the property was subdivided in
1983 for four townhouses, part of The Wrens. Extensive renovation,
inside and out, has been carried out by the present owners, Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Seline.

[Sidenote: *84] _Mrs. Mary G. Sims._ Was located at 210 Little Falls St.
between Park Ave. and W. Great Falls St. Now an office building across
from the City Hall.

[Sidenote: 85] _Mr. A.E. Rowell._ 923 W. Broad St. The Rowell House was
also known as the "Old Brick House." Built in 1855 by George B. Ives,
the Rowell family lived here for 62 years. Formerly had a barn with a
harness room and a glass conservatory for flowers. Was an antique shop
several years ago and the yard was also used for antique sales. While
the house still stands, it has been renovated and surrounded by a
townhouse complex known as Rowell Court, and bears no resemblance to the
original structure. Owned by Mr. and Mrs. C.A. Rolander.

[Sidenote: *86] _Dr. S.S. Luttrell._ Was at 155 E. Broad St., and later
known as the Murphy House. It served as the last temporary City Hall in
the 1950s.

[Sidenote: 87] _Oakwood Cemetery._ Located off N. Roosevelt St. behind
Koon's Ford. Many old time residents of Falls Church are buried here. A
corner of the foundation of Fairfax Chapel, built about 1790, and
demolished during the Civil War by Union soldiers, was recently (1984)
revealed by the falling of a tree during a storm.

[Sidenote: *88] _Mr. H.N. Ryer._ Was in East Falls Church, Arlington.

[Sidenote: 89] _Dr. M.E. Church._ Description under his photo is
eloquent. For photo of his home, see p. 13.

[Sidenote: 90] _Miss B.C. Merrifield._ 210 W. Great Falls St. Built
1876. Known as the Merrifield/Orme House. Once owned by Harry O. Bishop
and Mayor Albert Orme. Presently owned by Mr. and Mrs. John A. Payne.

[Sidenote: *91] _Mr. R.C.L. Moncure._ Was on the south side of
Washington Blvd. east of Lee Highway in East Falls Church, Arlington.
Demolished when I-66 was built.

[Sidenote: *92] _Mr. George M. Newell._ Built 1896. Was on N. Washington
St. on the present site of the parking lot next to the Columbia Baptist
Church, and next to the James A. Dickinson house at 351. The 1904
edition of _A Virginia Village_ was originally printed in his small shop
at the rear, by Joseph H. Newell, his son. (Newell-Cole Printing is now
located in Alexandria, Va.)

[Sidenote: 95] _Mr. H.C. Birge._ 610 Fulton Ave. Built 1890. Now known
as the Schefer School. Originally part of a 25-acre tract of the Cherry
Hill Farm. Rothsay Street along the rear of the property was dedicated
to provide access to the Rothsay Station on the W. and O. D. railroad,
between Pennsylvania Ave. and N. Lee St. Also known as _Woodland_.
Owner: Mrs. Eileen L.C. Schefer.

[Sidenote: *96] _The Inn._ Another name for the Eagle House Hotel, which
burned down about 1920. Was located near the present site of the State
Theatre at 220 N. Washington St. Occupants from about 1915 to 1919 were
Mr. and Mrs. Sheldon S. Cline, Sr. He was the Managing Editor of old The
Washington Star. Several of their children have remained in the Falls
Church area. Eli Northrup, an undertaker, was once the proprietor.

[Sidenote: *97] _Mr. Henry R. Thompson._ Was on the S. side of
Washington Blvd. in East Falls Church, on the E. side of Lee Highway.
Demolished about 1975 to make way for I-66.

[Sidenote: *98] _Columbia Baptist Church._ Was located in the 100 block
of E. Broad St. Demolished in 1909. A new stone church was relocated on
the corner of N. Washington and W. Columbia Sts. The stone building has
been replaced by a much larger brick structure. Address: 103 W. Columbia
St.

[Sidenote: 99] _Dulin Chapel Methodist Episcopal Church (South)._ Now
the Dulin United Methodist Church, 513 E. Broad St. Built on land
donated by William Dulin about 1869, shortly after the Civil War,
following the separation into the Northern and Southern branches of the
Methodist church.

[Sidenote: 100] _Mrs. M.E. DePutron._ 508 Lincoln Ave. Was also known as
the Sherwood Farm, on 210 acres. Included the hill on which Mt. Daniel
Elementary School (2328 N. Oak) is now located. Built in 1893-94 by Mr.
and Mrs. Jacob Coleman DePutron. Owned by Mr. and Mrs. J. Roger
Wollenberg. Roger is currently a member of the City Council and a former
member of the School Board. Pat Wollenberg was formerly Vice-chairman of
the Historical Commission and a re-founder of the VPIS in 1965.

[Sidenote: 101] _Mr. G.W. Cassilear._ 502 Walden Court. Known also as
the Cassilear/Lamont/Bell House, or _Bonnie Briar_. Built about 1898 on
what was part of the Crossman tract. Property originally consisted of
the house, a summer house (now gone), a fish pond, a sheep house (now
gone), a concrete ice-house, and a barn, on 11.66 acres. Was owned by
Mrs. William (Aloise) Bell, who died in February 1985.

[Sidenote: 102] _St. James Roman Catholic Church._ 905 Park Ave. Built
about 1902 to replace the old church on West St. at the St. James
Cemetery. Has been renovated and enlarged. Designed by A.O. Von Herbulis
(See item 58).

[Sidenote: *103] _The Methodist Episcopal Church._ Isaac Crossman
donated the land and funds for the Crossman Methodist Episcopal Church,
built in 1875. It was demolished in 1963. The new Crossman United
Methodist Church is now on the same site on the corner of N. Washington
and E. Columbia Sts. This was the Northern Methodist church; Dulin was
the Southern Methodist church.

[Sidenote: *104] _Mr. V.E. Kerr._ Was one of the group of houses south
of the Falls Church Bank (now the site of George Mason Square) on the
west side of South Washington Street about opposite The Falls Church
(Episcopal). Other houses in this group were the Updike House, the James
Walter Antique Shop and the Edith Thompson House (all gone).

[Sidenote: *105] _Mr. Herbert G. Hopkins._ Location unknown.

[Sidenote: *106] _Dr. N. F. Graham._ Was on the present Safeway grocery
site at 7397 Lee Highway, at the end of West St. in Fairfax County.

[Sidenote: 107] _Capt. M. S. Roberts,_ 409 S. West St. Known as the
Roberts/Burdick house. Capt. Roberts, who was wounded at Antietam, built
the house in 1867 with wood and hardware shipped by his brother from
Maine. Milton E. Roberts inherited the property from his uncle about
1915 and began a poultry business. Subsequently sold part of the
property to the City for Roberts Park. House now owned by Mr. and Mrs.
Edward A. Burdick.

[Sidenote: 109] _The Misses Birch._ The Birch House, 312 E. Broad St.
Built about 1835 but added to and renovated several times. Sold by Mr.
and Mrs. Milton T. Birch in 1976 to Historic Falls Church, Inc., which
in turn sold it to Mr. James Reid to build "The Wrens" on the side and
rear portion. The old barn had been converted to a garage and has since
been renovated into a handsome carriage house, as part of "The Wrens."
VPIS was the first patron, donating $1,000 toward the preservation of
the structure. On the National Register of Historic Places. Now owned by
Mr. and Mrs. Samuel A. Mabry. Kenneth and Patricia Loustalot were the
first owners after restoration (April 1980).

[Sidenote: 110] _Rev. H.A. Beach._ 212 E. Jefferson at Cherry St. Built
c. 1904. There was once a pump and a pulley for drawing water.
Originally part of the Copper property (p. 72). Owners: John and Nancy
Whitman.

[Sidenote: 111] _Congregational Church._ 222 N. Washington St., next to
the State Theatre. Formerly used as a police station, town hall,
school, recreation center and library, and finally became the Washington
House, the current headquarters of the Woman's Club of Falls Church.
Used for meetings and special events.

[Sidenote: *112] _Mr. Eli J. Northrup._ Was located on the E. side of N.
Washington St. in the 100 block. Northrup helped organize the Oakwood
Cemetery Assn. and the Falls Church Telephone and Telegraph Co. He was
an undertaker and ran the Eagle House (p. 96) at one time.




STRUCTURES LISTED BY NAME

  Auchmoody, Mrs. J.L.                                                73

  Ball, W.A.                                                          39
  Banks, Nathan                                                       20
  Barksdale, W.H.                                                     76
  Beach, Rev. H.A.                                                   110
  Biggs, W.W.                                                         44
  Billingsley, O.H.                                                   57
  The Misses Birch                                                   109
  Birge, H.C.                                                         95
  Blanton, C.L.                                                       42
  Brinkerhoff, M.H.                                                   80
  Brown, J.W.                                                         14
  Buxton, C.H.                                                        29

  Cassilear, G.W.                                                    101
  Cherry Hill (Riley, J.S.)                                           56
  Church, Dr. M.E. (Portrait)                                         89
  Church, M.E.                                                        13
  Columbia Baptist Church                                             98
  Congregational Church                                              111
  Copper, S.A.                                                        72
  Crocker, Henry                                                      27
  Crocker, E.F.                                                       27
  Crossman, Charles                                                   24
  Crossman, George G.                                                  7
  Crossman Methodist Episcopal Church                                103

  DePutron, Mrs. M.E.                                                100
  Dickinson, Dr. James A.                                             21
  Dodge, Mr. Pickering                                                38
  Dulin Chapel Methodist Episcopal Church (South)                     99

  Eagle House                                                         96
  Eastman, A.P.                                                       31
  Eastover (Dodge, Pickering)                                         38
  Eells, Mrs. Annie                                                   37
  Elliott, J.C.                                                       48
  Ellison, W.M.                                                        6
  Erwin, George L.                                                    15

  Fadeley, Dr. George B.                                              22
  Fellows, H.A.                                                       51
  Fenwick, E.T.                                                        4

  Garner, Mrs. Emma                                                   16
  Garrison, John S.                                                   64
  Gibson, John N.                                                     47
  Gott, Dr. L.E.                                                      70
  Gould, J.B.                                                          9
  Graham, Dr. N.F.                                                   106
  Green, Miss Ellen W.                                                67
  Gundry, Miss M.                                                      8

  Hawxhurst, George W.                                                43
  Hiett, Major Joseph T.                                              60
  Hillier, Thomas                                                     55
  Hodgkin, Dr.J.B.                                                    25
  Hopkins, Herbert G.                                                105
  Hopkins, Major M.S.                                                 18
  Hough, E.C.                                                         17

  Inn, The                                                            96
  Ives, G.B.                                                          82

  Kerr, V.E.                                                         104
  Kinsley, W.W.                                                       50

  Larner, Mrs. C.                                                     75
  Lawton House                                                     front
  Lothrop, A.M.                                                    front
  Luttrell, Samuel                                                    74
  Luttrell, Dr. S.S.                                                  86
  Lynch, Nathan                                                       83

  McInturff, G.F.                                                     12

  Mankin, Mrs. Charles A.                                             36
  Mankin, George W.                                                   28
  Mankin Pharmacy                                                     23
  Mankin, Mrs. C.E.                                                   34
  Marshall, Charles A.                                                63
  Merrifield, Miss B.C.                                               90
  Merrifield, G.A.L.                                              52, 53
  Moncure, R.C.L.                                                     91
  Munson, D.O.                                                        26

  Newell, George M.                                                   92
  Niles, F.A.                                                         65
  Northrup, E.J.                                                     112
  Nowlan, W.H.                                                        10

  Oakwood Cemetery                                                    87

  Payne, J.D.                                                         68
  Piggott, A.V.                                                       81
  Poole, G.W.                                                         11
  Presbyterian Church                                                  5

  Quick, Dr. T.C.                                                     66

  The Rectory (Somerville, Rev. G.S.)                                 69
  Rhodes, Miss Ada                                                    49
  Riley, J.S.                                                         56
  Roberts, Captain M.S.                                              107
  Rollins, George F.                                                  32
  Rowell, A.E.                                                        85
  Ryer, H.N.                                                          88

  St. James Roman Catholic Church                                    102
  Seay, J.W.                                                           7
  Sims, Mrs. Mary G.                                                  84
  Smith, Andrew M.                                                    59
  Snoddy, T.B.                                                        40
  Somerville, Rev. George S.                                          69
  Stambaugh, George                                                   61
  Stewart, Charles A.                                                 35

  Talbott, Dr. T.M.                                                   41
  Taylor Store                                                        30
  The Falls Church                                                33, 62
  Thompson, Frank M.                                                  54
  Thompson, Henry R.                                                  97
  Thornburg, S.H.                                                     19

  Virginia Training School                                             8
  Von Herbulis, A.O.                                                  58

  Walters, C.C.                                                       45
  Wells, J.H.                                                         79
  Wright, William B.                                                  77

  Yates, R.J.                                                         71




STRUCTURES LISTED BY ADDRESS

  Broad Street, East
    100 block (Mankin's Store)                                        34
    100 block (Columbia Baptist Church)                               98
    120 (J.B. Gould)                                                   9
    133 (S. Luttrell)                                                 74
    155 (S.S. Luttrell)                                               86
    200 (M.H. Brinkerhoff)                                            80
    209 (G.B. Ives)                                                   82
    225 (Presbyterian Church)                                          5
    304 (N. Lynch)                                                    83
    312 (The Misses Birch)                                           109
    400 (A.V. Piggott)                                                81
    424 (W.B. Wright)                                                 77
    513 (Dulin Chapel Methodist Episcopal Church (South))             99
    500 block (C.H. Buxton)                                           29
    1000 block (J.D. Payne)                                           68

  Broad Street, West
    100 block (M.E. Church)                                           13
    100 block (J.W. Brown)                                            14
    100 block (O.H. Billingsley)                                      57
    100 block (G.W. Mankin)                                           28
    200 block (C.A. Mankin)                                           36
    260 (G.B. Fadeley)                                                22
    300 block (Virginia Training School, Miss M. Gundry, Principal)    8
    923 (A.E. Rowell)                                                 85
    934 (Ellison, W.M.)                                                6

  Columbia Street, East
    on 15th Road (L.E. Gott)                                          70
    109 (G.F. Rollins)                                                32
    114 (W.H. Nowlan)                                                 10
    117 (W.A. Ball)                                                   39
    211 (E. Garner)                                                   16
    219 (J.W. Garner)                                                 46

  Columbia Street, West
    100 block (R.J. Yates)                                            71

  Fairfax Street, East
    115 (The Falls Church)                                        33, 62
    100 block (J.B. Hodgkin)                                          25

  Fulton Street
    610 (H.C. Birge)                                                  95

  Great Falls Street and Maple Avenue
    (G. Stambaugh)                                                    61

  Great Falls Street
    110 (A. Rhodes)                                                   49
    116 (J.W. Seay)                                                   78
    210 (B.C. Merrifield)                                             90
    300 (G.L. Erwin)                                                  15
    400 (J.L. Auchmoody)                                              73
    414 (A. Eells)                                                    37

  Jefferson Street, East
    103 (J.H. Wells)                                                  79
    115 (J.T. Hiett)                                                  60
    206 (S.A. Cooper)                                                 72
    211 (E.C. Hough)                                                  17
    212 (H.A. Beach)                                                 110
    215 (C.A. Marshall)                                               63

  Lawton Street
    203 (The Lawton House)                                         front

  Lee Highway
    6700 block (W.W. Kingsley)                                        50
    6733 (A.P. Eastman)                                               31
    and West Street (N.F. Graham)                                    106

  Lincoln Avenue
    508 (M.E. DePutron)                                              100

  Little Falls Street
    200 block (M.G. Sims)                                             84
    200 block (W.W. Biggs)                                            44

  Maple Street, North
    316 (A.M. Smith)                                                  59
    319 (E.F. Crocker)                                                27
    321 (H. Crocker)                                                  27
    and Great Falls (G.F. McInturff)                                  12
    329 (C. Larner)                                                   75

  McKinley Street
    (T.M. Talbott)                                                    41

  Oak Street, South
    114 (The Rectory--Rev. G.S. Somerville)                           69
    116 (T. Hillier)                                                  55

  Park Avenue
    312 (J.S. Riley)                                                  56
    900 (C.C. Walters)                                                45
    905 (St. James Roman Catholic Church)                            102

  Roosevelt Street
    Oakwood Cemetery                                                  87

  Spring Street
    (A.O. Von Herbulis)                                               58

  Underwood Street
    (G.G. Crossman)                                                    7

  Walden Court
    502 (G.W. Cassilear)                                             101

  Washington Blvd., Arlington
    near Lee Hwy. (R.C.L. Moncure)                                    91
    east of Lee Hwy. (F.M. Thompson)                                  97
      (H.R. Thompson)                                                 97
    at Roosevelt (W.H. Barksdale)                                     76
    at Roosevelt (H.A. Fellows)                                       51
    6831 (G.W. Poole)                                                 11
    6839 (E.T. Fenwick)                                                4
    6857 (C.A. Stewart)                                              325
    at 25th Street (P. Dodge)                                         38

  Washington Street, North
    100 block (Mankin Pharmacy)                                       23
    100 block (E.J. Northrup)                                        112
    200 block (The Inn)                                               96
    222 (Congregational Church)                                      111
    223 (M.S. Hopkins)                                                18
    282 (G.A.L. Merrifield)                                           52
    305 (T.C. Quick)                                                  66
    306 (G.A.L. Merrifield)                                           53
    351 (J.A. Dickinson)                                              21
    353 (G.M. Newell)                                                 92
    384 (The Methodist Episcopal Church)                             103
    at s.e. corner of Columbia St. (E.W. Green)                       67
    at n.e. corner of Columbia St. (G.W. Hawxhurst)                   43
    400 block (T.B. Snoddy)                                           40
    421 (C. Crossman)                                                 24

  Washington Street, South (V.E. Kerr)                               104

  West Street, South
    409 (M.S. Roberts)                                               107

  Wilson Blvd. and McKinley Street, Arlington (A.M. Lothrop)     Front




  A Virginia Village

  Historical Sketch

  of

  Falls Church

  and the

  Old Colonial Church


  PRESS OF J. H. NEWELL

  FALLS CHURCH, VA.

  1904

[Illustration: School House]




TABLE OF CONTENTS

  INTRODUCTORY                                                         1

  THE TOWN OF FALLS CHURCH                                             3

  THE OLD COLONIAL CHURCH                                             33

  FALLS CHURCH IN THE CIVIL WAR                                       62

  CHURCHES AND SOCIETIES, ETC.                                        77

[Illustration: Mr. A. M. Lothrop]




PREFACE.


In preparing this little book it has been the aim of the Editor to
obtain facts of the early history, as well as to set forth what changes
time has wrought in the erstwhile veritable hamlet of years gone by. To
this end he has exerted every effort in the examination of records, that
authentic data only, in describing the old church and village, may
appear in these pages. Aside from the descendants of the old settlers,
the heads of many households in the village of Falls Church have left
kindred and friends in other sections of the country, and identified
themselves heartily in the work of developing and beautifying the
natural advantages of the spot they have selected for the building of
new homes. It is but natural that interest should be taken in the
evidence of their thrift and enterprise, by those whose lives were
linked with theirs in times past, as in the town they have helped to
build up. The attempt has been to join the past with the present, in
reciting incidents of the early days, to show no less the improvements
that have come as the years roll on.

The joint work has been done by Messrs. Chas. A. Stewart, Pickering
Dodge and George M. Newell, Mr. Stewart having collected, edited and
compiled the text, Mr. Dodge the photographic work, and Mr. Newell the
printing.

The Editor is indebted for courtesies and assistance to Mr. H. H. Dodge,
Superintendent of Mount Vernon, a vestryman of Pohick Church, Mr. H. S.
Ryer, stenographer, Mr. F. M. Richardson, Clerk of the Court, Fairfax
Co., and Rev. George S. Somerville, Rector of the Falls Church. Valuable
information was obtained from Howe's History of Virginia, Snowden's Old
Landmarks in Virginia and Maryland, as from the Official Records of the
Union and Confederate Armies.

  M. M. O.

[Illustration: The Lawton House]




A Virginia Village.

Introductory.


Falls Church, while a Virginia village, is thoroughly cosmopolitan.
According to a recent census only about fifty per cent. of its
inhabitants are natives of Virginia, the rest coming from the various
States of the Union or from foreign countries.

Falls Church might properly be called a national village, since its
citizens are chiefly employees of the government, and the interests of
its eleven hundred people naturally center at the National Capitol.

Every geographical section of the United States has here a
representative type of citizen who has chosen this quiet village for a
home. For this and other reasons Falls Church is probably the most
thoroughly American community in the country. This distinction, if
admitted, must come as a natural sequence from its situation as a suburb
of the Nation's capital, from the cosmopolitan character of its society,
and from the fact that so many of its residents are connected with the
Executive Departments as a part of the machinery of representative
government.

The village is situated in a county of the Old Dominion rich in events
of historic interest. In Colonial days, in the times of the Revolution,
as in the days of the civil strife, Fairfax County furnished her quota
of illustrious sons. At Gunston Hall on the Potomac dwelt George Mason,
author of the Virginia Bill of Rights, pronounced the most remarkable
paper of the epoch, and the foundation of the great American assertion
of independence as afterward draughted by Jefferson. In Fairfax County
lived and died the immortal Washington, and his ashes repose in its
soil at his beloved Mount Vernon. During the late civil war every part
of its territory was a battle ground and breast-works thrown up by
contending armies over a generation ago may still be seen here and there
within its borders. At the beginning of our war with Spain twenty-five
thousand volunteer soldiers from a dozen States pitched their tents on a
favored spot in this ancient county, where they were schooled to
proficiency in the art of modern warfare.

The old Episcopal church, from which Falls Church takes its name, still
stands as a monument linking colonial days with the present. Around it
cluster memories of great events in American history, for past its
substantial walls have marched soldiers of all our leading wars since
the day Washington guided the lordly Braddock over the road hard by down
to the time of our recent war with Spain. The old church has passed
through many vicissitudes since Washington worshipped there. It served
as a recruiting station for patriots of the Revolution, then abandoned
as a house of worship for a long period of years; subsequently it was
reopened and throughout the civil war used alternately as a hospital and
a stable by the Union Army. To complete the chain of events in this
connection soldiers enlisted for the Spanish-American war were encamped
near by and pickets of the camp stood guard under the shadow of its
walls.

Falls Church thirty years ago was a mere hamlet of, perhaps, a dozen
houses. It is to-day the largest town in the county of Fairfax and its
population is steadily increasing. Forces are now at work which may
eventually make it the largest town in Northern Virginia, with the
possible exception of Alexandria. Upon the completion of the new bridges
now in course of construction across the Potomac and the improved
facilities for reaching Washington by means of steam roads and trolley
lines, the tide of suburban home-seekers from the capital city must turn
this way, whereby this Virginia village is destined to become a Virginia
city which may bind the old mother commonwealth closer than ever before
to the Federal City and the National government.




The Town of Falls Church.


Falls Church is an incorporated town of about eleven hundred
inhabitants. Endowed by State law with the name of town when a mere
hamlet, it is still "the village" to its citizens. It is situated on the
Bluemont branch of the Southern Railway 9 miles from Alexandria, and 45
miles from Bluemont at the foot of the Blue Ridge. An electric railway
connects it with Georgetown, D. C., 6 miles distant, and it is 13 miles
over the Southern Railway to the business center of Washington. Located
originally in Fairfax County its growing area has overlapped into the
adjoining county of Alexandria, taking within its corporate limits the
extreme southwestern part of what was at one time the District of
Columbia.

It is essentially a village of homes, nearly all of which are set in
ample grounds adorned with rare trees, well-kept lawns, and tasteful
shrubbery and hedges. Its fourteen miles of streets are bordered with
beautiful maples, and in summer the principal avenues are bowers of
living green.

Like the National Capital in its inception, Falls Church is a town of
magnificent distances. Within its corporate limits is room for ten
thousand people without overcrowding.

At an altitude of 300 feet above Washington, summer days here are
pleasant and summer nights cool and sleep-inducing.

The social atmosphere is most refined, and the moral tone of its
citizens cannot be surpassed. No saloons have been allowed in Falls
Church since its incorporation as a town thirty years ago.

The town has an excellent graded public school with a high class of
instructors, besides a number of private schools. Eleven churches,
including three for colored people just outside the town limits, afford
ample accommodation for all church-goers within a radius of many miles.
All the leading religious denominations are represented. The church
edifices are most creditable for a town of its size, and two are fine
examples of church architecture.

[Illustration: Mr. E. T. Fenwick.]

The history of Falls Church begins with the building of the old
Episcopal Church from which the place takes its name, but the town
itself is of modern growth. By a strange series of coincidences the old
church, as well as the town at a later period, has been in touch in
various ways with the National Government since Colonial days.
Washington was a vestryman and at times attended service here. It served
as a recruiting office for patriots of the Revolution. Dolly Madison
took the road for Leesburg leading past this church when fleeing from
the White House during the panic of the British invasion. Capt. Henry
Fairfax went forth with his company of Fairfax volunteers from the Falls
Church to the Mexican war and his body, borne home from far Saltillo,
found a resting place within its churchyard. Skirmishes between Union
and Confederate troops occurred all around its walls, and during the war
of '61 it served the purposes of a hospital for Union soldiers. To make
the chain of incidents complete, a farm near by was chosen at the
outbreak of the Spanish-American war as a training camp for United
States volunteer soldiers.

[Illustration: Presbyterian Church]

Few events of moment in government affairs can occur without directly
affecting some resident of Falls Church, since this little town has its
quota among the officers of the army and navy, in the rank and file of
the army, and on the forecastle of the man-of-war, to say nothing of a
full representation on the rolls of the several executive departments.
When the battle ship Maine was blown up in Havana harbor two jackies
from Falls Church were on board, fortunately escaping with their lives.
After Aguinaldo's capture by General Funston, it was a Falls Church man
who commanded the gunboat which conveyed the captive around the Island
of Luzon to Manila. The brave General Lawton, killed on the firing line
in the Philippine war, had so recently been a citizen of the town that
his death was deplored as a personal loss by his former neighbors.

[Illustration: Mr. W. M. Ellison]

About the middle of the last century there was a large influx of
settlers to Fairfax County from Northern New York and the New England
States, attracted by the milder climate and the cheaper lands then
offered for sale. Among the families who came about that period and
settled nearest the old Falls Church were the Baileys, Birches,
Barretts, Coes, Ellisons, Iveses, Lounsberrys, Munsons, Osbornes, Ryers
and Sherwoods--all familiar names, and many of them or their immediate
descendants now prominent residents of this village.

[Illustration: Mr. George G. Crossman]

Early in the seventies two government clerks drove over the rough and
hilly road from Washington and looked around the little hamlet of a
dozen houses scattered along the Leesburg turnpike from the old brick
church to the railroad station at West End. They were impressed with its
inviting hills as the ideal situation for country residences. The
excellent water from unlimited springs, the cool breezes and pleasing
prospect from the hilltops overlooking hot and dusty Washington in the
distance, persuaded them to make their homes in this ideal place. At
that time the railroad facilities to Washington were most unpromising.
The coaches were little better than the present freight car caboose, the
schedule was unreliable, the trains slow, and a change of cars had to be
made at the Alexandria junction. Such drawbacks did not deter these men
from carrying out their purpose of locating here. They decided to ride
or drive back and forth to their work in the department at Washington.
Others soon followed these pioneers, and a settlement of government
employees was the result. Many of those who followed the first two
pioneers were from New England. They were families for the most part
endowed with all those sturdy qualities of integrity, frugality and
piety, characteristic of their section, and soon the church of their
fathers stood within a stone's throw of the church of the early
Virginians.

Since the day our townsmen, Mr. Charles H. Buxton and Prof. W. W.
Kinsley, the pioneers of modern Falls Church, first settled here, the
increase of population has been slow, but it has been of steady and
sterling growth. The conservatism of the land-owners has given less
rapid growth than were its tone purely speculative. The population as
reported by the United States census for 1890 was 792; the census of
1900 gives the population at 1007, an increase of over 27 per cent.
during the ten years. The tax roll for 1903 shows property of taxable
value of $420,125, an increase of $149,040 over 1890.

[Illustration: Virginia Training School. Miss M. Gundry, Principal.]

Of all those who followed Messrs. Buxton and Kinsley to Falls Church,
who built homes and made the little straggling settlement at the
cross-roads the beautiful village it is to-day, space will not permit
even a brief mention. But there are a number of well-known citizens
still residing here who formed the nucleus of that "department colony"
of thirty years ago, and through whose influence in great measure this
village has become a settlement of government employees. Most prominent
among these settlers of the 70's who are connected with the executive
departments in Washington are Messrs. G. A. L. Merrifield and M. S.
Roberts of the Pension Bureau, Albert P. Eastman of the War Department
and George F. Rollins of the Treasury Department.

[Illustration: Dr. J. B. Gould]

The rate of taxation levied by the town government is 60 cents on the
hundred dollars, 30 cents of which is for school purposes and 30 cents
for all expenses of the corporation. To this must be added the taxes
collected by the county of Fairfax, 75 cents on the hundred dollars,
making a total tax on property holders in the town of $1.35 on each one
hundred dollars of the assessed valuation. Property within the
corporation is exempt from county road tax and district school tax.
Property in that part of the village lying within Alexandria County is
assessed in like manner by the town and the authorities of the latter
county. The tax rate for Alexandria County for the year 1903 on the one
hundred dollars of assessed valuation of personal and real property was:
State tax, 35 cents; county levy, 40 cents, and for court-house
purposes, 10 cents--a total of 85 cents chargeable to the property
owners of East Falls Church, the section of the village in this county.
An additional tax of 50 cents for road purposes and 40 cents for the
district school is levied against taxable property in this county
outside of East Falls Church.

[Illustration: Mr. W. H. Nowlan]

When scarcely entitled to be designated by the name of village, the
little settlement on the Leesburg turnpike known as Falls Church was, by
an act of the General Assembly of Virginia, incorporated as a town. The
act in question was approved March 30, 1875, and on April 13 following
the new town began its career with the following officials duly
installed: Mayor, Dr. J. J. Moran; Clerk, H. J. England; Town Sergeant,
E. F. Crocker; Councilmen, Dr. J. J. Moran, George B. Ives, J. E. Birch,
T. T. Fowler, Isaac Crossman, J. J. Carter, Dr. L. E. Gott.

The act of incorporation was successively amended by the State
Legislature in 1879, 1890 and 1894. Sections 1 and 2 of the act of
incorporation as amended, approved March 2, 1894, read as follows:

SECTION 1. So much of the territories in the counties of Fairfax and
Alexandria, together with all the improvements and appurtenances
thereunto belonging, as is contained in the following boundaries,
to-wit: Beginning at the corner of Alexandria and Fairfax counties, on
J. C. DePutron's farm; thence to the corner of J. C. Nicholson and W. S.
Patton, in Mistress Ellen Gordon's line; thence to the corner of Sewell
and L. S. Abbott on the new cut road; thence to the corner of A. A.
Freeman and Mrs. Henry J. England on the Falls Church and Fairfax Court
House road; thence along centre of said road to centre of bridge over
Holmes Run; thence easterly in a straight line to the northwest corner
of the colored Methodist church on the road leading to Annandale;
thence easterly to the crossing of the Alexandria and Georgetown roads
at Taylor's corner; thence along the north line of said Georgetown road
to the corner of T. M. Talbott and Emma Taylor's estate; thence to a pin
oak tree near Dr. L. E. Gott's spring; thence to a stone on the property
of J. A. and Mrs. J. H. C. Brown, formerly the northeast corner of John
Brown's barn; thence to the crossing of Isaac Grossman's and Bowen's
line on the chain bridge road; thence to the place of beginning, is and
shall continue forever to be a body politic and corporate under the name
and style of the town of Falls Church, and shall possess and exercise
the rights and powers conferred on towns by the general laws of this
State and shall be subject to the restrictions and limitations imposed
by said law in so far as the provisions thereof are not in conflict with
the provisions of this act.

[Illustration: Mr. G. W. Poole]

SEC. 2. Be it further enacted. That the government of said town shall be
vested in a council of nine qualified voters, who shall be elected by
ballot on the fourth Thursday in May, eighteen hundred and ninety-four;
three of whom shall hold that office for one year, three for two years
and three for three years respectively, the same to be determined by
lot. The successors of the three whose terms expire each year shall be
elected annually on the fourth Thursday in May and shall hold their
offices for three years, or until their successors are duly elected and
qualified. The terms of office of all councilmen shall begin on the
first day of July of each year succeeding their election. Any person
entitled to vote in the magisterial districts of Falls Church or
Providence, in Fairfax County, or Washington magisterial district in
Alexandria County, and residing in said corporation and duly registered
by the town clerk, shall be entitled to vote at all elections for
councilmen. The town clerk and two members of the council whose terms of
office do not expire with that year, and who shall be designated by the
mayor, shall conduct such election between the hours of one and seven,
post meridian, and shall make return of the same to the mayor who shall
issue certificates, countersigned by the clerk, to those elected. Tie
votes shall be decided by lot, and contests shall be decided by the
council under the law governing contests for the county offices.

[Illustration: Mr. G. F. McInturff]

[Illustration: Mr. M. E. Church]

Section five provides that the council shall annually levy and collect
necessary taxes for roads, streets, school and corporation purposes,
which tax for all purposes shall not exceed sixty cents on one hundred
dollars without the consent of two-thirds of the resident freeholders of
the corporation. An amendment gives the council the privilege of levying
an additional tax of ten cents on the hundred dollars for the purpose of
establishing and maintaining a high school course in Jefferson
Institute, the public school, whenever requested by the town school
board.

Section eight provides that the "town sergeant shall be the executive
officer of the council, and shall have the authority, jurisdiction and
fees of a constable of Fairfax and Alexandria counties within and one
mile beyond the corporate limits. He shall, unless otherwise provided,
be the town treasurer and as such shall collect all taxes, fines and
licenses, and disburse the same upon the warrant of the council, signed
by the mayor and clerk."

[Illustration: Mr. J. W. Brown, Store and Residence]

The same section makes the sergeant overseer of roads and streets,
giving him the same powers as overseers of roads under the special road
laws of Fairfax and Alexandria counties, his compensation to be fixed by
the council.

Section nine provides that no district school tax and no district road
tax shall be assessed and collected, except by the council, on any
property within the corporation limits.

The last important section of the act of incorporation, which assures
the peace and quiet of this village, is the restriction placed upon the
liquor traffic. It reads as follows:

SEC. 10. That any person applying to the county of Fairfax or the county
of Alexandria for a license to sell liquors of any kind, either as a
keeper of an ordinary or eating house, or as a merchant, within the
corporate limits of the town of Falls Church in the said counties, or
within one mile beyond the limits of the said corporation shall produce
before the courts or boards having control of the issuance of licenses
for the sale of liquor of said counties a certificate of said council of
said town to the effect that the applicant is a suitable person and that
no good reason is known to said council why said license should not be
granted. And the courts of said counties or boards having authority
shall not grant the said license to sell liquors within the limits above
prescribed until and unless such a certificate be given. And under no
circumstances and in no event whatever shall the sale of liquors be
licensed in any part of the corporation where license for the sale
thereof has been prohibited under the provisions of chapter twenty-five
of the Code of Virginia, known as the local option law.

[Illustration: Mr. Geo. L. Erwin]

The town is divided into three wards and each ward is represented by
three councilmen.

THE BOARD OF HEALTH, appointed annually by the council, looks after the
health of the town, with authority to carry out such sanitary
regulations as may be deemed wise and expedient. The Board of Health for
the present year consists of Dr. T. C. Quick, Chairman, and Councilmen
John H. Wells and Elmer I. Crump.

THE FIRE DEPARTMENT of the village was organized in 1898. The officers
are a chief engineer and three fire wardens, one from each ward, and a
captain of the fire company. The equipment for fighting fires consists
of one fifty-five and two twenty-five gallon chemical engines of the
most approved pattern and one fully equipped hook and ladder truck. The
larger engine is kept in the central part of the village while the two
smaller ones are stationed at East Falls Church and West End
respectively. The officers are Chief Engineer, Dr. J. B. Gould; Fire
Wardens--1st ward, Geo. T. Mankin; 2d ward, Edgar A. Kimball; 3d ward,
D. B. Patterson.

[Illustration: Mrs. Emma Garner.]

THE VILLAGE IMPROVEMENT SOCIETY, an important factor in the growth and
development of the village, was organized about twenty years ago. The
chief object of the society has been the improvement and adornment of
the streets and the fine shade trees which emborder the village
thoroughfares everywhere attest the fidelity of its members to the
object in view. In addition to the work of this character the society
has aided in various other ways in the work of improving the village
besides furnishing social entertainments for its members and friends.
About fifteen hundred dollars have been raised by the society and
disbursed to excellent advantage in securing substantial benefits to the
public weal.

[Illustration: Mr. E. C. Hough]

The Village Improvement Society was organized in the fall of 1885, the
first officers being Mr. W. H. Doolittle, President; Rev. D. H. Riddle,
Vice-President; Mr. S. V. Proudfit, Secretary and Mr. A. P. Eastman,
Treasurer.

This society was modeled after the famous Laurel Hill Society of
Stockbridge, Mass., and from a pamphlet published some years ago setting
forth its object we learn that its funds have been expended on roads,
sidewalks and street lamps, for a survey of the corporation, a piano for
the public school and other improvements at the school, for taking the
census and for Arbor Day expenses--a total expenditure up to that time
of about eight hundred dollars. The greater part of the money raised by
the society is from voluntary dues or the proceeds of lectures or other
entertainments. The funds raised in this manner are generally expended
through the town council or in conjunction with appropriations made by
that body.

The first observance of Arbor Day in the State was by the Falls Church
Village Improvement Society, when in 1892 this society instituted the
observance of the day by the public school. Since that date the society
has defrayed all Arbor Day expenses.

[Illustration: Major M. S. Hopkins]

By an ordinance of the town adopted February 8, 1904, the third Friday
in April of each year is designated as Arbor Day, to be observed under
the auspices of the Village Improvement Society for the planting of such
trees, plants or shrubs as it may desire.

The officers of the Village Improvement Society for the present year are
as follows:

President, M. E. Church; Vice-President, Franklin Noble, D. D.;
Secretary, Miss Belle Merrifield; Treasurer, George W. Hawxhurst;
Assistant Secretary, Dr. George B. Fadeley.

The meetings are held on the first Monday of each month, except July and
August, at the homes of the different members.

On these occasions after the adjournment of the business meeting, a
literary and musical programme is provided by the hostess of the
evening. Aside from the matter of business, the social part of these
gatherings is a distinct feature of the society, which serves to keep
alive the interest of its members, bringing together congenial friends
and giving "new-comers" an opportunity to become acquainted with their
neighbors.

[Illustration: Mr. S. H. Thornburg]

PIONEER BUSINESS MEN. Among the most prominent business men of Falls
Church who located here about the time the place was incorporated as a
town, or soon thereafter, may be mentioned Mr. M. E. Church. Mr. Church
is a native of Vermont, and upon settling here engaged in the drug
business; he now conducts a successful real estate, loan and insurance
business. He is also connected with other important commercial
interests, and has been an indefatigable worker in promoting the welfare
of the village.

Mr. George W. Mankin, a native of this State, was one of the early
settlers in the village. He conducted a general merchandise business for
a long period of years, but at present is engaged in the drug business
with his son Mr. Geo. T. Mankin, under the firm name of George T. Mankin
& Co. Mr. Mankin has established as high reputation as a business man
and citizen as had his brother Mr. Charles Mankin, the well known dry
goods merchant, but recently deceased.

[Illustration: Mr. Nathan Banks]

Mr. Wm. M. Ellison, whose father was one of the early northern settlers
in this community, is a successful lawyer and real estate broker. Mr.
Ellison stands high as a business man and citizen, having served his
town as a councilman for many years past and as mayor of the town for
several terms. He was recently re-elected councilman from the West End
ward.

Among other prominent merchants who early settled here are Mr. J. W.
Brown, dealer in hardware and general merchandise, and Mr. George
Gaither, dealer in groceries.

Mr. Isaac Crossman, who came here from Pennsylvania soon after the civil
war, purchased for farming purposes a large block of land which is now
situated almost in the center of the village. The price paid was about
forty dollars per acre. A large part of this land has been divided into
town lots and sold. To indicate the increase in real estate values since
the war, the land of this Crossman property lying nearest the northern
boundary of the village sells for one thousand dollars and upward per
acre.

[Illustration: James A. Dickinson, M. D.]

FEW OLD HOUSES. Practically all the houses of the village are modern,
but there are a few old buildings of historic interest. Among these is
the Lawton house, at one time the residence of General Lawton. This
house was the headquarters of General Longstreet when the place was in
possession of the Confederates soon after the first battle of Manassas.
What was once known as the Star Tavern, now a grocery store, is a relic
of by-gone days. It flourished in the days before the railroad came, and
was a favorite stopping place for travelers over the road from the
mountains leading past its doors to the then important mart, Alexandria.
The place was kept during the civil war by W. H. Erwin, father of our
townsmen Messrs. Walter, George and Munson Erwin.

The old big chimney house situated in the field opposite the Odd
Fellows' Hall was built in Revolutionary times and is probably the
oldest dwelling in this vicinity. It is owned by the venerable John
Lynch, who was the sexton of the Episcopal Church for so many years
before and after the civil war. Mr. Lynch is now a resident of Maryland.

[Illustration: Dr. Geo. B. Fadeley]

THE COLORED SETTLEMENT. The colored people have a settlement a short
distance south of the town limits, consisting of probably a hundred
cottages with a population of between four and five hundred. They have
a school building and three churches and many of the little cottages and
surroundings indicate industry and thrift in the occupants.

HOTELS. The Falls Church Inn, where an old Virginia welcome awaits the
way-farer, accommodates transient and regular boarders. Besides there is
the "Evergreens," a large summer boarding place which has a high
reputation. There are numerous other homes, in or near the village,
where boarders are taken for the summer months.

NEWSPAPER. Falls Church has one newspaper published weekly, called "The
Falls Church Monitor." This paper was first established by Mr. E. F.
Rorebeck, under the name of "The Falls Church News." Mr. M. E. Church is
Editor and Mr. R. C. L. Moncure, General Manager.

[Illustration: Mankin Pharmacy]

EXCELLENT NATURAL DRAINAGE. Four Mile Run, traversing the northeastern
section of the corporation, separates the main part of the village from
all that portion lying in Alexandria County and known as East Falls
Church. This little stream empties into the Potomac four miles below
Washington, whence its name. Where it breaks through the hills at
Barcroft its water-power is used for milling purposes, as in the days
when General Washington's flour mills were situated at or near the same
point. The southern section of the village is drained by Holmes' Run,
which empties into the Potomac just south of Alexandria. The two rapid
little streams named take their rise a short distance to the west of the
village and afford ample drainage for all the territory embraced within
the corporation boundaries.

RAILWAY DEPOTS AND POST-OFFICES. Indicating the wide extent of territory
covered by Falls Church, it possesses two railway depots and three
independent post-offices. The Southern Railway's East Falls Church and
West End stations are one mile apart. The electric railway also has
stations and ticket offices near those of the steam road. The Falls
Church post office is on Broad street in the center of the village. East
Falls Church post office is located at the electric railway station and
West End post office at the West End steam railway station, the former
being one-half mile and the latter about one mile distant from the main
office.

[Illustration: Mr. Charles Crossman]

STREET LIGHTS. The village streets are now lighted by kerosene lamps,
but a movement is already on foot looking toward a better system of
street lighting and it is probable that an electric light plant will be
installed for that purpose within the near future.

A BANK IS NEEDED. The organization of a bank is being considered by a
number of enterprising citizens. There is already a sufficient amount of
banking business transacted by the residents of the village, which is
now divided among the banks located at Leesburg, Fairfax, Alexandria and
Washington, to make such an institution a paying investment from the
start.

THE PARK. Crossman Park, the densely wooded hill over which the electric
road runs from East End to West End, is an attractive spot to nature
lovers. Hundreds of old chestnut trees make it a favorite resort for
picnic parties in summer and nut-hunters in the fall. It is altogether a
charming piece of woodland without undergrowth, and needs no gravelled
walks or other evidences of the hand of man to add to its present
charm.

[Illustration: Dr. J. B. Hodgkin]

Near the park may be seen the stone which marks what was at one time the
western corner of the District of Columbia. It is situated on the land
of Mr. S. B. Shaw and is only a few yards from his residence. On the
west corner is chiseled "Virginia 1791," while on the opposite corner
the words "Jurisdiction of the United States" are still quite legible.

FALLS CHURCH TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH CO. The Falls Church Telephone and
Telegraph Company, of which Mr. M. E. Church is President and General
Manager, is connected with the lines of the Chesapeake and Potomac
Telephone Company of Washington and with the lines of the Southern Bell
Telephone and Telegraph Company.

The stations on this line include Alexandria, Arlington, Ash Grove,
Bailey's Cross Roads, Ballston, Barcroft, Belaire, Bluemont,
Chesterbrook, Clarendon, Chain Bridge, Colvin Run, Dunn Loring,
Dranesville, East Falls Church, Fairfax, Fort Myer Heights, Glencarlyn,
Hall's Hill, Herndon, Hamilton, Kenmore, Lewinsville, Langley, Leesburg,
Merrifield, Oakton, Paeonian Springs, Purcellville, Round Hill,
Rosslyn, Vienna, Wiehle, and West Falls Church. All stations are
equipped with Long-Distance Metallic Circuit Telephones.

[Illustration: Mr. D. O. Munson]

In addition to the telephone line Falls Church has two Western Union
Telegraph offices besides two express offices.

CAMP ALGER. Falls Church has gained a national reputation within recent
years by reason of the establishment near the village of the camp for
volunteer soldiers at the outbreak of the Spanish-American War. This
camp was one of several of the kind established in the Southern States
for the purpose of organizing an army for the invasion of Spanish
territory.

The farm of Mr. C. L. Campbell, about one and a half miles southwest of
the village was selected by the War Department for the army corps to be
assembled nearest Washington, and as soon as the contract was signed for
the lease of the property, troops from fourteen States were hurried here
as fast as recruited.

[Illustration: Mr. Henry Crocker Mr. E. F. Crocker]

The first troops on the ground were the District of Columbia Volunteers.
They were followed by those from Pennsylvania, and later came troops
from Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey,
Ohio, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Missouri, Kansas, Tennessee and
Virginia, all forming the Second Army Corps of the Spanish-American War.

The Second Army Corps was made up of the troops assembled at Falls
Church, to which Major General William M. Graham, U. S. V., was assigned
by orders of May 16, 1898. General Graham assumed command May 23, 1898,
announcing the official designation of the camp as "Camp Russell A.
Alger."

[Illustration: Mr. G. W. Mankin]

The strength of this army corps before the last of May consisted of 922
officers and 17,467 men. In June the number in camp was 1,103 officers
and 26,002 men; in July the strength of the corps was 1,183 officers and
29,747 men. In August the corps consisted of 1,347 officers and 33,755
men, the highest number in this corps before disbandment at the end of
the war.

By orders of May 24, the troops then on duty at this point were
organized into a First Division composed of three brigades of three
regiments each, and by orders of June 9, 1898, the Ninth Massachusetts
Volunteer Infantry and 33rd and 34th Michigan Volunteer Infantry were
constituted a separate brigade.

On June 9th the separate brigade mentioned was assigned as the First
Brigade, 3rd Division. On August 2, 1898, a second brigade was organized
composed of the First Connecticut Volunteer Infantry, and the Third
Virginia Volunteer Infantry.

The First Brigade, consisting of the Massachusetts and Michigan troops,
left Camp Alger for Santiago de Cuba on June 22 and 24, 1898. Troops of
the Second Brigade were returned to their States for muster out on
September 7 and 8, 1898.

The tents of the provost guard pitched at the electric railway terminus
at East End with pickets posted at various street corners made Falls
Church appear like a town under martial law. Under all the circumstances
the conduct of the troops was admirable. The homes of the citizens were
thrown open to the soldiers doing picket duty in the village, and the
ladies of the place vied with each other in contributing to the comfort
of sick soldiers at the camp.

[Illustration: Mr. C. H. Buxton]

The summer of 1898 was a most eventful one in Falls Church. No such
stirring scenes had been witnessed here since the days of the civil war.
Troop trains arriving or departing, drills at camp and practice marches
through the town, martial music from many bands, reveille and taps, all
contributed to impress the town folk with the fact that the country was
at war.

FINANCES OF THE TOWN. The expenses of the town government for the year
ending August 31, 1904, was $2,188.47. The assessed valuation of the
town is $420,125, which is about 50 per cent of the real value. The tax
levy for all purposes is six mills. The levy is divided as follows: For
corporation purposes three mills; for school purposes three mills. The
total receipts for fiscal year 1904 were $2,289.20.

There is no bonded indebtedness. A number of times propositions to bond
the town for school or street purposes have been voted upon but each
time the citizens have decided against incurring any bonded debt.

[Illustration: Mr. Summerfield Taylor]

The following are the officers of the town government:

OFFICERS OF THE TOWN. George N. Lester, Mayor; Henry Crocker, Clerk;
John N. Gibson, Sergeant; R. C. L. Moncure, Corporation Attorney.
Members of Council: 1st ward, Elmer I. Crump, S. E. Thompson, G. A.
Brunner; 2nd ward, E. A. Kimball, Geo. N. Lester, Geo. W. Hawxhurst; 3rd
ward, Thomas Hillier; Wm. M. Ellison, H. C. Birge. Committees, Street
Lamp Lighting: E. A. Kimball, Thos. Hillier, S. E. Thompson. Finance:
Wm. M. Ellison, Chairman, H. C. Birge, Geo. W. Hawxhurst. Board of
School Trustees: J. W. Brown, Chairman, R. J. Yates, Clerk, J. S. Riley.

HEALTH. In the matter of health Falls Church leads. Statistics obtained
by the U. S. Census Bureau relating to the mortality rate show that out
of 341 towns and cities from which returns were received the lowest
death rate for the year ending May 31, 1900, was in St. Joseph, Mo.,
with 9.1 for each 1,000 inhabitants, followed by Portland, Oregon, 9.5,
St. Paul, Minn., 9.7, and Minneapolis, Minn., 10.08. For the same period
there were only 5 deaths in Falls Church, its population then being
1,007. The average annual death rate in Falls Church is about 9.5 per
1,000, only 57 deaths having occurred here between August 17, 1898 and
September 2, 1904, a period of a little over six years.

[Illustration: Mr. A. P. Eastman]

The death rate in the United States for 1900, according to census
returns was 17.8 per 1,000, the rate in cities where such statistics
were gathered being 18.6, and in rural districts 15.4.



For the purpose of comparison the death rate per 1,000 in the following
cities as reported by the U. S. Census Bureau for 1900 will be of
interest. Baltimore, Md., 21.0; New York, N. Y., 21.3; Washington, D.
C., 22.8; Alexandria, Va., 24.2; Norfolk, Va., 25.2; Lynchburg, Va.,
27.7; Richmond, Va., 29.7; Petersburg, Va., 31.1.

IDEAL COUNTRY HOMES. To the generosity of a nearby nurseryman the town
is indebted for its wealth of trees. When the first streets were laid
out Mr. D. O. Munson donated liberally from his nursery stock and to him
is chiefly due the credit for the present attractive appearance of the
tree-lined streets.

The conventional arrangement of the average suburban town has not been
followed in laying out the streets of this village, and even the sinuous
main avenue, lined on either side by a row of full grown maples, adds to
its charm. Beyond the town to the westward the view of rolling plain
and delightful wooded expanse greets the eye, and in the distance the
smoky Sugar Loaf looms up to beckon one to mountain scenes. In an
afternoon drive from the village to the south or west the lover of
nature may find pleasure at every turn.

The healthfulness of Falls Church is proverbial, while its charming
situation, accessibility to the city of Washington and the homelike tone
pervading every part of its area have surprised and attracted all whose
privilege it has been to visit here for the first time. The place to the
tired city man can afford all the enjoyment of retirement and
tranquillity. With an abundance of green lawns, well shaded walks and
drives, pure water, churches, good schools and the necessary stores;
what more could the seeker desire to complete his ideal of a country
home.

[Illustration: Mr. Geo. F. Rollins]

Possessing advantages imperfectly pictured herein, Falls Church welcomes
the jaded fathers and mothers from the city to the place where children
may enjoy life with nature, where the climate, conducive to refreshing
sleep, soothes tired nerves and makes life to such again buoyant with
youthful hopes and joys.

[Illustration: The Old Colonial Church.]

The original church at the Falls is said to have been built in 1709.
This is only tradition, as no satisfactory evidence has been obtained
relating to its exact location or the date when first erected.

Court records establish the fact that there was a church on the present
site of the Falls Church in 1746. On March 20th of that year John
Trammell, in consideration of the sum of fifty shillings sterling,
transferred, by deed of bargain and sale, to the Vestry of Truro Parish
in Fairfax County a certain parcel of land containing two acres "where
the Upper Church now is." John Trammell owned at that time the greater
part of the land upon which the town of Falls Church is now situated. In
June, 1745, he leased to Walter English his plantation of 244 acres
"near the head of the north of Holmes' Run extending to Four Mile Run,
excepting two acres for the use of the church."

[Illustration: Mrs. C. E. Mankin's Store]

The vestry book of Truro Parish commences about 1732. This book is in
the possession of Mr. H. H. Dodge, of Mt. Vernon, a vestryman of old
Pohick Church. Through the courtesy of Mr. Dodge, the Editor was
permitted to make a careful examination of its pages, and to copy from
the minutes of the vestry meetings therein such entries as appeared to
throw any light upon the early history of the Falls Church.

Some apparently trivial entries have been copied, such as the payment of
a sexton's salary for a number of successive years, but the name of the
sexton in such cases has an important bearing upon the subject, when it
is not improbable that the churches indicated as the "Upper Church," the
"New Church," etc., may be the church later designated as "The Falls
Church."

[Illustration: Mr. Charles A. Stewart]

In addition to religious matters, the duties of the church vestry in
these early times embraced many secular affairs. Under the direction of
the Parish Vestry tithes were collected from the land owners, and
"processioners" were appointed by them to survey and establish all land
boundaries within the parish. Such matters as related to the relief of
the poor, the medical care of the sick, charges for burial of the dead,
the maintenance of the blind, the lame, and the maimed, also of
foundlings and vagrants, now looked after by the county government, were
then a part of the duty of the vestry of each parish.

By a general law passed in the Colony in 1667, Act IV, 19th Charles II,
the right was vested in the county courts, when expedient, to set aside
and appropriate not more than two acres of land for church and burial
purposes; ministers' salaries had been fixed the year before at 16,000
pounds of tobacco, or about $650.

As early as October, 1734, John Trammell was paid by the Vestry of Truro
Parish 320 pounds of tobacco for grubbing a place for a new church, for
which Robert Blackburn had drawn plans.

[Illustration: Mrs. Charles A. Mankin]

In November of the following year, Thomas or James Bennitt was paid 150
pounds of tobacco as sexton of the New Church. Record of the payment of
400 pounds of tobacco to James Bennitt, Sexton of the New Church,
appears under date of October 6, 1740, and again May 21, 1745. On the
latter date the Vestry decided to build a church "at or near the spring
nigh Mr. Hutchinson's on the mountain road ... with doors, windows &
seats after the manner of the Upper Church." The deed from Andrew
Hutchinson to the Vestry of Truro Parish for two acres of land upon
which this new church was to be erected, recorded in Liber A. No. 1,
page 464, Fairfax County Land Records, does not show this land to have
been in the vicinity of Falls Church.

On October 12, 1747, the vestry records indicate that Mary Bennitt was
sexton of the Upper Church, supposed to be the same which was called the
New Church before this date, and that Wm. Grove was sexton of the more
recently built church on the mountain road near Mr. Hutchinson's. Mary
Bennitt's salary as sexton of the Upper Church was 400 pounds of tobacco
until 1749, when it was increased to 460 pounds. Her salary was again
raised to 560 pounds in 1752, and so continued until 1755, when James
Palmer became sexton at "Falls Church," so designated in the records.
James Palmer appears to have been succeeded by Gerard Trammell, the
Vestry at a meeting held November 12, 1759, having allowed the latter
560 pounds of tobacco as sexton of Falls Church.

[Illustration: Mrs. Annie Eells]

In February, 1749, the Vestry decided to build an addition to the "Upper
Church," and the contract for the improvement was given to Charles
Broadwater, Gent., who undertakes to complete the work by the laying of
the next parish levy for the sum of 12,000 pounds of tobacco. Mr.
Charles Broadwater was at that time one of the vestrymen, and among
those present at the meeting were George Mason and the Rev. Charles
Green. The vestry meeting held October 25, 1762, elected George
Washington a Vestryman in place of Wm. Peake, Gent., deceased, and at
the same meeting it was ordered that the sexton at Falls Church be
allowed 560 pounds of tobacco for his services.

The Vestry of Truro Parish met on March 28, 1763, at the Falls Church.
Those present were: Henry Gunnell, Wm. Payne, Jr., Church Wardens; John
West, Wm. Payne, Charles Broadwater, Thomas Wren, Abraham Barnes, Daniel
McCarty, Robert Boggers and George Washington.

[Illustration: "Eastover" Mr. Pickering Dodge]

It appears that this meeting was called for the purpose of deciding
whether to repair the old church, then greatly in decay, or to erect a
new building. It would seem that the matter of abandonment of the site
of the old church was also to be acted upon, and the erection of a new
one in a more convenient place.

The Vestry decided that the old church was too dilapidated to repair,
and resolved that a new church be built at the same place. It was
ordered that the Clerk of the Vestry advertise in the Virginia and
Maryland Gazettes for workmen to meet at the church on the 29th of
August next following, to undertake the building of a brick church, to
contain 1,600 feet on the floor, with a suitable gallery. The record of
the vestry meeting of October 3, 1763, shows that 30,000 pounds of
tobacco had been levied toward building Falls Church, and was to be sold
by the Church Wardens for the best cash price obtainable. George
Washington was not present at this meeting; but as an evidence of his
interest in the contemplated improvements he copied in his diary under
date of 1764 the advertisement published in the Maryland Gazette for
"undertakers to build Falls Church."

[Illustration: Mr. W. A. Ball]

The accounts of the Clerk of the Vestry at this date show Truro Parish
credited with 1,807 tithables at 37 pounds of tobacco each, or a total
of 66,859 pounds. The expenditures debited against this amount include
17,280 pounds of tobacco for salary of minister, 560 pounds each to the
sexton at Pohick Church and Falls Church, 500 pounds to the sexton at
Alexandria, 3,000 pounds to Clerk of Vestry, besides sundry payments
toward the support of the indigent of the parish.

The record of the vestry meeting for Truro Parish April 26, 1765, states
that Truro Parish has been divided from Colonel Washington's mill to
John Monroe's and thence to Difficult Run, the upper parish being called
Fairfax. The Parish of Fairfax in which was situated Falls Church or the
"Upper Church" and Alexandria or the "Lower Church" was created February
1, 1765, by virtue of an Act passed the previous year, being the 4th
George III. Falls Church was evidently the Parish Church, and Alexandria
"The Chapel of Ease" as indicated by the comparative emoluments of the
office of sexton.

[Illustration: Mr. T. B. Snoddy]

Earnest efforts have been made to locate the Vestry Book of Fairfax
Parish containing information relating to Falls Church after the
division of Truro Parish in 1765. This book was in charge of the rector
of Christ Church, Alexandria, at the outbreak of the civil war and is
supposed to have been lost or destroyed.

A few facts relating to Falls Church have been gathered from an address
delivered by the rector of Christ Church in 1873 upon the occasion of
the 100th anniversary of the consecration of the latter church.

The Vestry elected for Fairfax Parish March 28, 1765, consisted of the
following: John West, Charles Alexander, William Payne, John Dalton,
George Washington, Charles Broadwater, George Johnston, Townsend Dade,
Richard Sanford, William Adams, John Posey, Daniel French.

Rev. Townsend Dade, ordained by the Bishop of London in 1765, was the
first minister of Christ Church, and it is presumed that as minister of
the Parish he also officiated at the Falls Church. His salary was 17,280
pounds of tobacco, and 2,500 pounds were added to this for the
deficiency of a glebe. He served as minister until 1778.

[Illustration: Dr. T. M. Talbott]

In November, 1766, the Vestry ordered a levy to be made upon the
inhabitants of the parish of 31,185 pounds of tobacco, for the purpose
of building two new churches of brick; one at the Falls, the other at
Alexandria.

The new brick church which the Vestry decided to erect in place of the
old wooden structure was built, according to reliable information, by
Mr. James Wren, for about 600 pounds sterling. Bishop Meade states in
his book on old churches of Virginia, that a most particular contract
was made for him as also for James Parsons, the contractor for the
Alexandria church.

The mortar was to be two-thirds lime and one-third sand; the shingles
were to be of the best cypress or juniper and three-quarters of an inch
thick. The contract for building Falls Church called for a gallery, but
this was never put in.

The Alexandria church was begun in 1767 by James Parsons, 600 pounds
sterling being the contract price. Parsons failed to complete his
contract and the building was finished for an additional sum of 220
pounds sterling by Col. John Carlyle, and formally delivered February
27, 1773.

[Illustration: Mr. C. L. Blanton]

In 1770 a tract of about 500 acres was purchased from Daniel Jennings at
15 shillings per acre, and upon this in 1773 the Fairfax Vestry caused
to be erected a glebe house, or rectory, with a dairy, meat house, barn,
stable and corn house for 653 pounds sterling.

During the Revolutionary War, Falls Church is said to have been the
recruiting headquarters of Col. Charles Broadwater, one of Fairfax's
first patriots.

In 1775 there were in Virginia 95 parishes, 164 churches and chapels,
and 91 clergymen. At the conclusion of the war for Independence only 72
parishes remained, and 34 of these had been deprived of ministerial
help. Churches and chapels had gone to ruin; soldiers having turned them
into barracks or stables.

In 1778 the Rev. Mr. Dade was succeeded as Parish minister by the Rev.
Mr. West, who served for a few months, and he in turn was succeeded by
Rev. David Griffith who it is recorded exercised his ministry with
fidelity in his Parish, preaching both at Alexandria and at Falls Church
from 1780 to 1789. He had been chaplain in the 3rd Virginia Regiment
during the revolution and was to the time of his death, in 1789, a close
personal friend of Washington.

[Illustration: Mr. Geo. W. Hawxhurst]

From 1790 to 1792 Rev. Bryan Fairfax directed the affairs of Fairfax
Parish, selecting for his assistant Rev. Bernard Page. Before the
revolution, being an ardent royalist, he endeavored to dissuade from the
war with the mother country his friend George Washington whose
confidence and esteem he continued to enjoy to the last. Bryan Fairfax
was the son of William Fairfax of Belvoir. He was ordained to the
ministry in 1786 by Bishop Seabury. His title as Eighth Lord Fairfax was
confirmed to him by the English House of Lords in 1800.

The civil functions of the Vestry ceased in 1784. Thereafter, in the
struggle following the disestablishment, having to depend upon voluntary
contributions, many churches succumbed.

It was about this period, or not long after the death of Dr. Griffith in
1789, that Falls Church was abandoned as a place of worship, fell into a
state of dilapidation, and was not used for many years. Chiefly at the
expense of Henry Fairfax, grandson of Rev. Bryan Fairfax, formerly its
rector, the building was repaired and young Mr. Minor, as a lay reader,
organized a congregation of worshippers.

[Illustration: Mr. W. W. Biggs]

In 1827 Bishop Meade visited this church and the description of it in
his book "Old Families and Churches of Virginia" will be of interest.

"The exercises of the Seminary being over, I next directed my steps to
the Falls Church, so called from its vicinity to one of the falls on the
Potomac River. It is about eight miles from Alexandria, and the same
from Georgetown. It is a large oblong building, and like that near Mount
Vernon, has two rows of windows, being doubtless designed for galleries
all around, though none were ever put there. It was deserted as a house
of worship by Episcopalians about forty years ago. About that period,
for the first, and it is believed for the last time, it was visited by
Bishop Madison. Since then it has been used by any who were disposed to
occupy it as a place of worship, and the doors and windows being open,
itself standing on the common highway, it has been entered at pleasure
by travellers on the road and animals of every kind. Some years since,
the attention of the professors of our Seminary, and of some of the
students was drawn towards it, and occasional services performed there.
This led to its partial repair."

[Illustration: Mr. C. C. Walters]

Bishop Meade in this account of his visit to the old church states that
he visited the same day an interesting school for young ladies at Capt.
Henry Fairfax's where he delivered an address to the students. This
school was located near Fairfax Court House. Mrs. Chichester, widow of
the late Major John H. Chichester and a communicant at the present time
of Falls Church, was a pupil of this seminary before the death of Capt.
Fairfax, and recalls the incidents connected with his death in the
Mexican War and his burial near the old church door 57 years ago.

From the time Bishop Meade preached in the old church in 1827 to the
beginning of the war of 1861 much that might be of interest is lost with
the records of the Parish.

The damage to the church by soldiers during the civil war was later
repaired at the expense of the United States Government at a cost of
about $1,300. None of its ancient furniture has been preserved, the gray
stone urn-shaped baptismal font alone remaining.

[Illustration: Mr. J. W. Garner]

The rectors of Falls Church since the civil war have been Bishop Horatio
Southgate, Rev. John McGill, Rev. Frank Page, Rev. J. Cleveland Hall,
Rev. R. A. Castleman, Rev. Dr. John McGill again, and the present rector
Rev. George S. Somerville.

The present vestry book begins November 27, 1873. The vestrymen for the
year 1904 are S. D. Tripp, S. W.; J. T. Unverzagt, J. W.; C. A.
Marshall, Wm. E. Parker, A. H. Barbor, E. A. Ballard.

In connection with the name, it may be of interest to state that,
previous to the Revolution, there being no bishop in Virginia, church
buildings were not consecrated, generally being called after the parish
in which situated, or from some other geographical name; hence the New
Church, the Upper Church, the Falls Church. The simple name suggesting
only its location as first bestowed upon the church near the Falls has
now, after the lapse of years, become irrevocably fixed. Around it
cluster so many memories of the early days that the name "Falls Church"
must continue unchanged to the last.

[Illustration: Town Sergeant John N. Gibson]


Extracts from Records of Vestry Meetings.

     June 10, 1733:

     Capt. Francis Aubrey, towards building the chapel above Goose
     Creek, 2,500 pounds of tobacco.

     October 13, 1734:

     To Mr. Robt. Blackburn, for his plans for building church, 16,750
     pounds of tobacco.

     To John Trammell, for grubbing a place for the church, 320 pounds
     of tobacco.

     To Jos. Johnson, to read at the chapels, 1,300 pounds of tobacco.

     November 18, 1735:

     Jos. Johnson, Clk. of the New Church, 1,000 pounds of tobacco.

     Thos. (?) Bennitt, sexton at the New Church, 150 pounds of tobacco.

     Oliver Roe, sexton Pohick Church, 300 pounds of tobacco.

     August 19, 1736:

     At a Vestry held for Truro Parish this 19th day of August, 1736;
     present Jeremiah Bronaugh, Ch. Warden; Denis McCarty, Augustine
     Washington, Robt. Osborn, John Thurman, Wm. Godfrey, Jas. Baxter,
     and Thos. Lewis, Vestrymen.

[Illustration: Mr J. C. Elliott's Store]

     Mr. Cha. Green being recommended to this vestry by Capt. Augustine
     Washington as a person qualified to officiate as a minister in this
     parish, as soon as he shall receive orders from His Grace, the
     Bishop of London, to qualify himself for the same, it is,
     therefore,

     Ordered by this Vestry that as soon as the said Green has qualified
     himself as aforesaid he be received and entertained as Minister of
     the said parish, and the said Vestry do humbly recommend said Cha.
     Green to the Right Honorable Thos. Lord Fairfax, for his letters of
     recommendation and presentation to his Grace, the said Lord Bishop
     of London, to qualify himself as aforesaid.

     August 8,----:

     At a vestry held for Truro Parish the 8th of August, for appointing
     processioners.

     Ordered, That John Trammell and John Harle procession all the
     patented lands between Difficult Run and Broad Run, and that they
     perform the same sometime in the month of October or November,
     next, and report their proceedings according to law.

     Ordered, That Anthony Hampton and Wm. Moore procession all the
     patented lands between Broad Run and the South Side of Goose Creek,
     as far as the fork of Little River, and that they perform the same
     sometime in the month of October or November, next, and report
     their proceedings according to law.

[Illustration: Miss Ada Rhodes]

     October 6, 1740:

     Nicholas Carroll, sexton Pohick Church, 400 pounds of tobacco.

     Jas. Bennitt, sexton at the New Church, 400 pounds of tobacco.

     John Aubrey, sexton at Goose Creek, 400 pounds of tobacco.

     May 21, 1745:

     At a vestry held for Truro Parish, May 21, 1745, present Rev. Mr.
     Cha. Green, minister, and church wardens and vestrymen.

     Ordered, that a church be built at or near the spring nigh Mr.
     Hutchinson's on the mountain road, of the following dimensions: 40
     feet long, 32 feet wide and 13 feet pitch. To be weather boarded
     with 3/4-inch feather-edge plank, quartered and beaded; shingled
     with 18-inch pine shingles; sawed frame, and frame work ceiled with
     quartered plank, beaded, and floored with 1-1/4-inch plank, with
     proper cornice under the eaves, with pulpit, desk, communion table,
     etc. With doors, windows & seats, after the manner of the Upper
     Church, and all the proper facings and mouldings; and window
     shutters, to be shingled with single tiers, weather boarded with
     eights, and filled with tens or brads; locks and hinges that are
     necessary for the same.

     Ordered, That the Clerk of the Vestry prepare deeds for Mr. Andrew
     Hutchinson conveying two acres of land to this Parish for house of
     the Church to be built thereon, and church yard.

     Hugh Thomas undertakes to complete the aforesaid church and to
     enclose it by the last day of October, next, and to finish and
     complete it by the last day of October, then next following, for
     24,500 pounds of tobacco, to be paid him at two payments, and the
     clerk of the vestry is ordered to prepare articles of agreement and
     bond for the performance of the same.

                                 CHA. GREEN, }
                                 JOHN WEST,  } Ch. Wardens.

    Teste: { Wm. Henry Terrett,
           {   Clk. Vestry.

  October 12, 1747:
    Philip Howell, sexton, Pohick, 400 pounds of tobacco.
    Mary Bennitt, sexton, Upper Church, 400 pounds of tobacco.
    Mary McDowell, sexton, Goose Creek, 400 pounds of tobacco.
    Wm. Grove, sexton, New Church, 172 pounds of tobacco.

  [Illustration: Mr. W. W. Kinsley]

  October 10, 1748:
    Bennitt, clk., 1,200 pounds of tobacco.
    Wm. Chautneys, clk. at the New Church, 1,200 pounds of tobacco.
    Mary Bennitt, sexton at Upper Church, 400 pounds of tobacco.
    Alexander, sexton at Goose Creek, 400 pounds of tobacco.
    Wm. Grove, sexton at New Church, 400 pounds of tobacco.

  October 10, 1749:
    Truro Parish divided.--Upper Parish called Cameron.
    John Wiber Danty, clk. Upper Church, 1,000 pounds of tobacco.
    Mary Bennitt, sexton, Upper Church, 460 pounds of tobacco.

[Illustration: Mr. H. A. Fellows]

     February 19, 1749-50:

     Present: Rev. Mr. Cha. Green, Minister, Mr. Hugh West, Mr. Geo.
     Mason, Mr. Jas. Hamilton, Mr. Cha. Broadwater, Mr. Danl. McCarty,
     Wm. Payne, Abra. Barnes, Thos. Wren, Robt. Boggers, and John
     Turley;

     Ordered: That an addition be built to the Upper Church according to
     the plan produced to the Vestry; and Cha. Broadwater, gent.,
     undertakes to do the same and finish and complete it by the laying
     of the next parish levy, for the sum of 12,000 pounds of tobacco,
     which is then to be levied for him.

     October 9, 1749:

     John Wiber Danty, clk. at Upper Church, 1,000 pounds of tobacco.

     Mary Bennitt, sexton, ditto, 460 pounds of tobacco.

     Jacob Remy, for paling in the New Church, making horse blocks and
     tarring church, etc., our proportionable part, 1,950 pounds of
     tobacco.

     Ordered: That the Vestry do meet the third Monday in February next,
     at the Glebe house, in order to see what repairs are wanted to it
     and the New Church, and the Church Wardens are ordered to give
     notice to workmen to appear there to undertake the work and also to
     repair the Pohick Church and the Vestry House.

     October 8, 1750:

     John Wiber Danty, clk. Upper Church, 1,000 pounds of tobacco.

     Mary Bennitt, sexton Upper Church, 460 pounds of tobacco.

[Illustration: Residence of Mr. G. A. L. Merrifield]

     October 14, 1751:

     John Wiber Danty, clk. Upper Church for 7 months attendance, 581
     pounds of tobacco.

     Mary Bennitt, sexton, Upper Church, 560 pounds of tobacco.

     October 2, 1752:

     John Wiber Danty, clk. Upper Church, 1,000 pounds of tobacco.

     Mary Bennitt, sexton, Upper Church, 560 pounds of tobacco.

     Ordered: That the clerk of the Upper Church read prayers every
     intervening Sunday, and that he be allowed 1,200 pounds of tobacco
     per annum for his salary.

     Mr. Cha. Broadwater and Mr. Abraham Barnes are appointed Church
     Wardens for this parish for the ensuing year.

     October 22, 1753:

     Mary Bennitt, sexton at the Upper Church, 560 pounds of tobacco.

     John Wiber Danty, clerk at the Upper Church, 1,100 pounds of
     tobacco.

     November 22, 1754:

     Wm. Donaldson, Clk. Upper Church, 1,000 pounds of tobacco.

     Mary Bennitt, sexton at the Upper Church, 560 pounds of tobacco.

     September 17, 1755:

     Ordered: That the several tracts of land that have their
     beginnings between Hunting Creek and the Potomac, the road that
     leads from Aubrey's Ferry to the Upper Church, and the road that
     leads from Cameron to the Upper Church, be processioned sometime in
     the month of December, next, and that John Dalton, Thos. Harrison,
     John Hunter and Nathan'l Smith attend to see the same performed,
     and that they take an account of their proceedings therein and
     return the same to the next Vestry after the same shall be
     performed.

     [Illustration: Cottage of Mr. G. A. L. Merrifield]

     November 27, 1755:

     Wm. Donaldson, Clk. at Upper Church, 1,000 pounds of tobacco. James
     Palmer, sexton at Falls Church, 560 pounds of tobacco.

     November 29, 1756:

     Mr. Lumley, Clk. at Upper Church, 1,000 pounds of tobacco. James
     Palmer, sexton, Upper Church, 560 pounds of tobacco.

     November 28, 1757:

     Jas. Palmer, sexton at Falls Church, 560 pounds of tobacco.

     November 27, 1758:

     Jas. Palmer, sexton at Falls Church, 560 pounds of tobacco.

     November 12, 1759:

     Thos. Lewis, Clk. at Falls Church, 1,050 pounds of tobacco. Gerard
     Trammell, sexton, at Falls Church, 560 pounds of tobacco.

[Illustration: Mr. Frank M. Thompson]

     October 25, 1762:

     Ordered that Geo. Washington, Esq., be chosen and appointed one of
     the Vestrymen of this parish in the room of Wm. Peake, gent.,
     deceased.

     Ordered that the sexton at Falls Church be allowed 560 pounds of
     tobacco.

     October 3, 1763:

     At a Vestry held for Truro Parish, October 3, 1763, present: Rev.
     Mr. Green, minister; Wm. Payne, jun'r., and Henry Gunnell, Ch.
     Wardens; Geo. Wm. Fairfax, Thos. Wren, Wm. Payne, Abra. Barnes,
     Cha. Broadwater, John West, and Geo. Mason, Vestrymen.

[Illustration: Mr. Thomas Hillier]

  TRURO PARISH.

  DR.,                                                            Lbs.
                                                                Tobacco.
  To Revd. Mr. Green, minister                                    17,280
  Sexton at Pohick Church (Eliz Parce)                               560
  Sexton at Falls Church (Gerard Trammell)                           560
  Sexton at Alexandria (John Rhoads)                                 500
  John Barry, Clk.                                                 3,000
  John West, Junr. Clk. Vestry                                       500
  John West, Junr. Amt. for providing-Elem'ts etc.                 1,200
  Matthew Bradley, for support of his son                          1,000
  Jos. Wilson, towards support of himself and wife                   500
  Robt. Mills, towards his support                                   630
  Elizabeth Palmer, for support of her idiot son,
    (to be laid up for her use by Church Wrdns.)                   1,000
  John Posey, for 11 parish levies overchd. last year                242
  Edwd. Bates, for his levies the two last years, (Tho' a Patroller)  48
  Gerard Trammell, constable, one levy overchd. last year             22
  Philip Trammell, patroller, one levy overchd. last year             22
  Saml. Russell, towards his support until October, 1764           1,000
  Eliza. Young, for boarding Charlotte Lindsay 2 mo.                      1 Â£. 10 s.
  Saml. Conner, for assistance to Saml. Russell                      500
  Hugh West, Deputy Atty. on acct.                                   913
  Grafton Kirk, on acct.                                             600
  Peter Waggner, Clk. Cur. on acct.                                  837
  Tobacco levied towards building Falls Church,
    to be sold for cash by the Church Wardens
    for the best price they can get                               30,000
                                                                          Â£   s   d.

  Dr. Jas. Lawrie for Mason and Jane Evans                                4   7   6
  "    "     "     " Eleanor Swallow                                 700  5   7   6
  "    "     "     " Sparrow                                              0   7   5
  John Muir, on acct                                                      3  17   4-1/2
                                                                  _____________________
                                                                  61,614 15   9   10-1/2
  To Acct. of Collection of 61,614 lbs. tobc.                      3,696
                                                                  ______
                      Total                                       65,310
  To the fraction in collectors' hands                             1,549
                                                                  ______
                                                                  66,859
                                                                  ______
  Truro Parish Cr. by 1807 tithables at 37 lbs.
  tobc. on acct. poll                                             66,859
                                                                  ______

[Illustration: Mr. J. S. Riley]

     Ordered: That the Clerk of the Vestry proportion the parish levy
     when he shall receive the list of tithables.

     Ordered: That Geo. Wm. Fairfax, & Geo. Washington, Esqs., be
     appointed Church Wardens for the ensuing year.

     Ordered: That the Vestry meet at Alexandria on the third Tuesday
     in March, next, in order to agree with workmen to undertake the
     building a church at or near the old Falls Church, and that the
     Church Wardens advertise the same in the Virginia and Maryland
     Gazettes, to be continued six weeks, and that it will be then
     expected of each workman to produce a plan and estimate of the
     expense.


                                 CHA. GREEN,     }
                                 G. W. FAIRFAX.  }C. W.

    Truly Recorded:
      Teste--John West, junr.,
        Cl. Vestry.


[Illustration: Mr. O. H. Billingsley]

     March 28, 1763:

     At a Vestry of Truro Parish held at the Falls Church March 28,
     1763; present: Henry Gunnell, Wm. Payne, jr., Ch. Wardens; John
     West, Wm. Payne, Chas. Broadwater, Thos. Wren, Abra. Barnes, Dan'l
     McCarty, Robt. Boggers, and Geo. Washington; who being there met to
     examine into the state of the said church, greatly in decay and
     want of repair, and likewise whether the same shall be repaired or
     a new one built, and whether at the same place or removed to a more
     convenient one, and likewise to view the addition built by Mr.
     Chas. Broadwater, and what he hath been deficient in the work.

     Resolved: It is the opinion of this Vestry that the Old Church is
     rotten and unfit for repair, but that a new church be built at the
     same place.

     [Illustration: Mr. A. O. Von Herbulis]

     Resolved: That Jas. Wren and Owen Williams do view the work to be
     done by Mr. Broadwater on the new addition, that is, the price of
     glazing three windows, plaistering the said house, together with
     the materials necessary for the same, and make report to the next
     Vestry.

     Ordered: That the Clerk of the Vestry advertise in the Virginia and
     Maryland Gazettes for workmen to meet at the church on the 29th day
     of August, next, if fair, if not the next fair day, to undertake
     the building of a brick church to contain 1,600 feet on the floor,
     with a suitable gallery & bring plan of the church and price,
     according to the same.

     Ordered: That the Church Wardens employ workmen to repair the
     windows of the north side & the east end of the old church & repair
     the shutters of the new addition.

                                         HENRY GUNNELL,
                                         WM. PAYNE.

     (N. B.) This Vestry was held when I was sick and could not
     attend--above orders were sent as above, signed by Messrs. Gunnell
     and Payne, and I thought fit to record the same, tho in point of
     time it should have been before the last one.

                                         JOHN WEST, junr.

[Illustration: Mr. Andrew M. Smith]

     April 26, 1765:

     Vestry records of this date state that Truro Parish had been
     divided from Col. Washington's mill to John Monroe's and thence to
     Difficult Run, the upper parish called Fairfax.

     February 3, 1766:

     In the record of a Vestry meeting held for Truro Parish at Wm.
     Gardner's the 3rd and 4th of February, 1766, is the following: It
     appearing from an order of the Vestry bearing date the 25th day of
     March, 1763, that there was a deficiency in the work which ought to
     have been done on the Falls Church, by Mr. Chas. Broadwater, and
     that persons were appointed to view the same and report and no
     report appearing upon the records of this parish, it is ordered
     that the Church Wardens do inquire into the same and report
     accordingly. [Geo. Washington was present at this meeting. Ed.]

     [Illustration: Major Jos. T. Hiett]

     July 10, 1766:

     At a Vestry held for Truro Parish July 10, 1766, Mr. Edward Payne,
     one of the Church Wardens, having reported to this Vestry that he
     had applied to the persons formally appointed to view the work
     which ought to have been done on the Falls Church by Mr. Chas.
     Broadwater, and that they denied having any order to view the same
     and refused to concern themselves;

     Ordered: That Thos. Price do view the work done to the Falls Church
     and report what deficiency appears in the same, and that Mr. Edward
     Payne do apply to the Vestry of Fairfax Parish to appoint a workman
     to view the same and that the said do report as aforesaid, and that
     Mr. Edward Payne attend the viewing on behalf of this parish and to
     apply to the said Vestry to appoint one of their members to attend
     the same on behalf of their parish.


     February 23, 1767:

     At a Vestry held for Truro Parish at the Glebe the 23rd day of
     February, 1767, at which Geo. Washington was present, it was
     ordered: A report being made to this Vestry by Jas. Wren and Thos.
     Price, two workmen empowered by a formal order of this Vestry to
     view the work done to the Falls Church and to report what
     deficiency appeared in the same, etc., by which report there
     appears to be a deficiency of 9 Â£ 14 s. 6 p.

     Ordered: That the Church Wardens of this parish apply to Maj. Chas.
     Broadwater, the undertaker of said work, for the said sum, and
     account with the Vestry of Fairfax Parish for their proportion of
     the same when it is received.

     Ordered: That a Vestry House be built at the New Church of the
     dimensions and in manner following * * (Capt. Ed. Payne agreeing
     with the Vestry to build said house).

[Illustration: Mr. George Stambaugh]

     September 9, 1768:

     At a Vestry held for Truro Parish September 9, 1768, at which Geo.
     Washington was present, the following entries appear:

     That the Vestry being convened at the New Church in order to view
     and examine the work, and having done so do find the same completed
     and finished according to the articles of agreement between Capt.
     Ed. Payne, the undertaker * * *

     Ordered: That Col. Geo. Mason pay him the sum of 193 pounds out of
     the money in his hands belonging to the parish the same being the
     last payment due to the said Payne, for the said church. (This was
     probably known as Payne's Church; the church near the Fairfax C.
     H.)

     November 28, 1768:

     At a Vestry held for Truro Parish November 28, 1768, at which Geo.
     Washington was present, it was ordered: That Geo. Washington, Esq.,
     pay to Alex. Henderson the sum of Â£. 8, being the balance of Â£ 9 14
     s., 6 p., received from Maj. Chas. Broadwater for a deficiency on
     the Falls Church.

     February 24, 1784:

     At a Vestry held for Truro Parish at Colchester, the 22nd day of
     February, 1784, John Gibson, gent., is elected for a member of this
     Parish in the room of his Excellency General Washington, who has
     signified his resignation in a letter to Dan'l McCarty, esq.

[Illustration: The Old Church from a war-time Photograph]




Falls Church in the Civil War.


In May, 1861, the Union troops moved into Virginia and occupied
Arlington Heights and Alexandria. On June 1 an engagement at Fairfax
Court House between a company of Union cavalry and Confederate troops
resulted in the loss of six Union and twenty Confederate soldiers. The
Union forces under General McDowell occupied the town of Fairfax about
the middle of July, inaugurating the first Bull Run Campaign. The battle
of Bull Run was fought July 21, 1861.

After the first battle of Bull Run, a systematic plan for the defense of
the National Capital began to take shape. At that time the commanding
heights four miles west of Alexandria and six miles from Washington were
occupied by the Confederates, Falls Church being the headquarters of
General Longstreet.

In October, 1861, the hills were again taken possession of by the Union
troops. The system of works for the defense of Washington on the south
began with Fort Willard below Alexandria, and terminated with Fort Smith
opposite Georgetown, comprising in all twenty-nine forts and eleven
supporting batteries, besides Forts Ethan Allen and Marcy at the
Virginia end of Chain Bridge, with their five batteries of field guns.

[Illustration: Mr. Charles A. Marshall]

Falls Church was the most advanced post of General McDowell's corps,
when on August 3, 1861, a correspondent of Harper's Weekly writing from
here to that paper described the old Church as it appeared at the
beginning of the Civil war as follows:

"On this page we illustrate Fall's Church, Fairfax County, Virginia,
from a sketch by our special artist with General McDowell's 'corps
d'armee.' This is the most advanced post of our army in Fairfax County,
and has been the scene of several picket skirmishes. Falls Church was
built in 1709, and rebuilt, as an inscription on the wall informs us, by
the late "Lord" Fairfax, whose son, the present "Lord" Fairfax, is
supposed to be serving in the rebel army. The title of "Lord," we may
observe, is still given to the representative of the family. The
inscription on the old church reads as follows:

[Illustration: Mr. John S. Garrison]

'Henry Fairfax, an accomplished gentlemen, an upright magistrate, a
sincere Christian, died in command of the Fairfax Volunteers at
Saltillo, Mexico, 1847. But for his munificence this church might still
have been a ruin.'

Service was held in the old church two Sundays since, Rev. Dr. Mines,
Chaplain of Second Maine Regiment, officiating, and most of the troops
in the neighborhood being present."

Captain Henry Fairfax, to whose memory the tablet alluded to was placed
in the old church, was a graduate of West Point. At the outbreak of the
Mexican War, he organized a company called the Fairfax Volunteers
sailing to Mexico with the regiment of Virginia volunteers under command
of Colonel John F. Hamtramck. Upon arriving in Mexico, Captain Fairfax
fell a victim to the climate and died at Saltillo, August 16, 1847. His
body was brought home and buried near the church he loved so well, and
it is thought that the grave which may be seen in the foreground of the
war-time picture of the church on page 62 may be his. The tablet to his
memory has long since been destroyed, and every vestige of his
tombstone has disappeared, but nature, not forgetting his generous gifts
to the old church, has sent up a spire-shaped cedar to mark his grave.
Colonel Hamtramck died April 21, 1858, at Shepardstown, Va.

[Illustration: Mr. F. A. Niles]

The damage to the old church, according to one of the oldest citizens of
the town, Mr. George B. Ives, was done by a company of Union cavalry on
picket duty under command of a captain of the regular army. He permitted
his men to tear out the floor of the church and use it for a stable. The
building might have been damaged beyond repair had it not been for Mr.
Ives and the late Mr. John Bartlett, who reported the matter to General
Augur, the Military Governor of this district, by whose orders the
captain was arrested and further desecration prevented.

About three miles from Falls Church, on the Alexandria turnpike, is
Bailey's Cross Roads, where in November, 1861, President Lincoln
reviewed the Union forces preparatory to the Peninsular Campaign.

The story of the most important events occurring during those stormy
times around the old Colonial church is best told by the "Official
Records of the Union and Confederate Armies," extracts from reports
therein following:

[Illustration: Dr. T. C. Quick]

SKIRMISH AT MUNSON'S HILL AUGUST 31, 1861.

Report of Colonel Geo. W. Taylor, 3rd N. J. Infantry, dated September 2,
1861.

GENERAL: The pickets of the enemy having for some time been extremely
annoying to outposts on Little River Turnpike and on the road leading
from thence to Chestnut Hill, I decided on making a reconnaissance in
person with a small force with the view of cutting them off. Accordingly
I marched with 40 men, volunteers from 2 companies of my regiment, on
the morning of Aug. 31, at 3 a. m., and keeping to the woods arrived
soon after daylight at or near the point, a little beyond, at which I
desired to strike the road and cut them off.

[Illustration: Miss Ellen W. Green]

Here we were obliged to cross a fence and a narrow corn field where the
enemy, who had doubtless dogged our approach through the woods, lay in
considerable force.

While in the corn we were suddenly opened upon by a rapid and sharp fire
which our men, whenever they got sight of the enemy, returned with much
spirit. Scarce two minutes elapsed when I found 3 men close to me had
been shot down. The enemy being mostly hid, I deemed it prudent to order
my men to fall back to the woods, distant about 30 yards, which I did.

At the same time I ordered enough to remain with me to carry off the
wounded, but they did not hear or heed my order except two. With these
we got all off, as I supposed, the corn being thick, but Corporal Hand,
Co. 1, who, when I turned him over, appeared to be dying. I took his
musket, also the musket of one of the wounded and returned to the woods
to rally the men. I regret to say that none of them could be found, nor
did I meet them until I reached the blacksmith shop, three-quarters of a
mile distant.

Here I found Capt. Regur, Company I, with his command. Re-enforcing him
with 25 men of the picket, then in charge of Capt. Vickers, 3rd regiment
N. J. volunteers, with the latter he immediately marched back to bring
in Corporal Hand, and any others still missing. He reports that on
reaching the ground, he found the enemy in increased force, and did not
re-enter the corn field, in which I think he was justified. I should
have stated that quite a number of the enemy were in full view in the
road when we jumped the fence and charged them, and that each man in the
charge, Capt. Regur leading by my side, seemed eager to be foremost; nor
did one to my knowledge flinch from the contest until my order to fall
back to the woods, which fortunately they misconstrued into a continuous
retreat to our pickets. The enemy seemed to have retreated very soon
after, as the firing had ceased before I left.

[Illustration: Mr. Jno. D. Payne]

The 3 wounded men are doing well except one. As near as I can ascertain
there were 3 of the enemy shot down.

The whole affair did not last 10 minutes.

The officers with me were Capt. Regur, Co. I, 1st Lieut. Taylor and 2d
Lieut. Spencer, both of the same company.

All of which I have the honor, respectfully to report.

                                   GEO. W. TAYLOR,
                         Colonel, 3rd Regiment N. J. Volunteers

                                   BRIG. GEN. P. KEARNY,
                                    Commanding Brigade.

[Illustration: The Rectory--Rev. George S. Somerville]

Sept. 12, 1861: Longstreet states that Colonel Stuart has been at Munson
Hill since its occupation by the Confederate troops; that he had driven
the enemy from Mason's, Munson's and Upton's Hills.

Sept. 25, 1861: Reconnaissance at Lewinsville and skirmish near that
place with Stuart's cavalry. Union force 5,100 infantry, 16 pieces of
artillery and 150 cavalry, under Brig. Gen. Wm. F. Smith, commanding at
Chain Bridge.

Sept. 25, 1861: Report of General J. E. Johnston, Headquarters Army of
Potomac to Secretary of War, Richmond, states that an advance guard of
11 regiments of infantry and Colonel Stuart's calvary is stationed at
Falls Church, Munson's and Mason's Hills, at Padgett's and at
Springfield Station on the Orange and Alexandria Railroad in a strong
defensive position.

[Illustration: Dr. L. E. Gott]

Sept. 28, 1861: Affair at Munson's Hill, near Vanderburg's House. Union
force attacked at night on march to Poolesville. Lieut. Col. Isaac J.
Wistar, Commanding California Regiment, reported 4 killed and 14
wounded.

Nov. 16, 1861: In General Orders No. 45, Headquarters Army of Potomac,
Major General McClellan gave Fort on Upton's Hill name of Fort Ramsay.

Nov. 18, 1861: Skirmish on road from Falls Church to Fairfax Court
House, about a mile south of Falls Church, between a detachment of 1st
Va. Cavalry under Lieut. Col. Fitz Lee, and 14th N. Y. S. M., under Lt.
Col. E. B. Fowler. Union loss 2 killed, 1 wounded, 10 missing.
Confederate loss, Private Tucker killed and John C. Chichester, Lee's
guide, mortally wounded; 2 slightly wounded. Col. Lee's horse killed
under him during action.

Sept. 2, 1862: Skirmish near Falls Church. F. J. Porter, Major General
Commanding, Headquarters Army Corps, Hall's Hill, in his report to
General Marcy states that a battery supported by cavalry suddenly
appeared on Barnett's Hill and opened fire upon Pleasanton at Falls
Church, while dismounted cavalry fired upon and killed 3 of his mounted
pickets, who, armed only with sabers and pistols, could not contend with
the enemy protected by timber. Pleasanton replied with his battery but
the shots fell very short. The enemy supposed to have come from
direction of Hunter's Mill returned toward Vienna. He states that the
country beyond his picket lines affords every facility for such attacks,
and that the commanding general must expect them to be frequent so long
as the enemy continues in large force in his front and wishes to divert
attention from other movements, that from the opposite hills his camp
and movements are open to view of the enemy.

[Illustration: Mr. R. J. Yates]

Sept. 4, 1862: Brig. Gen'l A. Pleasanton from his camp near Fort Albany,
Va., in his report to Brig. Gen. R. B. Marcy, chief of staff, written at
5 a. m., states that he is about to be off with the sixth cavalry and
two other companies for Falls Church where he expects to make his
headquarters and from whence he will scout as directed. He suggests
that the telegraph be extended to Falls Church and asks that supplies
for his command be forwarded by railroad to a point opposite Falls
Church.

[Illustration: Mr. S. A. Copper]

At 8:30 a. m., his message states that from reports received by him, the
impression is that the enemy is going to cross the Potomac at Walker's
Landing.

At 12: 45 p. m., he reports from Falls Church that the enemy's advanced
pickets, on the Leesburg and Georgetown turnpike are three-fourths of a
mile this side of Difficult Creek, and that a regiment of Mississippi
cavalry, the Jeff Davis Legion, is at the bridge over the creek.

At 1:30 p. m., from Falls Church his dispatch to the chief of staff
states that the squadron on the Vienna road reports the enemy to be
approaching from that direction in some force; that one of his men had
been badly wounded in a skirmish. Gives it as his opinion that the enemy
is only making a show of force to conceal his movements on the upper
Potomac.

Sept. 4, 1862: Major General F. J. Porter from Headquarters Fifth Army
Corps at Hall's Hill, sends a message at 4:30 p. m., to Major Gen'l
McClellan stating that Gen'l Morell from Minor's Hill reports that the
enemy has begun an attack on the Union pickets, with artillery, infantry
and cavalry.

[Illustration: Mrs. J. L. Auchmoody]

Sept. 4, 1862: At 6:45 p. m., from Upton's Hill, Brig. Gen'l J. D. Cox,
commanding division, makes the following report to A. V. Colburn, Ass't
Adjutant General:

"The firing upon General Pleasanton's command was from, possibly, three
pieces of light artillery. The small-arm fighting was confined to the
head of the enemy's column, deployed as skirmishers, with some
dismounted men or infantry, it is not certain which. The pickets of
Pleasanton's command, Eight Illinois and Eight Pennsylvania Cavalry,
skirmished with them. We lost 2 men shot. The force of the enemy did not
come beyond the edge of the woods, one and a half or 2 miles above Falls
Church, and no large numbers were actually seen. The reports sent by
General Pleasanton were necessarily those brought in by his men. A
regiment of cavalry, with two light pieces, rapidly handled, would
account for all the demonstration I could see with my glass, but there
may have been more. General Pleasanton's cavalry being ordered away, we
shall not have cavalry to scout the country till General Buford arrives.
Scouts report all quiet toward Fairfax and Little River pike."

[Illustration: Mr. Samuel Luttrell]

Aug. 16, 1863: Skirmish at Falls Church; no circumstantial reports on
file.

June 23-24, 1864: Skirmishes near Falls Church and Centreville, Va.
Extract from report of Col. Charles R. Lowell, Jr., 2nd Mass. Cavalry,
commanding cavalry brigade. Headquarters cavalry brigade near Falls
Church, Va., June 24, 1864.

A patrol from the camp of 16th N. Y. Cavalry consisting of 4 men was
fired upon last evening between the pike and the railroad by a party of
about 10 men and 2 of the patrol captured; the other two brought word to
Annandale, and Col. Lazelle sent out a party of 40 men under Lieut.
Tuck, 16th N. Y. Cavalry in search of attacking party. Party halted one
and a half miles beyond Centreville to feed. Party of about 60 of the
the enemy dashed in upon them. Men demoralized and panic stricken
scattered in all directions. Lieut. Tuck only one as yet, 6 p. m., who
has reached camp; remainder either wounded, prisoners, or straggling.
After Tuck had been sent out a citizen reported to Col. Lazelle that he
had been stopped by Mosby last evening near Centreville and detained
under guard till morning, and that he had seen small parties numbering
about 100 men. Col. Lazelle, upon receiving this information, sent out
150 men to support Tuck under Major Nicholson. This party started at 8
a. m. At 2 p. m., Tuck returned, reporting attack as above at 11 a. m.
He was started by Col. Lazelle with a party of 15 men to overtake party
of 150 and put them on trail. Major Forbes with 100 men and ambulances
has been sent out this evening to place of surprise to pick up
stragglers and any wounded, and support Major Nicholson if Mosby's force
is reported more than 60 men.

[Illustration: Mrs. C. Larner]

June 25, 1864, 11 a. m.: Major Forbes just returned from Centreville and
a clearer account of affairs can be given. Mosby with 200 men came down
Thursday evening to near Union Mills and an iron gun drawn by 6 horses.
Squad of Kincheloe's men took 2 of Col. Lazelle's patrol. Mosby returned
to Union Mills Friday morning and marched his column back through
Centreville about 10:30 a. m. Tuck's men feeding horses on newly cut
hay, men in cherry trees, some asleep, one picket sitting on fence.

Mosby learned of Tuck and sent part of his men rapidly on. Shot man on
post, causing panic among the rest.

[Illustration: Mr. W. H. Barksdale]

July 18-21, 1864: Scout from Falls Church, Va. Col. Henry M. Lazelle,
16th N. Y. Cavalry commanding brigade, writing under date of July 21,
1864, from headquarters cavalry brigade near Falls Church, Va., to
Lieut. Col. J. H. Taylor, Assistant Adjutant General and chief of staff,
reports return to camp of a portion of a party of 10 men sent under
charge of 2d Lieut. Gray, 13th N. Y. Cavalry on Monday evening last.
About 4 o'clock a. m. to-day, while between Sangsters and Fairfax
Station was ambuscaded by a party of from 50 to 60; loss 5 men taken
prisoners and 7 horses.

[Illustration: Mr. Wm. B. Wright]



Churches and Societies.


THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH. One of the most attractive church edifices in
the village of Falls Church is the Presbyterian Church, a picture of
which is shown on page 5.

It was built in 1884, being formally dedicated in October of that year.
The building now used by the Sunday School of the church, which was
built before the civil war by Dr. Simon J. Groot, as a hall for
religious and secular public meetings, was purchased and formally
dedicated as a church November 20, 1866.

Since that date the pastors have been Rev. H. P. Dechert, who resigned
in 1870, Rev. David H. Riddle, Rev. D. L. Rathbun and Rev. R. A.
Davison, D. D.

The Rev. Mr. Riddle's pastorate extended over a period of seventeen
years, and it was during his term that the present handsome stone church
was built.

The Rev. Mr. Rathbun was pastor from 1890 to 1900.

[Illustration: Mr. J. W. Seay]

The church has a large membership and the congregation continues to
increase.

The Sunday School connected with the church, of which Mr. E. C. Hough is
Superintendent, is one of the largest in the village.

DULIN CHAPEL M. E. CHURCH, SOUTH. After the close of the war of 1861-65
the Methodists of Falls Church found themselves without a house of
worship, the church in which they had formerly worshipped having been
destroyed by soldiers of the Union Army while encamped close by. For a
time they held services in the "Old Falls Church," the present Episcopal
Church of the town until some of the leading members, desirous of having
a house of worship of their own, took steps towards the erection of the
present building near the site of their old church, among them being the
late H. W. Febrey, John E. Febrey, B. F. Shreve, Jos. E. Birch and Wm.
Dulin.

Mr. Wm. Dulin gave the site and soon there was erected thereon a church
which was dedicated in the spring of 1869. The parsonage was built a few
years later. The church as first built was remodeled in 1893. The
church officers are as follows: W. H. Torreyson, W. H. Shreve, R. W.
Birch, W. S. Tucker, W. M. Ellison, Trustees; W. H. Shreve, F. L. Birch,
J. H. Brunner, E. J. Febrey, W. M. Ellison, Stewards.

[Illustration: Mr. J. H. Wells]

COLUMBIA BAPTIST CHURCH. Columbia Baptist Church was organized in 1857
by Rev. Hiram Reed, and up to the beginning of the civil war had about
300 enrolled on the church books as active members.

Services were discontinued during the war and the church used as a
hospital by the Union troops. Later it was used as a public school for a
number of years prior to 1870. In that year the State Mission Board sent
the Rev. W. S. O. Thomas to reopen the church as a place of worship.
Rev. Mr. Thomas was succeeded by Rev. Hugh McCormick, now in Porto Rico.

The Mission Board assisted the church liberally in a financial way up to
the time Rev. Mr. McCormick assumed charge, since which time the
congregation has been self-supporting.

The following pastors have occupied the pulpit for various terms since
the church was first organized: Rev. Hiram Reed, Rev. Hugh McCormick,
Rev. George E. Truitt, Rev. G. W. T. Noland, Rev. J. B. Clayton, Rev. J.
T. Barbor, Rev. J. W. Kincheloe and Rev. A. W. Graves.

[Illustration: Mr. M. H. Brinkerhoff]

The church at this time has a membership of 103 and is in a more
prosperous condition than at any time since the war.

The officers of the church are: Deacons: E. J. Galpin, Thomas Hillier,
Frank Williams. Clerk, Thomas Hillier; Treasurer, Mrs. Geo. W.
Hawxhurst; Trustees, E. J. Galpin, Geo. F. McInturff, Elijah Berry.

The Sunday School has about forty scholars on the rolls, the officers of
which are: Mr. R. S. Ilsley, Superintendent, Mr. Van Quick, Assistant
Superintendent, Miss Emma Seaman, Organist.

THE FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH. The First Congregational Church of
Falls Church, Va., was organized and duly recognized by Council May 30,
1876, the Congregational Society having first been organized in October,
1875.

Services were held in the Baptist Church up to 1879 when the present
attractive church building was erected. It is of Gothic design, with
main audience room seating 300, and a Sunday School room in the rear. A
fine toned bell was purchased in 1881.

[Illustration: Mrs. A. V. Piggott]

At its organization 25 members united in forming the church. At that
time it was thought by some that another church in such a small town
would result in dissension among the Christian people. Such was not the
intention of this church. At its first annual meeting a resolution was
unanimously adopted expressing "good wishes toward every church of
Christ in this place, and its readiness and desire to co-operate with
them in every good work." The other churches responded in a Christian
spirit, and the pastors and churches of this town have always cordially
worked together in the cause of the Master.

The first minister engaged by the Society was Rev. J. W. Chickering, Jr.
The first regular pastor of the church was Rev. L. B. Platt, who
supplied the pulpit from November, 1877 to July, 1880, followed by Rev.
A. L. Park, November, 1881 to December, 1882. Rev. Wm. W. Jordan, May,
1883 to October, 1885. Rev. F. W. Tuckerman, September, 1886 to May,
1890. Rev. R. E. Eels, acting pastor, February, 1891 to December, 1891.
Rev. J. H. Jenkins, January, 1893 to July, 1897. Rev. Arsene
Schmavonian, May, 1899 to May, 1901. Rev. Franklin Noble, the present
minister was called to the church December, 1901.

[Illustration: Mr. G. B. Ives]

The following are the officers of the church: Trustees, Geo. F. Rollins,
M. H. Brinkerhoff, Geo. W. Poole; Treasurer, Dr. J. B. Gould; Clerk,
Frank H. Eastman; Superintendent Sunday School, Miss Gertrude Nourse.
Deacons: Geo. F. Rollins, G. A. L. Merrifield and Albert P. Eastman.
Deaconesses: Mrs. Albert P. Eastman and Mrs. Helen C. Raymond.

ST. JAMES ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. St. James Roman Catholic Church, Falls
Church, of which Rev. Father Tierney is Pastor, was built in 1902 and is
one of the finest specimens of Gothic architecture in Northern Virginia.
It is built of Virginia sand stone taken from a quarry near the village.

The old church, a wooden structure built about 26 years ago, had become
too small for the growing congregation, and through the munificence of
Mrs. Thomas Ryan of New York City, the present handsome and imposing
edifice was erected at a more convenient point.

[Illustration: Mr. Nathan Lynch]

Father Tierney has been in charge of this parish for about ten years and
under his ministration the church has grown in numbers and influence,
the membership at present being about 325.

The church and parsonage was designed and built under the supervision of
Mr. A. O. Von Herbulis, an architect of wide reputation and a resident
of this village.

THE METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH. The Methodist Episcopal Church, situated
on Washington Street, was built in 1875 chiefly through the aid of the
late Isaac Crossman. He donated the site for the building and later
contributed liberally to its support.

Rev. D. C. Hedrick is the present pastor, to whom the congregation has
become much attached during the brief time he has been stationed here.
The following are the officers of the church: Trustees, J. M. Thorne, M.
E. Church, W. Y. Swiggett, S. S. Luttrell, W. W. Biggs, V. E. Kerr,
Henry Crocker, and Geo. G. Crossman; Stewards, M. E. Church, J. M.
Thorne and W. Y. Swiggett.

[Illustration: Mrs. Mary G. Sims]

CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOR SOCIETY. Meets every Sunday at 6:15 p. m., at the
Presbyterian Chapel. Officers: A. M. Smith, President; Miss Raydelle B.
Shaw, Vice President; Jesse Varcoe, Secretary; Miss Emma Seaman,
Corresponding Secretary; Milton Thorne, Treasurer.

EPWORTH LEAGUE OF THE M. E. CHURCH. President, W. W. Biggs; Vice
Presidents, Miss Ida N. Ball, Mrs. V. E. Kerr; Mrs. M. H. Luttrell, Dr.
S. S. Luttrell, Miss Pearl Luttrell; Secretary, Walter S. Kerr;
Treasurer, Mrs. J. M. Thorne; Organist, Miss Pearl Luttrell.

JEFFERSON INSTITUTE. Enrollment session 1904-5 147. Principal, Prof. E.
C. Sine; Teachers, Miss Fannie Weadon, Miss Ruth Dyer, Miss Ida N. Ball.

OAKWOOD CEMETERY. Oakwood Cemetery is beautifully situated in the
Eastern part of the town on the site of the old Methodist Church. It
contains about 5 acres enclosed with a neatly trimmed evergreen hedge.
The officers of the cemetery association are Wm. N. Febrey, President;
E. J. Northrup, Secretary; G. A. L. Merrifield, Treasurer; M. E. Church,
Superintendent.

[Illustration: Mr. A. E. Rowell]

KEMPER LODGE NO. 64, A. F. & A. M. Chartered December 3, 1896. Meets
second and fourth Fridays in each month. Membership about 60. Officers:
W. A. Ball, W. M.; A. H. Barbor, S. W.; J. R. Hagan, J. W. Past Masters:
John H. Fisher, M. E. Church, G. T. Mankin, Dr. Geo. B. Fadeley, Dr. T.
C. Quick, Geo. M. Newell.

THE INDEPENDENT ORDER OF GOOD TEMPLARS. Pioneer Lodge No. 1 of Good
Templars was organized on April 27, 1887. This lodge meets every Tuesday
night at Odd Fellows Hall. The lodge has a membership of eighty-five in
good standing. The object of the order is prohibition of the liquor
traffic by the will of the people, and no saloons have been allowed here
for over thirty years, largely attributable to Pioneer Lodge which keeps
public sentiment alive on the subject. The present officers of the lodge
are: Henry Hawxhurst, Chief Templar; Jesse Varcoe, Past Chief Templar;
Miss Laura Summers, Secretary; George W. Hawxhurst, Financial Secretary;
Mrs. J. H. Garretson, Treasurer; J. H. Marr, Marshal; Miss Raydelle B.
Shaw, Chaplain; Miss Catharine Foley, Vice Templar; G. C. Kesterson,
Guard; Walter Kerr, Sentinel; Mrs. M. M. Erwin, Organist; J. H.
Garretson, Lodge Deputy; Geo. W. Hawxhurst, Superintendent of Juveniles.

Falls Church is also headquarters of the Grand Lodge of the State. Since
1887 the office of Grand Secretary has been located here, Mr. George W.
Hawxhurst, who has filled the office for the past thirty-two years,
being a resident of the town.

[Illustration: Dr. S. S. Luttrell]

VIRGINIA STATE AUDUBON SOCIETY. The Virginia State Audubon Society was
organized at Falls Church, September 29, 1903. The objects of the
society are to protect our native birds, to discourage the buying and
wearing for ornamental purposes of the feathers of all birds other than
the ostrich and domesticated fowls, and to promote a popular interest in
bird study. The present officers are: President, John B. Henderson; 1st
Vice President, Wm. C. Pennywitt; 2nd Vice President, Nathan Banks, and
Secretary-Treasurer, E. C. Hough. Regular members pay $1.00 a year as
dues. Children under 16 pay no dues but sign pledge cards agreeing not
to harm birds or their eggs. The society has had printed for free
distribution a digest of the recent game law.

[Illustration: Oakwood Cemetery]

INDEPENDENT ORDER OF ODD FELLOWS. Falls Church Lodge No. 11, I. O. O.
F., was organized October 24, 1890, and has a membership of
seventy-four. The lodge owns its hall, a large brick structure, located
near the corner of Broad and Little Falls streets, in the center of the
town. The building which was erected in 1891 contains a handsome lodge
room on the second floor and a spacious public room on the first floor.
The order makes a specialty of giving attention to its members during
sickness and pays funeral expenses on death. The lodge numbers among its
members some of the most influential citizens of the town. Its present
officers are as follows: John D. Payne, N. G.; T. O. Marr, V. G.; J. H.
Garretson, Sec'y; J. H. Brunner, F. S.; George W. Hawxhurst, Treasurer;
Rev. W. H. Wolffe, Chaplain; Dr. Geo. B. Fadeley, R. S. to N. G.; Thomas
Hillier, L. S. to N. G.; Geo. A. Brunner, S. P. G.; W. H. Nowlan, R. S.
to V. G.; C. F. Newman, L. S. to V. G.; Ray Marcey, O. G.; Walter
Marcey, I. G.; W. Maben, Warden; Webster Donaldson, R. S. S.; Chauncey
Seay, L. S. S.; T. S. Luckett, Conductor.

R. E. LEE CHAPTER DAUGHTERS OF THE CONFEDERACY. This chapter was
organized in June, 1898. Its object is to assist needy widows and
orphans of Confederate soldiers. The chapter has 43 members, the
officers for the present term being as follows: President, Mrs. G. J.
Head; Vice President, Mrs. George G. Bolling; Secretary, Mrs. A. H.
Barbor; Treasurer, Miss Nellie Green; Historian, Mrs. Jonas Unverzagt;
Registrar, Miss Georgia Head.

[Illustration: Mr. H. N. Ryer]

FALLS CHURCH LIBRARY. The Falls Church Library, organized 1899, is
conducted by the Library Association under the supervision of a Board of
Control. The library building is located on Columbia street near
Washington street.

Officers: Pickering Dodge, President; Wm. A. Ball, Secretary; Librarian,
Geo. W. Hawxhurst.

PATRIOTIC ORDER SONS OF AMERICA. Washington Camp No. 1, organized in
1902. Officers: C. C. Walters, Past President; H. H. Moreland,
President; Lester Brunner, Vice President; G. W. Moreland, M. of F.; M.
M. Erwin, R. S.; E. L. Payne, F. S.; B. F. Elliott, Conductor; Upton
Galisher, Inspector; W. H. Erwin, Guard; J. H. Brunner, Chaplain;
Trustees, A. H. Barbor, C. C. Walters and J. H. Brunner.

[Illustration: Dr. M. E. Church.]

Mr. M. E. Church is a native of the State of Vermont, but has been a
resident of Virginia for nearly twenty-five years, and of Falls Church
for the past eighteen years, during which period he has been closely
identified with every public movement. He it was who first established
telephonic communication between Falls Church and Washington City over
sixteen years ago, and from a small beginning has built up an extensive
telephone system extending over Fairfax and Alexandria Counties and
reaching to Bluemont in the Blue Ridge Mountains. The company operating
this system is incorporated under the name of the Falls Church Telephone
and Telegraph Company, and Mr. Church is the chief stock-holder,
President and General Manager. Exchanges are operated at Falls Church
and Rosslyn.

Mr. Church has brought to his adopted home a large share of the energy
and sterling business qualities for which his native state is noted.
This has been manifest from the moment he set foot on the soil of his
adopted state. He first engaged in the drug business in Falls Church
which he successfully conducted for over twelve years, during which
period he trained several young men who have since been conducting a
successful business of their own. The esteem in which he was held by his
fellow-pharmacists in the state was evidenced by his unanimous election
to the office of President of the State Pharmaceutical Association, a
position which he filled with great credit, as well as many other
positions of trust and responsibility. He still remains an active and
esteemed member of that Association.

[Illustration: Miss B. C. Merrifield]

About fifteen years ago he entered into the real estate, loan and
insurance business, and notwithstanding his lack of previous training or
experience, has been eminently successful along that line, and to him
more than any other one man, is due the growth and development of our
beautiful little village, as he has been untiring in his efforts to
locate here in homes of their own a desirable class of moral and
intellectual citizens. One of his first ventures along this line was
the organization of the Falls Church Improvement Company, of which he
was general manager and a large stock-holder. His associates in this
company were: Hon. Schyler Duryee, then Chief Clerk of the U. S. Patent
Office; Judge A. A. Freeman, now of New Mexico, and others. This company
successfully developed the "Sherwood Sub-Division," one of the first
sub-divisions put on the market in Fairfax County.

[Illustration: Mr. R. C. L. Moncure]

In the loan business Mr. Church has been particularly successful, by his
conservative investments and faithful fidelity to the interests of his
clients, both investors and borrowers have learned to place implicit
confidence in his judgment and integrity and as a result, he has been
able to bring together those who wish to borrow money with which to buy
or build a home, and those who wish to invest funds, thereby enabling
the worthy home-seeker to own his own home, making of him not only a
prominent but more interested and desirable citizen.

While not an Attorney at Law Mr. Church's experience and familiarity
with the real estate law, titles and values of land in Fairfax and
Alexandria Counties have made his services and opinions much sought
after as an expert in such matters, both by the courts and private
parties. Persons seeking homes or investments in the suburbs of
Washington will do well to consult him, as his judgment can be relied
upon in real estate matters, and his integrity is unquestioned.

[Illustration: Mr. Geo. M. Newell]

In the development of Falls Church Mr. Church has been indefatigable,
and has been personally identified with every progressive movement. In
addition to his drug-store, real estate and telephone business, he has
been largely interested in procuring better transportation facilities in
the way of electric railroads; he has built many houses in the town and
organized several companies for the purpose of developing the trade and
industries of this section. He is at present engaged in organizing an
electric light company for the purpose of furnishing light and power to
Falls Church and the country intervening between that and Washington; he
has great faith in the future of the town and is not afraid to invest
his money in home enterprises.



"EVERYTHING IN THE MUSIC LINE"

[Illustration:

The LEADING

Piano, Organ & Music House

In the National Capital is

Sanders & Stayman Co.

1327 F Street N. W. WASHINGTON, D. C.]

Baltimore Store,

Academy of Music Building

PERCY S. FOSTER,

Manager Washington Warerooms



"Wonder What Mertz Will Say To-Day?"

Store closes at 6 p. m. daily: 9 p. m. Saturdays

Satisfaction!

[Illustration]

That's the foundation of the success of Mertz-tailorings. Every suit
made in the "Mertz-way" is guaranteed to satisfy. This special offers
you a chance to prove that.

Fall and winter suits to order in the "Mertz-way" of Mertz's exclusive
"Royal" Black Thibet and "Royal" Black, Blue and Brown Worsted fully
guaranteed--for ... $10

Mertz and Mertz Co.

906 F Street, N. W. WASHINGTON, D. C.



[Illustration: Mr. H. C. Birge]



  Established 1861

  Mason, Fenwick & Lawrence

  PATENT and
  Trade-Mark Lawyers,
  Solicitors and Experts.

  Practice before the U. S. Patent Office and Courts
  Guide Book on Patents free on Application

  602 F STREET, N. W.                            WASHINGTON, D. C.



[Illustration: The Inn]



  THE UNITED REALTY CO.

  612 14TH ST., N. W., WASHINGTON, D. C.

  Is composed of about forty people working together
  for mutual interest and doing a general

  Real Estate, Loan and Insurance Business

  Our general business is buying and selling all
  kinds of real property on commission, but we make
  a specialty of trading country and suburban property
  for city property and exchanging improved
  property for unimproved property.

             { _Bargains for Buyers_,
   We Find   { _Trades for Traders_,
             { _Investments for Investors_.

  Homes in the City, Farms in the Country, Investments Everywhere.
  Don't Buy or Sell without Seeing us First.

  R. T. CHATTERTON, Manager.



[Illustration: Mr. Henry R. Thompson]

  Established 1873.

  M. Goldsmith & Son,
  .. JEWELERS ..

  Our Xmas Stock is Complete and we invite inspection. Thousands of
  Suggestions are Here and Gift Buying is Made Easy. Goods laid
  aside for future delivery. Select now while Stock is Complete.

  911 Pennsylvania Ave.          ::            Washington, D. C.

  Country Real Estate

  Houses--Lots--Farms

  E. W. PIERCE, Vienna, Fairfax County, Va.

  Fifteen miles from Washington        Steam and Electric Roads



[Illustration: Columbia Baptist Church]



  John N. Gibson

  DEALER IN

  Oak, Chestnut and Pine Lumber
    Plastering, Laths, Pine and
      Chestnut Shingles, and
        Framing Lumber a
          Specialty .. .. .. ..

East Falls Church, Va.



[Illustration: Dulin Chapel Methodist Episcopal Church (South)]



  LOAN NEGOTIATED AND ABSTRACTS
  OF TITLE FURNISHED

  FARMS, TOWN LOTS AND HOMES
  FOR SALE

  Wm. M. Ellison

  ATTORNEY AT LAW
  AND REAL ESTATE AGENT

  PRACTICING IN ALL THE COURTS IN THE STATE OF VIRGINIA
  THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA AND THE
  U. S. COURT OF CLAIMS

  OFFICES

  WEST FALLS CHURCH, VA. AND 402 6TH ST. N. W., WASHINGTON, D. C.



[Illustration: Mrs. M. E. DePutron]



  Washington, Arlington and
  Falls Church Railway
  (U. S. MAIL ROUTE)

  Only Line to Fort Myer, Va., and Short Route to
  Ballston, Falls Church, Dunnloring, Vienna,
  Oakton and Fairfax Court House, Va.,
  and Arlington National Cemetery

  The Bivouac of the Nation's Dead, on the banks of the beautiful Potomac

  Take Pennsylvania Avenue or F Street cars
  to Aqueduct Bridge

  For detailed information in regard to movement of trains or freight and
  passenger rates apply to the officers of the company.

  F. B. HUBBELL, Vice-President and Manager   T. GARRETT, Passenger Agent



[Illustration: Mr. G. W. Cassilear]



  Manager Falls Church Improvement Company
  Notary Public for Fairfax and Alexandria Counties

  M. E. CHURCH
  REAL ESTATE, LOANS AND INSURANCE

  Washington Telephone Connections

  FALLS CHURCH, VIRGINIA



[Illustration: St. James Roman Catholic Church]



  THOMAS HILLIER

  CONTRACTOR AND BUILDER

  FAITHFUL CONSTRUCTION   HONEST MATERIAL

  ESTIMATES CHEERFULLY FURNISHED

  West Falls Church, Va. P. O. West End Va.

  Houses shown on pages 20, 35, 55, 58, 69 and 93 were built by
  Mr. Hillier, besides many others in Falls Church and vicinity,
  including St. James Catholic Church and
  parsonage at Falls Church and the Catholic
  Church and parsonage at
  Fortress Monroe, Va.



[Illustration: The Methodist Episcopal Church]



  JOHN D. PAYNE

  LICENSED AUCTIONEER

  Will Conduct Sales of Both Real and
  Personal Property on Short Notice

  Terms: REASONABLE        Telephone in Residence

  FALLS CHURCH, VA.



[Illustration: Mr. V. E. Kerr]



  Falls Church

  Telephone & Telegraph Co.

  OPERATING UNDER LICENSE OF THE

  Southern Bell Telephone Company

  EXCHANGES AT

  FALLS CHURCH AND ROSSLYN, VA.

  ALL LONG DISTANCE CONNECTIONS

  M. E. CHURCH, PRESIDENT

  F. E. PARKER, SUPERINTENDENT



[Illustration: Mr. Herbert G. Hopkins]



  CAPITAL $25,000   SURPLUS AND PROFITS OVER $6,000

  THE

  National Bank of Fairfax

  FAIRFAX, VA.

  BEGAN BUSINESS AUGUST 25, 1902

  R. WALTON MOORE, PRESIDENT

  DR. M. BROOKS, VICE-PRESIDENT

  JAMES W. BALLARD, CASHIER

  DIRECTORS

  R. WALTON MOORE

  JOS. E. WILLARD

  F. M. BROOKS

  M. E. CHURCH

  E. R. SWETNAM

  M. D. HALL

  S. R. DONOHOE

  C. VERNON FORD

  T. B. PUTNAM

     Deposits solicited. Negotiable paper discounted. We have
     unsurpassed facilities for making collections. Collections made
     free of charge to depositors. Every accommodation consistent with
     prudent business methods will be extended to our patrons. Small
     deposits receive the same attention as large ones. Prompt attention
     given to all business. Loans negotiated.



[Illustration: Dr. N. F. Graham]



  A BRANCH HERE

  French Steam Laundry

  We doubt if there is a better laundry in the
  country than the French Steam Laundry. By
  best, we mean the quality of work done and
  the care exercised to guard the interest of patrons.
  We have become one of their authorized
  agents, and before accepting the agency, satisfied
  ourselves as to the superior excellence of
  this laundry's service.

  F. P. WELLER, Druggist

  3534 M Street Northwest

  "Right by the Aqueduct"



[Illustration: Capt. M. S. Roberts]



  CHAS. L. BLANTON'S
  BLACK MINORCAS
  BARRED ROCKS ...

  _FALLS CHURCH, VA._

  There is nothing that costs so little and gives such returns as poultry.
  For the past ten years I have been breeding Barred Plymouth Rocks and
  Black Minorcas and have produced many high scoring exhibition birds that
  have carried off honors in some of the largest shows in the United States
  in very strong competition.

  LIST OF WINNINGS

  At Upper Marlboro, Md., September, 1898, 1st pen, 1st cockerel, and 1st
  pullet, Black Minorcas; 2d pen, 2d cockerel, and 1st pullet, Barred
  Plymouth Rocks.

  At Hamilton, Va., November, 1898, 1st, 2d, and 3d pullets, 1st cockerel,
  and 1st and 2d pens, Black Minorcas.

  At Washington, D. C., January, 1899, 1st and 2d hens, 2d and 4th
  pullets, and 3d and 4th pens, Black Minorcas; 5th pen, Barred Plymouth
  Rocks. Also special for Black Minorca hen.

  At Rockville, Md., September, 1899, 1st pen, 1st cock, and 1st and 2d
  hens, Black Minorcas; 2d pen, Barred Plymouth Rocks.

  At Hagerstown, Md., October, 1899, on three entries, 1st hen, 1st
  pullet, and 4th cockerel, Black Minorcas.

  At Hamilton, Va., November, 1899, 2d pen, 1st cock, 1st, 2d, and 3d
  cockerels (13 in class), 2d, 3d, and 4th hens, and 2d, 3d, and 4th
  pullets, Black Minorcas. Also special on Black Minorca cock, and silver
  trophy cup for the best display of Black Minorcas.

  At Laurel, Md., January, 1900, on Black Minorcas, 1st pen, 2d cock, 1st
  hen, 1st and 3d cockerels, 1st and 2d pullets. Special on display. 1st
  on Barred Rock cockerel, (19 in class).

  At Hamilton, Va., October, 1900, on Black Minorcas, won 1st and 3d
  cocks, 3d and 4th hens, 1st and 4th cockerels, 1st and 4th pullets, 2d
  and 4th pens. Three out of four specials; tied for best display, and
  received a silver cup for highest-scoring display.

  At the great Philadelphia Poultry Show, held at Philadelphia, Pa.,
  December, 1900, won, on Black Minorcas, 1st pen, 2d cock, 5th hen, 2d
  and 4th cockerels, 2d and 4th pullets. Special on pen. Special on best
  display.

  At Philadelphia, Pa., January, 1901, in the largest and best class of
  Minorcas ever brought together in America up to that time, I won seven
  regular prizes and thirteen specials. At this show I had three of the
  largest cockerels ever shown at one time by a single exhibitor, their
  combined weight being 29 pounds. In a class of sixty-four females I won
  first on the best shaped bird. Also, won nearest to ideal comb on a
  cockbird in a class of nineteen.

Eggs in season at $3 per sitting, two sittings, $5. Birds a matter of
correspondence. Address all communications to

  CHARLES L. BLANTON, East Falls Church, Va.



[Illustration: The Misses Birch]



  ... FALLS CHURCH BAKERY ...

  HOME-MADE BREAD, PIES AND CAKES

  Geo. L. Erwin

  PHONE NO. 1

  Falls Church, Va.

  SALESROOM IN POST OFFICE BUILDING

  Bread and orders delivered daily without extra cost, at all residences
  in Falls Church, Vienna, Dunnloring, Lewinsville, Langley,
  Ballston, Bailey's X Roads, Halls Hill and Merrifield.



[Illustration: Rev. H. A. Beach]



[Illustration: Congregational Church]



[Illustration: Mr. E. J. Northrup]



  Washington, Arlington and Falls
  Church Railway Company


  Electric Railway Line--Passenger, Mail,
  Freight and Parcel Express, between

  Fairfax C. H., Dunnloring, Vienna, Oakton,
  Falls Church, Glen Carlyn, Balston, Clarendon,
  Alexandria C. H. and Washington
  City, also Arlington National Cemetery,
  Fort Myer, Columbia
  and Nauck. :  :  :

  FREQUENT SERVICE         LOW RATES

  Waiting Room and Ticket Office

  3528 M St. N. W., Washington, D. C.

  For further information apply to any agent of Company

  F. B. Hubbell, V-Prest. and Manager    T. Garrett, Pass. Agent