COMPLETE
  CLASSIFIED
  PRICE LIST
  OF SCHOOL
  & COLLEGE
  TEXTBOOKS


  JANUARY
  1915


  AMERICAN
  BOOK COMPANY
  INCORPORATED




NOTICE TO PURCHASERS


For Index see third cover page

=SINGLE COPIES.= Any printed book will be sent prepaid on receipt of the
list price. Keys and translations will be supplied to teachers only.
Transportation charges on blank books, drawing books, blanks, and
tablets will be at purchaser's expense.

=ORDERS.= Each order should be clearly written and signed by the
purchaser. It should give the post-office, county, and State, and also
indicate whether the goods are to be sent by mail, express, or freight;
and, where the name of the railroad or express station differs from that
of the post-office, it should be so stated.

=EXACT TITLES.= All orders should give the exact titles of the books as
printed in our price lists; otherwise we can not be held responsible for
errors in shipping.

=ORDER EARLY.= Orders are usually filled on the day on which they are
received, but just before the opening of schools this is not always
possible. To insure prompt delivery due allowance should be made for
unavoidable detentions and orders should be sent early.

=REMITTANCES.= Remittances by draft are preferred, but post-office money
orders or express money orders may be used, if more convenient.

=EXCHANGE.= Special terms for books desired for exchange will be made on
application. In such cases, the names of the books to be displaced as
well as those to be introduced must be given.

=MAIL, PARCEL POST AND EXPRESS.= Packages of printed books under 8 oz.
may be sent at the rate of 1c. for 2 oz. Packages between 8 oz. and 50
lbs. may be sent by Parcel Post in accordance with the new zone rates,
ascertainable at any post office. Packages of any weight may be sent by
express. In the absence of specific instructions, we will send packages
by the cheapest transportation.

American Book Company




AMERICAN BOOK COMPANY'S

CLASSIFIED PRICE LIST

  READERS--Graded Series

  =Alderman's Classics, Old and New:=
    First Reader                                                     $0.25
    Second Reader                                                      .30
    Third Reader                                                       .35
    Fourth Reader                                                      .40
    Fifth Reader                                                       .40

  =Appletons'= First Reader                                            .18
    Second Reader                                                      .30
    Third Reader                                                       .38
    Introductory Fourth Reader                                         .50
    Fourth Reader                                                      .50
    Fifth Reader                                                       .90

  =Baldwin's School Readers=--Eight Book Series:
    First Year                                                         .25
    Second Year                                                        .35
    Third Year                                                         .40
    Fourth Year                                                        .40
    Fifth Year                                                         .40
    Sixth Year                                                         .45
    Seventh Year                                                       .45
    Eighth Year                                                        .45

  =Baldwin's School Readers=--Five Book Series:
    First Year                                                         .25
    Second Year                                                        .35
    Third Year                                                         .40
    Combined Fourth and Fifth Years                                    .60
    Combined Sixth and Seventh Years                                   .65

  =Baldwin & Bender's Expressive Readers=--Eight Book Series:
    First Reader                                                       .30
    Second Reader                                                      .35
    Third Reader                                                       .45
    Fourth Reader                                                      .45
    Fifth Reader                                                       .45
    Sixth Reader                                                       .45
    Seventh Reader                                                     .45
    Eighth Reader                                                      .45
      Teacher's Manual                                                 .40

  =Baldwin & Bender's Expressive Readers=--Five Book Series:
    First Reader                                                       .30
    Second Reader                                                      .35
    Third Reader                                                       .45
    Reader for Fourth and Fifth Years                                  .55
    Reader for Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Years                        .65
      Teacher's Manual                                                 .40

  =Barnes's= New National First Reader                                 .20
    New National Second Reader                                         .35
    New National Third Reader                                          .50
    New National Fourth Reader                                         .70
    New National Fifth Reader                                          .90

  =Brooks's= (S. D.) =Readers=--Five Book Series:
    First Year                                                         .25
    Second Year                                                        .35
    Third Year                                                         .40
    Combined Fourth and Fifth Years                                    .50
    Combined Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Years                          .60

  =Brooks's= (S. D.) =Readers=--Eight Book Series:
    First Year                                                         .25
    Second Year                                                        .35
    Third Year                                                         .40
    Fourth Year                                                        .40
    Fifth Year                                                         .40
    Sixth Year                                                         .40
    Seventh Year                                                       .40
    Eighth Year                                                        .40

  =Butler's= First Reader                                              .20
    Second Reader                                                      .30
    Third Reader                                                       .40
    Fourth Reader                                                      .50
    Fifth Reader                                                       .60

  =Crane= First Reader                                                 .20
    Second Reader                                                      .30
    Third Reader                                                       .40
    Fourth Reader                                                      .50
    Fifth Reader                                                       .60

  =Davis's= (E. H.) Beginner's Reading Book. Complete                  .25
      The same. Part I                                                 .15
      The same. Part II                                                .15

    Beginner's Reading Book (Teacher's Edition)                        .25
      The same. Part I                                                 .15

    Second Reading Book. Complete                                      .32
      The same. Part I                                                 .20
      The same. Part II                                                .20

    Third Reading Book. Complete                                       .45
      The same. Part I                                                 .25
      The same. Part II                                                .25

    Fourth Reading Book. Complete                                      .64

  =New Franklin Readers= (Campbell):
    First Reader                                                       .18
    Primer and First Reader                                            .24
    Second Reader                                                      .36
    Third Reader                                                       .50
    Fourth Reader                                                      .60
    Fifth Reader                                                       .84

  =Golden Treasury Readers= (Stebbins & Coolidge):
    Primer                                                             .32
    First Reader                                                       .32
    Second Reader                                                      .42
    Third Reader                                                       .48
    Fourth Reader                                                      .60
    Fifth Reader                                                       .65
      Plan Book for Teachers                                           .45

  =Harper's= First Reader                                              .24
    Second Reader                                                      .36
    Third Reader                                                       .48
    Fourth Reader                                                      .60
    Fifth Reader                                                       .90
    Sixth Reader                                                       .90

  =Hazen's= Primer and First Reader                                    .20
    Second Reader                                                      .35
    Third Reader                                                       .45
    Fourth Reader                                                      .65
    Fifth Reader                                                       .90

  =Holmes's= First Reader. Boards (96 pp.)                             .15
      The same. Cloth (128 pp.)                                        .20
    Second Reader. Cloth                                               .25
    Third Reader. Cloth                                                .35
    Fourth Reader. Cloth                                               .45
    Fifth Reader. Cloth                                                .60

  =Lee Readers=:
    First Book                                                         .25
    Second Book                                                        .30
    Third Book                                                         .40
    Fourth Book                                                        .50
    Fifth Book                                                         .60

  =New McGuffey= First Reader                                          .17
    Second Reader                                                      .25
    Third Reader                                                       .35
    Fourth Reader                                                      .45
    Fifth Reader                                                       .55

  =McGuffey's= Revised First Reader                                    .17
    Revised Second Reader                                              .30
    Revised Third Reader                                               .42
    Revised Fourth Reader                                              .50
    Revised Fifth Reader                                               .72
    Revised Sixth Reader                                               .85

  =Modern Readers= (Gourley & Hunt):
    First Reader                                                       .20
    Second Reader                                                      .40
    Third Reader                                                       .50
    Intermediate Reader                                                .60
    Grammar School Reader                                              .80

  =Monroe's= First Reader                                              .20
    Second Reader                                                      .35
    Third Reader                                                       .50
    Fourth Reader                                                      .60
    Fifth Reader                                                       .90
    New First Reader                                                   .20
    New Second Reader                                                  .30
    New Third Reader                                                   .42
    New Fourth Reader                                                  .66
    New Fifth Reader                                                   .84

  =New Education Readers= (Demarest & Van Sickle):
    Book I                                                             .35
    Book II                                                            .35
    Book III                                                           .40
    Book IV                                                            .45
      Teaching Primary Reading (Teacher's Manual)                      .10
    Perception Cards, to accompany Book I                     Per set 2.00
      The same for Book II                                       "     .75
      The same for Book III                                      "     .50

  =New Graded Readers:=
    American Educational Reader. No. 1.                                .18
    American Educational Reader. No. 2.                                .29
    American Educational Reader. No. 3.                                .40
    American Educational Reader. No. 4.                                .50

  =New Normal= First Reader                                            .20
    Second Reader                                                      .35
    Third Reader                                                       .45
    Fourth Reader                                                      .60
    Fifth Reader                                                       .80

  =Parmly= First Reader                                                .30
    Second Reader                                                      .35
    Third Reader                                                       .35
    Teachers' Manual                                                   .40

  =Pollard's= Synthetic First Reader                                   .24
    Synthetic Second Reader                                            .35
    Synthetic Third Reader                                             .45
    Intermediate Reader. Cloth                                         .60
      The same. Half leather                                           .65
    Advanced Reader                                                    .75
    Manual (Teacher's Handbook)                                       1.00

  =Progressive Course in Reading= (Aldrich & Forbes):
    First Book                                                         .20
    Second Book                                                        .30
    Third Book                                                         .40
    Fourth Book                                                        .50
      The same. Part I                                                 .35
      The same. Part II                                                .35
    Fifth Book                                                         .60
      The same. Part I                                                 .40
      The same. Part II                                                .40
    Sight Reader (Supplementary to First Book)                         .15

  =Standard Catholic Readers= (Doyle)--Five Book Series:
    First Reader                                                       .20
    Second Reader                                                      .30
    Third Reader                                                       .40
    Fourth Reader                                                      .50
    Fifth Reader                                                       .60

  =Standard Catholic Readers by Grades= (Doyle)--Eight Book Series:
    First Year                                                         .20
    Second Year                                                        .30
    Third Year                                                         .35
    Fourth Year                                                        .35
    Fifth Year                                                         .35
    Sixth Year                                                         .35
    Seventh Year                                                       .35
    Eighth Year                                                        .35

  =Story Hour Readers (Coe & Christie):=
    _Regular Edition:_
      Primer                                                           .30
      Book One                                                         .30
      Book Two                                                         .35
      Book Three                                                       .40
      Teacher's Manual                                                 .60
    _Special Edition:_
      First Year, First Half                                           .30
      First Year, Second Half                                          .30
      Second Year, First Half                                          .35
      Second Year, Second Half                                         .35
      Third Year, First Half                                           .35
      Third Year, Second Half                                          .35
      Teacher's Manual                                                 .60
    Perception Cards for Primer, and for First Year, First Half.
        Complete Set                                                  1.65
      Word Groups                                              $0.30
      Sight Words                                                .60
      Phonic Words                                               .60
      Outline Pictures                                           .15
    Perception Cards for Book One, and for First Year, Second
        Half. Complete Set                                            2.25
      Word Groups                                                .40
      Sight Words                                                .85
      Phonic Words                                               .85
      Outline Pictures                                           .15

  =Swinton's= First Reader. Separate                                   .18
    Primer and First Reader                                            .25
    Second Reader                                                      .35
    Third Reader                                                       .50
    Fourth Reader                                                      .65
    Fifth Reader                                                       .90
    Sixth or Classic English Reader                                   1.08

  =Taylor's= School Readers:
    First Reader                                                       .25
    Second Reader                                                      .35

  =Willson's= First Reader                                             .24




  PRIMERS

  =Appletons'= Chart Primer                                            .30

  =Bailey= (M. A.) & Germann's Number Primer                           .30

  =Baker's= (T. O.) Action Primer                                      .25

  =Baldwin= Primer (Kirk)                                              .30

  =Beebe's= (E. M.) Picture Primer                                     .25

  =Brown= (C. L.) =& Bailey's= (C. S.) Jingle Primer                   .30

  =Butler's= Chart Primer                                              .15

  =Crosby's= (W. E.) Our Little Book for Little Folks                  .30

  =Fundenberg's= First Lessons in Reading                              .25
    The same. Teacher's edition                                        .50

  =Gibbs's= Natural Number Primer                                      .25

  =Hazen's= First Year Book                                            .30

  =Hyde's= Primer                                                      .25

  =Klingensmith's= Universal Primer                                    .15

  =Latham's= First Lessons for Deaf Mutes                              .20
    Primary Reader for Deaf Mutes                                      .35

  =McGuffey's= Revised Eclectic Primer. Paper              Per doz.,  1.00
    Revised Eclectic Primer. Board covers                     "       1.50
    Small Eclectic Primer. Yellow covers                  Per gross   4.50
    Thin Eclectic Primer                                  Per doz.,    .75
    Thick Eclectic Primer                                     "       1.00

  =Monroe's= Chart Primer                                              .12
    New Primer                                                         .15

  =New Franklin= Primer                                                .12

  =Pollard's= First Book for Little Folks                              .25
    Synthetic Primer                                                   .15

  =Rose= Primer (Turpin)                                               .30

  =Sanders's= (C. W.) Union Pictorial Primer                           .15
    Primary School Primer.  Boards                       Per doz.,     .84
    Pictorial Primer.  Green cover                                     .14

  =Stewart= (S. T.) & =Coe's= First Days in School                     .25

  =Swinton's= Primer                                                   .12

  =Tooke's= Hand in Hand with the Wise Men                             .40

  =Werner= Primer (Taylor)                                             .30

  =White's= Pantomime Primer                                           .24

  =Williams= Reader for Beginners                                      .15

  =Willson's= Primer                                                   .15



  BOOKS FOR EVENING SCHOOLS

  =Austin's= Lessons in English for Foreign Women                      .35

  =Chancellor's= Arithmetic for Evening Schools                        .30
    Studies in English for Evening Schools                             .30
    History and Government of the U.S. for Evening Schools             .30
    Reading and Language Lessons for Evening Schools                   .30
    Standard Short Course for Evening Schools                          .50

  =Houghton's= First Lessons in English for Foreigners in
  Evening Schools                                                      .40

  =Markowitz & Starr's= Everyday Language Lessons                      .40
    Vocabulary of Common Words in English, Italian, Russian, and
    Yiddish                                                            .15

  =Sharpe's= First Reader for Foreigners                               .40
    Plain Facts for Future Citizens                                    .48




  SUPPLEMENTARY READING

  General

  =Coe's School Readers=:
    Third Grade                                                        .40
    Fourth Grade                                                       .50

  =Pathways in Nature and Literature= (Christy & Shaw):
    First Reader                                                       .25
      The same. Teacher's Edition                                      .30
    For Second Grade                                                   .30

  =Standard Supplementary Readers:=
    Easy Steps for Little Feet                                         .25
    Golden Book of Choice Reading                                      .30
    Book of Tales                                                      .50
    Readings in Nature's Book                                          .65
    Seven American Classics                                            .50
    Seven British Classics                                             .50

  =Swinton's= Advanced First Reader                                    .25
    Advanced Second Reader                                             .35
    Advanced Third Reader                                              .50
    Advanced Fourth Reader                                             .65


  Fairy Tales and Stories

  =Bakewell's= True Fairy Stories                                      .35

  =Baldwin's= Fairy Reader                                             .35
    Second Fairy Reader                                                .35
    Another Fairy Reader                                               .35
    Fairy Stories and Fables                                           .35

  =Barnard= Language Reader (Paine)                                    .30

  =Davis & Chow-Leung's= Chinese Fables and Folk Stories               .40

  =Eldridge's= Child's Reader in Verse                                 .25

  =Farmer's= Nature Myths of Many Lands                                .45

  =Fox's= Indian Primer                                                .25

  =Holbrook's= (F.) 'Round the Year in Myth and Song                   .60

  =Lakeside= Literature Series (Adams):
    Book I. Fables and Rhymes                                          .30
    Book II. Folk-Story and Verse                                      .40
    Book III. Myths of Old Greece                                      .50

  =Lane's= (Mrs. C. A.) Stories for Children                           .25

  =Logie & Uecke's= Story Reader                                       .30

  =Lucia's= Peter and Polly in Summer                                  .35
    Peter and Polly in Winter                                          .35

  =McCullough's= Little Stories for Little People                      .25

  =Moran's= Kwahu, the Hopi Indian Boy                                 .50

  =Nixon-Roulet's= Indian Folk Tales                                   .40
    Japanese Folk Stories and Fairy Tales                              .40

  =Pratt's= Legends of the Red Children                                .30

  =Pyle's= Prose and Verse for Children                                .40

  =Rolfe's= Fairy Tales                                                .50

  =Simms's= Child Literature                                           .30

  =Smythe's= Old Time Stories Retold                                   .35

  =Stafford's= Animal Fables                                           .30

  =Wilkins's= The Weaver's Children                                    .36

  =Wood's= (M. H.) The Children's First Story Book                     .25


  Famous Stories and Literature

  =Baldwin's= Don Quixote for Young People                             .50
    Fifty Famous Stories Retold                                        .35
    Golden Fleece                                                      .50
    John Bunyan's Dream Story                                          .35
    Nine Choice Poems                                                  .25
    Old Greek Stories                                                  .45
    Old Stories of the East                                            .45
    Stories of the King                                                .50
    Thirty More Famous Stories Retold                                  .50

  =Bradish's= Old Norse Stories                                        .45

  =Clarke's= (M.) Arabian Nights                                       .60
    Story of Aeneas                                                    .45
    Story of Troy                                                      .60
    Story of Ulysses                                                   .60

  =Cole's= (C. W.) Choice Readings                                     .60

  =Cooper's= Adventures of Deerslayer (Haight)                         .35
    Last of the Mohicans (Haight)                                      .35
    Adventures of Pathfinder (Haight)                                  .35

  =Defoe's= Robinson Crusoe (Stephens)                                 .50
    Robinson Crusoe Retold (Baldwin)                                   .35

  =Dickens's= Child's Oliver Twist and David Copperfield
  (Severance).                                                         .40
    Story of Little Nell (Gordon)                                      .50
    Tale of Two Cities (Kirk)                                          .50
    Twelve Christmas Stories (Gordon)                                  .50

  =Hall's= (F. A.) Homeric Stories                                     .40

  =Johnson's= Waste Not, Want Not Stories                              .50

  =Kupfer's= Lives and Stories Worth Remembering                       .45

  =Lambs'= Tales from Shakespeare (Rolfe):
    Comedies                                                           .50
    Tragedies                                                          .50
    Comedies and Tragedies. In one volume                              .60

  =Pitre's= Swallow Book (Camehl)                                      .35

  =Scott's= Kenilworth (Norris)                                        .50
    Quentin Durward (Norris)                                           .50
    Tales and Verse (Webster & Coe)                                    .60
    Talisman (Dewey)                                                   .50

  =Skinner's= Readings in Folk-Lore                                   1.00
    Schoolmaster in Literature                                        1.40
    Schoolmaster in Comedy and Satire                                 1.40

  =Smythe's= Reynard the Fox                                           .30

  =Swift's= Gulliver's Travels Retold (Baldwin)                        .35

  =Thomas's= Words of Abraham Lincoln                                  .65

  =Williams's Choice Literature. New Edition:=
    Book One                                                           .22
    Book Two                                                           .25
    Book Three                                                         .28
    Book Four                                                          .35
    Book Five                                                          .40
    Book Six                                                           .45
    Book Seven                                                         .50

  =Williams's Choice Literature:=
    Book One, for Primary Grades                                       .22
    Book Two, for Primary Grades                                       .25
    Book One, for Intermediate Grades                                  .28
    Book Two, for Intermediate Grades                                  .35
    Book One, for Grammar Grades                                       .40
    Book Two, for Grammar Grades                                       .50
    Literature for Fifth Reader Grades                                 .50


  Dramatic Stories

  =Holbrook's= (F.) Dramatic Reader for Lower Grades                   .40

  =Johnston= (E. L.) & =Barnum's= Book of Plays for
  Little Actors                                                        .30

  =Knight's= Dramatic Reader for Grammar Grades                        .50

  =Skinner's= Dramatic Stories for Reading and Acting                  .35

  =Skinner & Lawrence's= Little Dramas for Primary Grades              .35


  Geographical and Commercial Readers

  =Carpenter's Geographical Readers:=
    North America                                                      .60
    South America                                                      .60
    Europe                                                             .70
    Asia                                                               .60
    Africa                                                             .60
    Australia, Our Colonies, and Other Islands of the Sea              .60

  =Carpenter's Readers on Commerce and Industry:=
    How the World is Fed                                               .60
    How the World is Clothed                                           .60
    How the World is Housed                                            .60

  =Button's= (S. T.) =World at Work Series:=
    Fishing and Hunting                                                .30
    In Field and Pasture                                               .35
    Trading and Exploring (Luther)                                     .40

  =Guyot= Geographical Reader (Pratt)                                  .60

  =Johonnot's= Geographical Reader                                    1.00

  =Krout's= Alice's Visit to the Hawaiian Islands                      .45
    Two Girls in China                                                 .45

  =Long's= Home Geography                                              .25

  =MacClintock's= The Philippines                                      .40

  =Payne's= (F. O.) Geographical Nature Studies                        .25

  =Schwartz's= Five Little Strangers                                   .40

  =Shaw's= (E. R.) Big People and Little People of Other Lands         .30

  =Smith= (F. R.) =& Perry's= (A. C.) Geography of New York            .40


  Historical and Biographical Readers

  =Alexander's= Story of Hawaii                                        .75

  =Arnold's= (E. J.) Stories of Ancient Peoples                        .50

  =Baldwin's= Abraham Lincoln                                          .60
    American Book of Golden Deeds                                      .50
    Conquest of the Old Northwest                                      .60
    Discovery of the Old Northwest                                     .60
    Fifty Famous People                                                .35
    Four Great Americans                                               .50

  =Beebe's= Four American Naval Heroes                                 .50
    Story of Paul Jones; of Oliver H. Perry; of David G. Farragut;
      of George Dewey                                            Each  .10

  =Brittain= (H. L.) & Harris's (J. G.) Historical Reader              .75

  =Brooks's= (E. S.) Stories of the Old Bay State                      .60

  =Burton's= Four American Patriots                                    .50
    Story of Patrick Henry; of Alexander Hamilton; of Andrew
      Jackson; of Ulysses S. Grant                               Each  .10
    Story of Lafayette                                                 .35

  =Clarke's= (M.) Story of Caesar                                      .45

  =Cody's= Four American Poets                                         .50
    Four American Writers                                              .50

  =Coe's= Founders of Our Country                                      .50
    Makers of the Nation                                               .56

  =Cooke's= Stories of the Old Dominion                                .60

  =Dutton's= (M. B.) Little Stories of England                         .40
    Little Stories of France                                           .40
    Little Stories of Germany                                          .40

  =Eggleston's= Stories of Great Americans for Little Americans        .40
    Stories of American Life and Adventure                             .50

  =Foote & Skinner's= (A. W.) Explorers and Founders of America        .60
    Makers and Defenders of America                                    .60

  =Gail Hamilton's= English Kings in a Nutshell                        .60

  =Goho's= Pennsylvania Reader                                         .50

  =Guerber's= Story of the Chosen People                               .60
    Story of the Greeks                                                .60
    Story of the Romans                                                .60

  =Guerber's= Story of the English                                     .65
    Story of the Thirteen Colonies                                     .65
    Story of the Great Republic                                        .65
    Story of Old France                                                .65
    Story of Modern France                                             .65

  =Haaren & Poland's= (A. B.) Famous Men of Greece                     .50
    Famous Men of Rome                                                 .50
    Famous Men of the Middle Ages                                      .50
    Famous Men of Modern Times                                         .50

  =Harris's= (J. C.) Stories of Georgia                                .60

  =Horne & Scobey's= Stories of Great Artists                          .40

  =Howells'= Stories of Ohio                                           .60

  =Johonnot's= Grandfather's Stories                                   .27
    Stories of Heroic Deeds                                            .30
    Stories of Our Country                                             .40
    Stories of Other Lands                                             .40
    Stories of the Olden Time                                          .54
    Ten Great Events in History                                        .54

  =Kingsley's= Four American Explorers                                 .50
    Story of Lewis and Clark                                           .25

  =Lucia's= Stories of American Discoverers for Little
  Americans                                                            .40

  =Moore's= (E. E.) A Century of Indiana                               .75

  =Musick's= Stories of Missouri                                       .60

  =Otis's= Colonial Series:
      Calvert of Maryland                                              .35
      Mary of Plymouth                                                 .35
      Peter of New Amsterdam                                           .35
      Richard of Jamestown                                             .35
      Ruth of Boston                                                   .35
      Stephen of Philadelphia                                          .35
    Pioneer Series:
      Antoine of Oregon                                                .35
      Benjamin of Ohio                                                 .35
      Hannah of Kentucky                                               .35
      Martha of California                                             .35
      Philip of Texas                                                  .35
      Seth of Colorado                                                 .35

  =Perry's= Four American Inventors                                    .50

  =Perry & Beebe's= Four American Pioneers                             .50

  =Pitman's= Stories of Old France                                     .60

  =Rhoades's= Story of Philadelphia                                    .85

  =Rolfe's= Tales of Chivalry                                          .50
    Tales from English History                                         .50
    Tales from Scottish History                                        .50

  =Schwartz's= Famous Pictures of Children                             .40

  =Scobey & Horne's= Stories of Great Musicians                        .40

  =Shaw's= (E. R.) Discoverers and Explorers                           .35

  =Shepherd's= Historical Readings                                    1.00

  =Stockton's= Stories of New Jersey                                   .60

  =Swett's= (S.) Stories of Maine                                      .60

  =Thompson's= (M.) Stories of Indiana                                 .60

  =Thwaites's= Stories of the Badger State                             .60

  =Van Bergen's= Story of China                                        .60
    Story of Japan                                                     .65
    Story of Russia                                                    .65

  =Wallach's= Historical and Biographical Narratives                   .35

  =Walton & Brumbaugh's= Stories of Pennsylvania                       .60

  =Whitehead's= Two Great Southerners                                  .50

  =Whitney & Perry's= Four American Indians                            .50

  =Winship's= Great American Educators                                 .50

  =Winterburn's= Spanish in the Southwest                              .55

  (_See also State and Local History, page 41_)


  Nature Readers

  =Abbott's= Boy on a Farm (Johnson)                                   .45

  =Bartlett's= Animals at Home                                         .45

  =Beebe & Kingsley's= First Year Nature Reader                        .35

  =Bradish's= Stories of Country Life                                  .40

  =Cooper's= (S.) Animal Life                                         1.25

  =Dana's= (Mrs. W. S.) Plants and Their Children                      .65

  =Gilmore's= Birds Through the Year                                   .50

  =Hawkes's= Trail to the Woods                                        .40

  =Herrick's= (S. B.) Chapters on Plant Life                           .60
    Earth in Past Ages                                                 .60

  =Holder's= (C. F.) Stories of Animal Life                            .60
    Half Hours with Fishes, Reptiles, and Birds                        .60
    Half Hours with the Lower Animals                                  .60
    Half Hours with Mammals                                            .60

  =Hooker's= (W.) Child's Book of Nature                              1.00

  =Johonnot's= Book of Cats and Dogs                                   .17
    Friends in Feathers and Fur                                        .30
    Neighbors with Wings and Fins                                      .40
    Some Curious Flyers, Creepers, and Swimmers                        .40
    Some Neighbors with Claws and Hoofs                                .54
    Glimpses of the Animate World                                     1.00

  =Keffer's= Nature Studies on the Farm                                .40

  =Kelly's= Short Stories of Our Shy Neighbors                         .50

  =Mix's= Mighty Animals                                               .40

  =Monteith's= (Jas.) Popular Science Reader                           .75

  =Monteith's= (John) Familiar Animals and Their Wild Kindred          .50
    Living Creatures of Water, Land, and Air                           .50
    Some Useful Animals                                                .50

  =Needham's= Outdoor Studies                                          .40

  =Patri's= White Patch                                                .40

  =Pitre's= Swallow Book (Camehl)                                      .35

  =Pyle's= Stories of Humble Friends                                   .50

  =Riggs's= Stories from Lands of Sunshine                             .40

  =Stokes's= Ten Common Trees                                          .40

  =Treat's= (M.) Home Studies in Nature                                .90

  =Turner's= Our Common Friends and Foes                               .30

  =Walker's= (M. C.) Our Birds and Their Nestlings                     .60


  Patriotic and Ethical Readers

  =Johnson's= Story of Two Boys                                        .35
    Waste Not, Want Not Stories                                        .50

  =Marden's= Stories from Life                                         .45

  =Markwick & Smith's= (W. A.) True Citizen                            .60

  =Morgan's= (T. J.) Patriotic Citizenship                            1.00

  =Nordhoff's= Politics for Young Americans                            .75

  =Persons's= Our Country in Poem and Prose                            .50

  =Richman & Wallach's= Good Citizenship                               .45

  =Smiles's= Self-Help (Bower)                                         .60


  Bible Reading

  =Schaeffer's= Bible Readings for Schools                             .35

  =Wight's= Selections from the Bible                                  .40




  SCHOOL CHARTS

  =Appletons'= Elementary Reading Charts. 47 Nos., with
  Stand and Teacher's Manual                                         10.00

  =Butler's= Reading Charts. 36 Nos., with Stand and
  Teacher's Manual                                                    8.00

  =Complete= School Charts.  36 Nos., with Stand and
  Teacher's Manual                                                   10.00

  =Eclectic= Elementary Charts. 36 Nos., with Stand and
  Teacher's Manual                                                    6.00

  =Fundenberg's= Chart Lessons in Reading. 24 Charts,
  with Stand                                                          7.50

  =McGuffey's= Reading Charts.  28 Nos., with Teacher's Manual.
      Manila, with Revolving Stand                           Per set  5.00
      The same. Mounted on Heavy Boards                         "     7.50
      Spanish Edition. Manila, with Revolving Stand             "     5.00
    Chart Primer (Facsimile of Charts)                     Per doz.,   .50

  =New American= Reading Charts. 30 Nos., with Stand                  5.00

  =Primary= Language Studies. 50 Nos., with Stand and
  Teacher's Manual                                                   12.00




  SPELLING

  =Appletons'= Select Spelling Lessons                                 .04

  =Baldwin= Speller (Shear & Lynch)                                    .20
    Spelling by Grades (Baldwin)                                       .20

  =Bouton's= Spelling and Word Building                                .25

  =Buckwalter's= Primary Spelling Book                                 .15
    Comprehensive Spelling Book                                        .20

  =Columbian= Speller                                                  .20

  =Creery's= Grammar School Spelling Book                              .35

  =Cronson's= Graded Dictation and Spelling Lessons:
    First year and first half of second year                Per doz.,  .60
    Second year, second half, and third year, each half        "       .60
    Fourth and fifth years, each half                          "       .75
    Sixth to eighth years, each half                           "       .90

  =Eldridge's= Business Speller                                        .25

  =Harrington's= (H. F.) Spelling Book. Complete                       .20
    The same. Parts I and II                                     Each  .15

  =Harvey's= (T. W.) Graded School Primary Speller                     .13
    Graded School Speller                                              .18

  =Hicks's= Champion Spelling Book. Complete                           .25
    The same. Parts I and II                                     Each  .18

  =Holmes's= Elementary Spelling Book                                  .13

  =Hunt's= (J. N.) Primary Word Lessons                                .15
    Progressive Course in Spelling                                     .20
      The same. Parts I and II                                   Each  .15

  =McGuffey's= Alternate Spelling Book                                 .12
    Revised Eclectic Spelling Book                                     .17
    Word Lists of Revised Readers (Blewett)                            .10

  =Metcalf's= Spelling and Language Book                               .20

  =Modern= Spelling Book (Hunt & Gourley) Vertical
  Script edition                                                       .20
    The same. Slant Script edition                                     .20

  =Monroe's= First Steps in Spelling                                   .18
    Practical Speller                                                  .25

  =Natural= Speller and Word Book                                      .20

  =New American= Primary Speller                                       .15
    Pronouncing Speller                                                .20
    Advanced Speller                                                   .25

  =Osborn & King's= (J. E.) Seventy Lessons in Spelling                .20

  =Patterson's= American Word Book                                     .25
    Common School Speller                                              .18
    Speller and Analyzer                                               .32

  =Pollard's= Synthetic Speller                                        .18
    Advanced Speller. Complete                                         .30

  =Rice's= Rational Spelling Book. Part I. Boards                      .15
      The same. Cloth                                                  .17
    Rational Spelling Book. Part II. Boards                            .20
      The same. Cloth                                                  .22

  =Sheldon's= Word Studies. Vertical Script edition                    .25
      The same. Slant Script edition                                   .25
    Graded Speller                                                     .25

  =Shoup's= Graded Speller                                             .19

  =Spelling= by Grades (Baldwin)                                       .20

  =Swinton's= Word Primer                                              .15
    Word Book of English Spelling                                      .18
    New Word Analysis                                                  .35
    Word Analysis. Old                                                 .29

  =Warren's= (M. A.) Class Word Speller
.18

  =Watson's= Complete Speller                                          .20
    Independent Elementary Speller                                     .18

  =Webster's= Elementary Spelling Book   Per doz., net                 .90

  =Williams & Rogers= Test Lessons in Spelling                         .15

  =Willson's= Primary Speller                                          .15
    Larger Speller                                                     .24

  =Worcester's= New Primary Spelling Book                              .18
    New Pronouncing Spelling Book                                      .23
    Comprehensive Spelling Book                                        .23

  =Wright's (A. D.)= Analytical Orthography                            .18


  Spelling Blanks

  =American Spelling Blanks--Vertical Writing=:
    Angular Hand                                            Per doz.,  .48
    Round Hand                                                 "       .48

  =American= Standard Writing Speller. Nos. 1 and 2            "       .45

  =Barnes's= Natural Slant Writing Speller                     "       .48
    Vertical Writing Speller                                   "       .48

  =Butler's= Vertical Writing Speller                          "       .50

  =Dinsmore's Spelling Blanks=:
    Model Script, 36 pages                                     "       .45
    Elementary, "Five Cent" Blank                              "       .42

  =Eclectic= Writing Speller                                   "       .50

  =Harper's= Spelling and Dictation Blanks. Nos. 1 to 4        "       .48

  =Manson's= Economic Spelling Blank                           "       .42

  =Monroe's= Complete Writing Speller                          "       .42

  =Osborn & King's= (J. E.) Blank for Seventy Lessons
  in Spelling                                                          .07

  =Sheldon's= Spelling and Language Blanks                  Per doz.,  .48

  =Spencerian= Practical Writing Speller                       "       .48
    The same. Intermediate ruling                              "       .48
    The same. Wide ruling, for primary grades                  "       .48




  PENMANSHIP

  Copy Books and Charts

  =American= Practice Blanks. No. 1                         Per doz.,  .42
    System of Vertical Writing. Nos. 1 to 7                    "       .96

  =Appletons'= Standard Writing Books:
    Grammar Course. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6                  "       .96
    How to Teach Writing (Manual of Penmanship)                        .50

  =Barnes's= National Vertical Penmanship. Nos. 1 to 8         "       .75
    Special Books. Nos. N-1 and N-2                            "       .75

  =Barnes's= Natural Slant Penmanship. Nos. 1 to 8             "       .75
    Pen and Pencil Series. Books A, B, and C                   "       .60
    Natural Slant Writing Charts. In four sheets              Per set 1.50

  =Barnes's= Penmanship Pads:
    National Vertical. A 1 to 12, B 1 to 12, C 1 to 12.
    36 Pads.                                                     Each  .20
    Natural Slant. D 1 to 12, E 1 to 12, F 1 to 12, G 1 to 12,
    H 1 to 12, I 1 to 12, J 1 to 12, K 1 to 12, L 1 to 12, M 1
    to 12. 120 Pads                                              Each  .20

  =Bond's= Staff Ruled Writing Books. Nos 1 and 2           Per doz.,  .96
      The same. No. 3                                          "       .50

  =Chancellor's= Standard Short Course for Evening Schools             .50

  =Curtiss's= Vertical Copy Books. Nos. 1 to 6              Per doz.,  .96
    Semi-Vertical Copy Books. Nos. 1 to 6                      "       .96

  =Eclectic= Penmanship:
    Elementary Tracing Course. Nos. 1 to 3                     "       .72
    New Copy Books. Nos. 1 to 9                                "       .96
    Practice Books, single or double line                      "       .48

  =Ellsworth's= New Reversible Copy Books. Slanting
  edition. Nos. 1 to 6                                         "       .96

  =Healey's= System of Free Arm Movement Writing:
    Books and Pads (9 of each) for Grades 1, 2, 3A, 3B,
    4A, 4B, 5A, 5B, and Movement Exercises                       Each  .10
    Copies for 1st and 2d Years                               Per set  .05
    Complete Manual                                              Each  .20
    Manual. Parts I, II and III                       Each, per doz., 1.50
    Primary Manual                                               Each  .10

  =Mills's= Practical Penmanship. Vertical edition.
  Six Books                                                 Per doz.,  .72
    Modern Business Penmanship                                   Each  .30

  =National= Writing Books:
    No. 1. 24 pp. Square. Manila. Single ruled              Per doz.,  .42
    No. 3. 24 pp. Square. Manila. Double ruled                 "       .42
    No. 4. 24 pp. Square. Manila. German ruled                 "       .42
    No. 5. 24 pp. Oblong. Manila. Single ruled                 "       .42
    No. 10. 36 pp. Square. Manila. Single ruled                "       .60
    No. 25. 72 pp. Square. Boards. Single ruled                "      1.08

  =Payson, Dunton, & Scribner's= National Copy Books:
    New edition. Nos. 4, 5 and 6                               "       .96

  =Payson, Dunton, & Scribner's= Book of Alphabets          Per doz.,  .96
    Handbook of Penmanship                                             .25
    Patent Blotter Covers. Large                         Per hundred  1.20

  =Poland's= (M. D.) First Book for Pen or Pencil
    Parts I. and II                                   Each, per doz.,  .72

  =Rational= Writing Books. Vertical. Nos. 1 to 6           Per doz.,  .60
    Medium Slant. Nos. 1 to 6                                  "       .60

  =Sheldon's= Standard Writing
    Tracing. No. 1                                             "       .72
    Elementary. Nos. 2 to 4                                    "       .72
    Grammar Course. Nos. 5 to 12                               "       .95
    Teacher's Manual                                           "       .75
    Standard Writing Charts. In two sheets                   Per set  1.00

  =Spencers'= Practical Writing. Nos. 1 to 8                Per doz.,  .60
    Copies for Movement Exercises (Envelope containing
    35 slips)                                                          .05
    How to Teach Writing                                               .10
    California Writing Charts. In four sheets                Per set  1.50

  =Spencer Bros.'= Hand Chart, Movement Drill, etc          Per doz.,  .60

  =Spencerian= Copy Books--Revised:
    Tracing Course.  Nos. 1 to 4                               "       .72
    Shorter Course. Nos. 1 to 4                                "       .72
    Common School Course. Nos. 1 to 7                          "       .96
      The same. Business Series. Nos. 8 to 11                  "       .96

  =Spencerian= Vertical Penmanship:
    Special Books, A and B                                     "       .72
    Common School Course. Nos. 1 to 6                          "       .96
    Business Course. Nos. 7 to 10                              "       .96

  =Spencerian= Theory of Penmanship                                    .18
    Key to Penmanship                                                 1.08

  =Steadmans'= Graded Lessons in Writing.  Eight pads.
  Nos. 1 to 8                                                    Each  .15
    Teachers' Manual                                              "    .20
    Writing Chart. In five sheets                             Per set 1.50

  =Williams & Rogers= Pen-Written Slant Copies (reproduced).
  Abridged                                                             .35
    Vertical Copy Books. Six books                          Per doz.,  .60


  German Copy Books

  =Eclectic= German Standard Copy Books. Nos. 1 to 5        Per doz.,  .84
    German Exercise Books. Nos. 1 to 5                         "       .48

  =Payson's= Deutsches Schreibe System.  Nos. 1 to 3,
  3-1/2, 4 to 7                                                  "       .84


  Business Forms

  =Eaton's= Business Forms, Customs, and Accounts                     1.00
    Exercise Manual of Business Forms                                  .50
      Key to the same                                                  .50

  =Ward's= Letter Writing and Business Forms:
    Nos. 1 and 2                                                 Each  .10
    The same. Nos. 3 and 4                                        "    .15

  =Williams & Rogers Series.=--_See page 68._




  ENGLISH LANGUAGE

  Language Lessons and Grammar

  =Barnes's= Picture Lessons in English                                .30
    Working Lessons in English                                         .40

  =Baskervill-Sewell English Course=:
    Language Lessons                                                   .35
    School Grammar                                                     .50
    English Grammar. Advanced                                          .90

  =Brown= (G. P.) =& De Garmo's= Elements of English Grammar           .60

  =Bullions's= School Grammar                                          .36
    Practical English Grammar                                          .72

  =Conklin's= Practical Lessons in Language                            .35
    English Grammar and Composition                                    .60

  =Dalgleish's= Grammatical Analysis                                   .48

  =De Garmo's= Language Lessons. Complete                              .50
    The same. Book I                                                   .30
    The same. Book II                                                  .40

  =Evans's= Language Lessons                                           .30
    English Grammar                                                    .40

  =Fellows's= First Steps in English Grammar                           .18

  =Garrison's= Manual and Diagrams to Metcalf's Grammars               .50

  =Greene's= Introduction to English Grammar                           .40
    English Grammar                                                    .75
    New Analysis of the English Language                               .86

  =Harvey's= (T. W.) New Language Lessons                              .35
    New English Grammar for Schools                                    .60
    Revised Elementary Grammar and Composition                         .42
    Revised Practical English Grammar                                  .65

  =Hoenshel's= Progressive Course in English:
      Book One                                                         .32
      Book Two                                                         .56
      Teacher's Manual                                                 .30
    Language Lessons and Elementary Grammar                            .30
    Advanced Grammar                                                   .60
      Manual for Elementary and Advanced Grammars                      .50
    Complete Grammar                                                   .50
      Key and Manual for the same                                      .50

  =Holbrook's= (A.) New English Grammar                                .65

  =Irish's= (F. V.) Grammar and Analysis by Diagrams                  1.25

  =Kimball's= Elementary English. Book One                             .40
      The same. Book Two                                               .50

  =Kimball's= English Grammar                                          .50
    Structure of the English Sentence                                  .75

  =Knight's= Primer of Essentials in Grammar and Rhetoric              .25

  =Long's= New Language Exercises.  Part I                             .20
      The same. Part II                                                .25
    Lessons in English. Grammar and Composition                        .35

  =Lyte's= Elementary English                                          .35
    Elements of Grammar and Composition                                .50
    Advanced Grammar and Composition                                   .75
    English Grammar and Composition                                    .65

  =March's= Parser and Analyzer                                        .35

  =Maxwell's= Elementary Grammar                                       .40
    School Grammar                                                     .60
    First Book in English                                              .40
    Introductory Lessons in English Grammar                            .40
    Advanced Lessons in English Grammar                                .60
    Primary Lessons in Language and Composition                        .30

  =Maxwell, Johnston & Barnum's= Speaking and Writing. Book I.         .20
      The same. Book II                                                .23
      The same. Book III                                               .25

  =Metcalf's= Elementary English                                       .40
    English Grammar for Common Schools                                 .60
      Manual and Diagrams to same (Garrison)                           .50

  =Metcalf & Bright's= Language Exercises                              .42
    Language Lessons. Part I                                           .35
      The same.  Part II                                               .55

  =Metcalf & Rafter's= Language Series:
    Book One                                                           .40
      The same. New York State Edition                                 .45
    Book Two                                                           .60
      The same. New York State Edition                                 .60

  =Morris's= (R.) English Grammar                                      .35

  =Morrow's= Language for Little People                                .25

  =Park's= Language Lessons                                            .35
    English Grammar                                                    .65

  =Patterson's= Elements of Grammar and Composition                    .50
    Advanced Grammar and Rhetoric                                      .94

  =Pearson & Kirchwey's= Essentials of English. First Book             .40
      The same. New York State Edition                                 .48

  =Perry's= Punctuation Primer                                         .30

  =Powell's= How to See                                                .30
      The same. Teacher's edition                                      .42
    How to Talk                                                        .42

  =Quackenbos's= (G. P.) First Book in Grammar                         .35
    English Grammar                                                    .63

  =Raub's= Lessons in English                                          .35
    Practical English Grammar                                          .60

  =Serl's= Primary Language Lessons                                    .35
    Intermediate Language Lessons                                      .56

  =Sheldon's= Primary Language Lessons                                 .38
    Advanced Language Lessons                                          .62

  =Steps in English= (McLean, Blaisdell & Morrow):
    Book One                                                           .40
    Book Two                                                           .60
      Teachers' Handbook for Book Two                                  .50

  =Swinton's= Talking with the Pencil                                  .30
    Language Primer                                                    .28
    Language Lessons                                                   .38
    New English Grammar                                                .56
    New English Grammar and Composition                                .76

  (_See also Books for Evening Schools, page 7._)


  Language Tablets

  =National Language= Tablets. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 3-1/2, 4,
  4-1/2, 5, 5-1/2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12                   Per doz.,  .90
    Teacher's Manual, to accompany the same .25

  =Stickney's= Child's Book of Language. Nos. 1 to 4             Each  .08



  English Grammar for Foreigners

  =Cusachs's= Elements of Spoken English for Spanish-speaking
  Students                                                             .50

  =Ollendorff's= Grammar for Germans to Learn English (Gands)         1.05


  Composition and Rhetoric

  =Benedict's= English Punctuation                                     .60

  =Blaisdell's= (T. C.) Composition-Rhetoric (Steps in
  English Series)                                                     1.00

  =Brooks's= English Composition. Book One                             .75
      The same. Enlarged                                               .90
    English Composition. Book Two                                     1.00

  =Brooks & Hubbard's= Composition-Rhetoric                           1.00

  =Brown & Barnes's= Art of Writing English                           1.20

  =Buehler's= Practical Exercises in English                           .50

  =Butler's= (G. P.) School English                                    .75

  =Callaway's= Studies for Letters                                     .50

  =Cocker's= Punctuation. With Proof Reading, etc.                     .32

  =Denney, Duncan & McKinney's= Argumentation and Debate              1.25

  =Hill's= (A. S.) Beginnings of Rhetoric and Composition             1.25
    Foundations of Rhetoric                                           1.00
    Principles of Rhetoric                                            1.20

  =Hill's= (D. J.) Elements of Rhetoric                               1.00
    Science of Rhetoric                                               1.00

  =Johnson's= Elements of Literary Criticism                           .80

  =Knight's= Primer of Essentials in Grammar and Rhetoric              .25

  =Maxwell & Johnston's= School Composition                            .50

  =Maxwell & Smith's= (G. J.) Writing in English                       .75

  =Nichol's= English Composition                                       .35

  =Patterson's= Advanced Grammar and Rhetoric                          .94

  =Perry's= Introductory Course in Argumentation                      1.00
    Introductory Course in Exposition                                 1.00
    Punctuation Primer                                                 .30

  =Quackenbos's= (G. P.) First Lessons in English Composition          .63
    Course of Composition and Rhetoric                                1.05

  =Quackenbos's= (J. D.) Practical Rhetoric                           1.00

  =Sampson & Holland's= Written and Oral Composition                   .80

  =Steeves & Ristine's= Representative Essays in Modern
  Thought. A Basis for Composition                                    1.50

  =Swinton's= School Composition                                       .32

  =Thomas's= (H.) Study of the Paragraph                               .50

  =Thomas's= (R. W.) Manual of Debate                                  .80

  =Townsend's= Analysis of Letter Writing                             1.08

  =Waddy's= Elements of Composition and Rhetoric                      1.00

  =Wilson's= Treatise on Punctuation                                  1.00

  =Winning Speeches= of the Northern Oratorical League                1.00


  Composition Blanks

  =National= Composition Book. No. 1. 36 pages              Per doz.,  .72

  =National= Composition Blanks:
    No. 1.  24 pages. Paper. Single ruled                      "       .42
    No. 1D. 24 pages. Paper. Double ruled                      "       .42
    No. 2.  36 pages. Paper. Single ruled                      "       .54
    No. 3.  48 pages. Paper. Single ruled                      "       .72
    No. 3B. 48 pages. Boards. Single ruled                     "       .84

  Student's Notebook                                           "       .84


  Etymology

  =Anderson's= Study of English Words                                  .40

  =Graham's= English Synonymes                                        1.05

  =Johnson's= (C. F.) English Words                                    .84

  =Kennedy's= What Words Say. Part I                                   .45
    Stem Dictionary                                                   1.00

  =Peile's= Philology                                                  .35

  =Sanders & McElligott's= Analysis of Words                           .55

  =Sargent's= School Etymology                                         .68

  =Scholar's= Companion                                                .72

  =Skeat's= Etymological Dictionary                                   1.25

  =Smith's= (W. W.) Condensed Etymology                                .50

  =Swett's= (John) Normal Word Book                                    .30

  =Swinton's= New Word Analysis                                        .35


  English Dictionaries

  =Clarendon= Dictionary (Browne & Haldeman)                           .45

  =Webster's= Shorter School Dictionary                                .60
    Elementary-School Dictionary                                       .90
    Secondary-School Dictionary. Cloth, $1.50. Indexed                1.80
    Primary Dictionary                                                 .48
    Common School Dictionary                                           .72
    High School Dictionary                                             .98
    Academic Dictionary. Cloth, $1.50. Indexed                        1.80
      The same. Half calf, $2.75.  Indexed                            3.00
    Handy Dictionary. Cloth                                            .15
    Pocket Dictionary. Cloth                                           .57
      The same. Roan, flexible, 69 cents. Roan, tucks                  .78
      The same. Morocco. Indexed                                       .90

  =Skeat's= Etymological Dictionary                                   1.25




  ANGLO-SAXON

  =March's= Anglo-Saxon Grammar                                       1.80




  ELOCUTION

  =Bailey's= (M.) Essentials of Reading                                .50
    Introduction to Elocution                                          .50

  =Cathcart's= Youth's Speaker                                         .54

  =Cole's= Institute Reader                                            .80

  =Harper's School Speakers:=
      I. Arbor Day--Memorial Day                                       .60
     II. Graded Selections                                             .60
    III. Miscellaneous                                                 .60

  =Kidd's= New Elocution and Vocal Culture                            1.00

  =Murdoch's= Analytic Elocution                                      1.00

  =Peaslee's= Graded Selections for Memorizing                         .50

  =Randall's= Reading and Elocution                                   1.00

  =Southwick's= Steps to Oratory                                      1.00

  =Swett's= (John) School Elocution                                   1.00

  =Watkins's= Public Speaking for High Schools                         .75

  =Winning Speeches= of the Northern Oratorical League                1.00




  ENGLISH LITERATURE

  For Texts see Eclectic, Gateway, and Rolfe Series

  =Alden's= Studies in Bryant                                          .35

  =Backus & Brown's= (H. D.) Great English Writers                    1.25

  =Baldwin= (E. C.) & =Paul's= English Poems                          1.00

  =Blaisdell's= (A. F.) First Steps with American and
  British Authors                                                      .90

  =Blakely's= Teachers' Outlines for Studies in English                .50

  =Brooke's= English Literature. Revised (Johnson)                     .35

  =Cathcart's= Literary Reader                                        1.15

  =Cleveland's= Compendium of English Literature                      1.75
    English Literature of the Nineteenth Century                      1.75

  =Dickinson & Roe's= Nineteenth Century English Prose--
  Critical Essays                                                     1.00

  =Dowden's= Shakespeare                                               .35

  =Guerber's= Myths of Greece and Rome. Illustrated                   1.50
      The same. Without illustrations                                 1.00
    Myths of Northern Lands                                           1.50
    Legends of the Middle Ages                                        1.50

  =Halleck's= New English Literature                                  1.30
    History of English Literature                                     1.25
    History of American Literature                                    1.25

  =Himes's= Milton's Paradise Lost                                    1.20

  =Irving's= Sketch Book--Selections (Benjamin)                        .50

  =Johnson's= (C. F.) Elements of Literary Criticism                   .80
    Outline History of English and American Literature                1.25
    Forms of English Poetry                                           1.00

  =Koopman's= Mastery of Books                                         .90

  =Long's= (A. W.) American Poems                                      .90

  =Matthews'= Introduction to American Literature                     1.00
    The Short-Story. Specimens illustrating its development           1.00

  =McCaskey's= Lincoln Literary Collection                            1.00

  =McNeill & Lynch's= Introductory Lessons in English
  Literature                                                          1.00

  =Painter's= Poets of the South                                       .60

  =Pallen's= Meaning of the Idylls of the King                         .40

  =Phillips's= (M. G.) English Literature. 2 vols               Each  2.00

  =Porter & Clarke's= (H. A.) Shakespeare Studies--Macbeth             .56

  =Robertson's= History of English Literature                         1.25

  =Select= American Classics                                           .60

  =Shaw's= (T. B.) New History of English Literature                  1.25

  =Shaw-Backus's= Outlines of Literature. English and
  American                                                            1.25

  =Sheran's= Textbook on English Literature for Catholic
  Schools                                                             1.25

  =Skinner's= Schoolmaster in Literature                              1.40
    Schoolmaster in Comedy and Satire                                 1.40
    Readings in Folk-Lore                                             1.00

  =Smiley's= Manual of American Literature                             .60

  =Swinton's= Studies in English Literature                           1.20

  =Watkins's= American Literature                                      .35


  Masterpieces of the English Drama (Schelling)

  =Beaumont & Fletcher.= Four plays (Schelling)                        .70

  =Congreve.= Four plays (Archer)                                      .70

  =Marlowe.= Four plays (Phelps)                                       .70

  =Massinger.= Four plays (Sherman)                                    .70

  WEBSTER & TOURNEUR. Four plays (Thorndike)                           .70


  Gateway Series of English Texts
  HENRY VAN DYKE, _General Editor_

  =Addison's= Sir Roger de Coverley Papers (Winchester)                .40

  =Burke's= Speech on Conciliation (MacDonald)                         .35

  =Byron, Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, and Browning=--
  Selections (Copeland & Rideout)                                      .40

  =Carlyle's= Essay on Burns (Mims)                                    .35

  =Coleridge's= Rime of the Ancient Mariner (Woodberry)                .30

  =Emerson's= Essays--Selections (Van Dyke)                            .35

  =Franklin's= Autobiography (Smyth)                                   .40

  =Gaskell's= Cranford (Rhodes)                                        .40

  =George Eliot's= Silas Marner (Cross)                                .40

  =Goldsmith's= Vicar of Wakefield, and The Deserted
  Village (Tufts)                                                      .45

  =Irving's= Sketch Book--Selections (Sampson)                         .45

  =Lamb's= Essays of Elia--Selections (Genung)                         .40

  =Lincoln=, Selections from (Draper)                                  .35

  =Macaulay's= Essay on Addison (McClumpha                             .35
    Essay on Milton (Gulick)                                           .35
    Life of Johnson (Clark)                                            .35
    Addison and Johnson. In one volume (McClumpha-Clark)               .45

  =Milton's= Minor Poems (Jordan)                                      .35

  =Scott's= Ivanhoe (Stoddard)                                         .50
    Lady of the Lake (Alden)                                           .40

  =Shakespeare's= As You Like It (Demmon)                              .35
    Julius Caesar (Mabie)                                              .35
    Macbeth (Parrott)                                                  .40
    Merchant of Venice (Schelling)                                     .35

  =Stevenson's= Inland Voyage, and Travels with a Donkey
  (Blakely)                                                            .40

  =Tennyson's= Idylls of the King--Selections (Van Dyke)               .35
    Princess (Bates)                                                   .40

  =Washington's= Farewell Address, and Webster's First
  Bunker Hill Oration (Pine)                                           .30


  Eclectic English Classics--New Edition--Cloth

  The 20 cent Series

  =Addison's= Sir Roger de Coverley Papers (Underwood)                 .20

  =Arnold's= Sohrab and Rustum (Tanner)                                .20

  =Bunyan's= Pilgrim's Progress (Jones & Arnold)                       .20

  =Burke's= Conciliation with the American Colonies (Clark)            .20

  =Burns's= Poems--Selections (Venable)                                .20

  =Byron's= Childe Harold (Canto IV), Prisoner of Chillon,
  Mazeppa, and other Selections (Venable)                              .20

  =Carlyle's= Essay on Burns (Miller)                                  .20

  =Chaucer's= Prologue and Knighte's Tale (Van Dyke)                   .20

  =Coleridge's= Rime of the Ancient Mariner (Garrigues)                .20

  =Cooper's= Pilot (Watrous). Double number                            .40

  =Defoe's= History of the Plague in London (Syle)                     .20
    Robinson Crusoe (Stephens)                                         .20

  =De Quincey's= Revolt of the Tartars                                 .20

  =Dickens's= Tale of Two Cities (Pearce). Double number               .40

  =Dryden's= Palamon and Arcite (Bates)                                .20

  =Emerson's= American Scholar, Self-Reliance, Compensation
  (Smith)                                                              .20

  =Franklin's= Autobiography (Reid)                                    .20

  =George Eliot's= Silas Marner (McKitrick)                            .20

  =Goldsmith's= Vicar of Wakefield (Hansen)                            .20

  =Gray's= Elegy in a Country Churchyard, and Goldsmith's
  Deserted Village (Van Dyke)                                          .20

  =Irving's= Sketch Book--Selections (St. John)                        .20
    Tales of a Traveler (Rutland). Double number                       .40

  =Lincoln's= Addresses and Letters (Moores)                           .20
    Address at Cooper Union, and Macaulay's Speeches on Copyright
      (Pittenger)                                                      .20

  =Macaulay's= Essay on Addison (Matthews)                             .20
    Essay on Milton (Mead)                                             .20
    Life of Johnson (Lucas)                                            .20
    Essays on Lord Clive and Warren Hastings (Holmes)
      Double number                                                    .40
    Lays of Ancient Rome and other Poems (Atkinson)                    .20
    Speeches on Copyright, and Lincoln's Address at Cooper
      Union (Pittenger)                                                .20

  =Milton's= L'Allegro, Il Penseroso, Comus, Lycidas (Buck)            .20
    Paradise Lost.  Books I and II (Stephens)                          .20

  =Old Testament= Narratives (Baldwin)                                 .20

  =Poe's= Selected Poems and Tales (Stott)                             .20

  =Pope's= Homer's Iliad. Books I, VI, XXII, XXIV                      .20
    Rape of the Lock, and Essay on Man (Van Dyke)                      .20

  =Scott's= Abbot. Double number                                       .40
    Ivanhoe (Schreiber). Double number                                 .40
    Lady of the Lake (Bacon)                                           .20
    Marmion (Coblentz)                                                 .20
    Quentin Durward (Norris). Double number                            .40
    Woodstock. Double number                                           .40

  =Shakespeare's= As You Like It (North)                               .20
    Hamlet (Shower)                                                    .20
    Henry V (Law)                                                      .20
    Julius Caesar (Baker)                                              .20
    Macbeth (Livengood)                                                .20
    Merchant of Venice (Blakely)                                       .20
    Midsummer-Night's Dream (Haney)                                    .20
    Twelfth Night (Weld)                                               .20

  =Southey's= Life of Nelson. Double number                            .40

  =Stevenson's= Inland Voyage, and Travels with a Donkey
      (Armstrong)                                                      .20
    Treasure Island (Fairley)                                          .20

  =Swift's= Gulliver's Travels (Gaston)                                .20

  =Tennyson's= Idylls of the King--Selections (Willard)                .20
    Princess (Shryock)                                                 .20

  =Thackeray's= Henry Esmond (Bissell). Double number                  .40

  =Washington's= Farewell Address and Webster's First Bunker
    Hill Oration (Lewis)                                               .20

  =Webster's= Bunker Hill Orations                                     .20

  =Wordsworth's= Poems--Selections (Venable)                           .20


  Harper's School Classics

  =Besant's= Life of Gaspard de Coligny                                .30

  =Conant's= Primer of Spanish Literature                              .30

  =Eginhard's= Charlemagne                                             .30

  =Herbermann's= Business Life in Ancient Rome                         .30

  =Macaulay's= John Hampden--Burleigh                                  .30
    Lord Bacon                                                         .30
    Machiavelli--Walpole                                               .30


  Rolfe's English Classics

  =Browning's= Select Dramas                                           .56
    Select Poems                                                       .56

  =Goldsmith's= Select Poems                                           .56

  =Gray's= Select Poems                                                .56

  =Macaulay's= Lays of Ancient Rome                                    .56

  =Milton's= Minor Poems                                               .56

  =Wordsworth's= Select Poems                                          .56


  Rolfe's New Edition of Shakespeare

    All's Well that Ends Well              Merchant of Venice
    Antony and Cleopatra                   Merry Wives of Windsor
    As You Like It                         Midsummer-Night's Dream
    Comedy of Errors                       Much Ado About Nothing
    Coriolanus                             Othello
    Cymbeline                              Pericles
    Hamlet                                 Richard II.
    Henry IV, Part I.                      Richard III.
    Henry IV, Part II.                     Romeo and Juliet
    Henry V.                               Sonnets
    Henry VI, Part I.                      Taming of the Shrew
    Henry VI, Part II.                     Tempest
    Henry VI, Part III.                    Timon of Athens
    Henry VIII.                            Titus Andronicus
    Julius Caesar                          Troilus and Cressida
    King John                              Twelfth Night
    King Lear                              Two Gentlemen of Verona
    Love's Labour's Lost                   Two Noble Kinsmen
    Macbeth                                Venus and Adonis, etc.
    Measure for Measure                    Winter's Tale
      40 volumes                                                 Each  .56

  _The old edition is continued in publication in order that sets may be
  completed where desired._




  MATHEMATICS

  Arithmetic

  _Some of these arithmetics are published both with and without answers.
  The edition =with= answers will always be supplied unless the edition
  =without= answers is specified._

  =Appletons' Standard Arithmetics:=
    Numbers Applied. With Answers                                      .75
      The same. Part I. With Answers                                   .50
      The same. Part II. With or without Answers                       .50
      Key to the same                                                  .24
      Answers to the same                                              .10

  =Bailey's= American Elementary Arithmetic. Without Answers           .35
    American Comprehensive Arithmetic. With Answers                    .65
    American Mental Arithmetic. Without Answers                        .35

  =Bailey & Germann's= Number Primer                                   .30

  =Bailey-Wiemer Arithmetics:=
    First Book. Without Answers                                        .20
    Second Book. Without Answers                                       .30
    Third Book. With Answers                                           .65

  =Baird's= Graded Work in Arithmetic:
    First and Second Years. Without Answers. Boards              Each  .18
      The same. Cloth                                              "   .20
    Third, Fourth, and Fifth Years. With Answers. Boards           "   .20
      The same. Cloth                                              "   .25
    Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Years. With Answers.
      Cloth                                                        "   .25
    Practical Arithmetic for Grammar Grades. With Answers              .65

  =Bookman's= Business Arithmetic. With or without Answers             .65
    Key to the same                                                    .40

  =Cook's= Mental Arithmetic. Without Answers                          .50

  =Dean's= Intellectual Arithmetic. Without Answers                    .34

  =Dubbs's= New Practical Arithmetic. With Answers                     .60
    Arithmetical Problems. With Answers.  Teacher's edition           1.00
      The same. Without Answers. Pupil's edition.  Parts I
        and II                                                   Each  .25
    Complete Mental Arithmetic. Without Answers                        .35

  =Felter's= New Primary Arithmetic. With Answers                      .30
    Advanced Arithmetic. With Answers                                  .50

  =Ficklin's= Elementary Arithmetic. Without Answers. Boards           .30
      The same. Cloth                                                  .40
    National Arithmetic. With Answers                                  .70

  =Fish's= Arithmetic No. 1. Without Answers                           .30
    Arithmetic No. 2. With Answers                                     .60
      Key to the same                                                  .60

  =New Franklin Arithmetics= (Seaver & Walton):
    First Book. With or without Answers                                .35
    Second Book. With or without Answers                               .65
      Key to both books                                                .90

  =Franklin Arithmetics= (Seaver & Walton):
    Primary Arithmetic. Without Answers                                .20
    Elementary Arithmetic. With Answers                                .35
      Key to the same                                                  .25
    Written Arithmetic. With or without Answers                        .75
      Key to the same                                                  .75
      The same. Part I                                                 .28
    Mental Arithmetic. Without Answers                                 .30

  =Gibbs's= Natural Number Primer                                      .25

  =Hall's= (F. H.) Primary Arithmetic. Without Answers                 .35
    Intermediate Arithmetic. Without Answers                           .40
    Practical Arithmetic. Without Answers                              .45
    Arithmetic Primer. Without Answers                                 .25
    Elementary Arithmetic. Without Answers                             .35
    Complete Arithmetic. Without Answers                               .60

  =Hamilton's Arithmetics=:
    _Three Book Series._
    Primary Arithmetic. With or without Answers                        .35
    Intermediate Arithmetic. With or without Answers                   .40
    School Arithmetic. With or without Answers                         .45
    _Two Book Series._
    Elementary Arithmetic. With or without Answers                     .35
    Complete Arithmetic. With or without Answers                       .60
      Key to all Hamilton's Arithmetics                                .80
    _New Jersey Edition._
    First Book.  With or without Answers                               .35
      Answers to the same                                              .10
    Second Book. With or without Answers                               .40
      Answers to the same                                              .10
    Third Book. With or without Answers                                .45
      Answers to the same                                              .10

  =Harper's= First Book in Arithmetic. Without Answers                 .30
    Second Book in Arithmetic. With Answers                            .60
      Key to the same                                                  .80
    Advanced Arithmetic. With Answers                                  .80
      Key to the same                                                  .80

  =Harvey's= (L. D.) Essentials of Arithmetic. First Book.
  With or without Answers                                              .25
      Answers to the same                                              .10
    Second Book. With or without Answers                               .50
      Answers to the same                                              .10

  =Harvey's= (L. D.) Practical Arithmetics.  Book One. With
  Answers                                                              .35
     Book Two. With Answers                                            .50

  =Hornbrook's= Primary Arithmetic. Without Answers                    .35
    Grammar School Arithmetic. Without Answers                         .65
      Key to Primary and Grammar School Arithmetics                    .65

  =Hull's= Elementary Arithmetic. With or without Answers              .35
    Complete Arithmetic. With or without Answers                       .65
      Key to the same                                                  .65
    Mental Arithmetic. Without Answers                                 .30
      Key to the same                                                  .40

  =Jones's= (W. S.) Elements of Arithmetic. With Answers               .30
    Practical Arithmetic. With Answers                                 .50
      Key to the same                                                  .50

  =Jury, O'Connell & Shallow's= Graded Exercises in Arithmetic:
    Fourth Year, First Half. Without Answers                           .30
    Fourth Year, Second Half. Without Answers                          .30
    Fifth Year, First Half. Without Answers                            .35
    Fifth Year, Second Half. Without Answers                           .35
    Sixth Year, First Half. Without Answers                            .35
    Sixth Year, Second Half. Without Answers                           .40

  =King's= (J. E.) Business Arithmetic. With Answers                   .80
      Key to the same                                                  .50

  =Kirk & Sabin's= Oral Arithmetic. Parts I and II.
    Without Answers                                              Each  .25

  =Lyman's= Advanced Arithmetic. Without Answers                       .75

  =McClymonds & Jones's= (D. R.) Elementary Arithmetic. Without
      Answers                                                          .35
    Essentials of Arithmetic. Without Answers                          .60

  =McNeill's= Mental Arithmetic. Without Answers                       .35

  =Milne's= Arithmetics:
    _New York State Arithmetic._
    First Book. With or without Answers                                .40
      Answers to the same                                              .10
    Second Book. With or without Answers                               .60
      Answers to the same                                              .10
    _Progressive Three Book Series._
    First Book. Without Answers                                        .35
    Second Book. With or without Answers                               .40
    Third Book. With or without Answers                                .45
    _Progressive Two Book Series._
    First Book. Without Answers                                        .35
    Complete Book. With or without Answers                             .65
      Answers to the same                                              .10
      Key to all Progressive Arithmetics                               .75

  =Milne's Arithmetics:=
    _Standard Two Book Series._
    Elements of Arithmetic. With Answers                               .30
    Standard Arithmetic. With or without Answers                       .65
    _Standard Three Book Series._
    Primary Arithmetic. Without Answers                                .25
    Intermediate Arithmetic. With Answers                              .30
    Standard Arithmetic. With or without Answers                       .65
      Key to Standard and Mental Arithmetics                           .75
    _Inductive Series._
    Mental Arithmetic. Without Answers                                 .35
    Metric Edition of Elements of Arithmetic. With Answers             .35
    First Lessons in Arithmetic. Without Answers                       .22
    Elementary Arithmetic. With Answers                                .35
    Practical Arithmetic. With Answers                                 .50
      Key to the same                                                  .50

  =Moore's= (E. H.) Grammar School Arithmetic. With Answers            .60

  =Moore's= (J. H.) New Commercial Arithmetic. With or without
      Answers                                                         1.00
    Key to the same                                                    .50

  =Nicholson's= (J. W.) Elementary Arithmetic. Without Answers    .34
    Grammar School Arithmetic. With Answers                            .45
      Key to the same                                                  .45
    New Primary Arithmetic. Without Answers                            .18
    New Intermediate Arithmetic. With Answers                          .35
    New Complete Arithmetic. With Answers                              .65
      Key to the same                                                  .65
    Advanced Arithmetic. With Answers                                  .90
      Key to the same                                                  .90

  =Philadelphia= Intermediate Arithmetic (Nudd).  Without Answers      .38
    Higher Arithmetic (Nudd). Without Answers                          .43

  =Raub's= Elementary Arithmetic. With Answers                         .35
    Complete Arithmetic. With Answers                                  .60
      Key to the same                                                  .60

  =Ray's= Modern Primary Arithmetic. Without Answers                   .15
    Modern Intellectual Arithmetic. Without Answers                    .25
    Modern Elementary Arithmetic. With Answers                         .30
    Modern Practical Arithmetic. With Answers                          .50
      Key to Modern Intellectual and Practical Arithmetics             .50
    New Primary Arithmetic. Without Answers                            .15
    New Intellectual Arithmetic. Without Answers                       .25
    New Elementary Arithmetic. With Answers                            .35
    New Practical Arithmetic. With Answers                             .50
      Key to New Intellectual and Practical Arithmetics                .50

  =Ray's= New Higher Arithmetic. With Answers                          .85
      Key to the same                                                  .75
    New Test Examples in Arithmetic. With or without Answers           .35
    Practical Arithmetic. Old. With Answers                            .50
      Key to the same                                                  .50

  =Robinson's= New Primary Arithmetic. Without Answers                 .18
    New Rudiments of Arithmetic. With Answers                          .30
    New Intellectual Arithmetic. Without Answers                       .35
    New Practical Arithmetic. With Answers                             .65
      Key to the same                                                  .65
    New Higher Arithmetic. With Answers                               1.00
      Key to the same                                                 1.00
    New Table Book (Fish). Without Answers                             .18
    Progressive Primary Arithmetic (Fish). Without Answers             .18
    Progressive Intellectual Arithmetic (Fish). Without Answers        .29
    Rudiments of Written Arithmetic (Fish). With Answers               .32
    Elements of Arithmetic. Without Answers                            .40
    Progressive Practical Arithmetic (Fish). With Answers              .68
      Key to the same                                                  .65
    Progressive Higher Arithmetic (Fish). With Answers                 .98
      Key to the same                                                  .90

  =Robinson's Shorter Course=:
    First Book in Arithmetic (Fish). Without Answers                   .30
    Complete Arithmetic (Fish). With Answers                           .75
      The same. Part I. With Answers                                   .50
      The same. Part II. With Answers. Boards                          .40
      Key to Complete Arithmetic                                       .72
    Beginner's Book in Arithmetic. Without Answers                     .30
    Graded School Arithmetic. Without Answers                          .60

  =Sanford's= Primary Arithmetic. Without Answers                      .20
    Intermediate Arithmetic. With Answers                              .36
    Common School Arithmetic. With Answers                             .64
      Key to the same                                                 1.00
    Higher Arithmetic. With Answers                                   1.00

  =Sheldon's= Elementary Arithmetic. With Answers                      .40
    Complete Arithmetic. With Answers                                  .67
      Key to the same                                                  .75
    Graded Examples in Arithmetic: First Book. Without Answers         .30
      Second Book. Without Answers                                     .35
        Answers to the same                                            .20

  =Stoddard's= Juvenile Mental Arithmetic. Without Answers             .18
    American Intellectual Arithmetic. Without Answers                  .29
      Key to the same                                                  .50
    New Intellectual Arithmetic. Without Answers                       .35

  =Thurston's= Mental Commercial Arithmetic. Without Answers           .45
      Key to the same                                                  .25

  =Van Tuyl's= Complete Business Arithmetic. With or without Ans.     1.00
      Key to the same                                                  .60
    Essentials of Business Arithmetic. With or without Answers         .70
      Answers to the same                                              .10
      Key to the same                                                  .25

  =Walton & Holmes's Arithmetics=:
    First Book. Without Answers                                        .30
    Second Book. Without Answers                                       .40
    Third Book. Without Answers                                        .45
    Fourth Book. Without Answers                                       .50

  =Wentworth's= Arithmetical Problems. Pupil's edition. Without
      Answers                                                          .32
    The same. Teacher's edition. With Answers                          .36

  =Werner= Mental Arithmetic (Raub). Without Answers                   .30

  =Werner= Arithmetics (Hall):
    Book I. Without Answers                                            .40
    Book II. Without Answers                                           .40
    Book III. Without Answers                                          .50
      Teacher's Hand Book                                              .25

  =White's= (E. E.) First Book of Arithmetic. New Century Edition.
      With Answers                                                     .30
    Complete Arithmetic. New Century Edition. With Answers             .65
      Key to the same                                                  .30
    New Elementary Arithmetic. With Answers                            .50
    Primary Arithmetic.  Old. Without Answers                          .22
    Intermediate Arithmetic. Old. With Answers                         .35
    Complete Arithmetic. Old.  With Answers                            .65
      Manual and Key of Arithmetics. Old                               .75
    Oral Lessons in Number. Without Answers                            .40

  =White's= (J. M.) Oral Arithmetic. Without Answers                   .35

  =Williams's= (O. F.) Commercial Arithmetic. With or without
      Answers                                                         1.10
    Key to the same                                                    .50

  =Winslow's= (I. O.) Natural Arithmetics:
    Book I. Without Answers                                            .30
    Book II. With Answers                                              .40
    Book III. With Answers                                             .50


  Arithmetic Tablets

  =Arithmetical= Table Cards                                Per doz.,  .55

  =National= Number Tablets. Arithmetic. Nos. 1 to 12          "       .90
    Answers to Arithmetic Tablets                                Each  .15

  =Ray's= Test Example Tablets. Nos. 1 to 8                 Per doz., 1.00
    Answers to all Problems in Tablets 4 to 8                    Each  .10

  =Silver's= Primary Exercises in Arithmetic. Nos. 1 and 2         "   .10
    The same. Nos. 3 and 4                                         "   .15

  =Walton's= (G. A.) New Arithmetical Tables             Per hundred  7.20
      Key to the same                                           Each   .40
    Arithmetical Tables                                  Per hundred  7.20


  Algebra

  _Some of these algebras are published both with and without answers.
  The edition =without= answers will always be supplied unless the edition =with=
  answers is specified._

  =Bailey's= High School Algebra. With Answers                         .90

  =Brown's= (T. K.) Elementary Algebra. With Answers                   .80

  =Collins's= Practical Elementary Algebra. Without Answers           1.00
      Answers to the same                                              .10
    Practical Algebra.  First Year Course.  With or without
        Answers                                                        .85
      Answers to the same                                              .10
    Practical Algebra. Second Course. With or without Answers          .85
      Answers to the same                                              .10
    Advanced Algebra. Without Answers                                 1.00
      Answers to the same                                              .10

  =Davies's= New Elementary Algebra. With Answers                      .90
      Key to the same                                                  .90
    University Algebra. With Answers                                  1.00

  =Downey's= Higher Algebra. With Answers                             1.50
      The same. Part I. With Answers                                   .90

  =Giffin's= Grammar School Algebra. Without Answers                   .50

  =Hedrick's= Algebra for Secondary Schools. Without Answers          1.00
      Answers to the same                                              .10

  =Hull's= Elements of Algebra. With Answers                           .50
    Complete Algebra. With or without Answers                         1.00
      The same. Teachers' edition                                     1.25

  =Jocelyn's= High School and Academic Algebra. Without Answers       1.25
    Answers to the same                                                .10

  =Milne's= Grammar School Algebra. With or without Answers            .50
      Answers to the same                                              .10
    Elements of Algebra. With or without Answers                       .60
      Answers to the same                                              .10
      Key to Grammar School Algebra and Elements of Algebra            .60
    First Year Algebra. With or without Answers                        .85
      Key to the same                                                  .85
      Answers to the same                                              .10
    High School Algebra. With or without Answers                      1.00
      Key to the same                                                 1.00
      Answers to the same                                              .10

  =Milne's= Standard Algebra. Revised. With or without Answers        1.00
      Answers to the same                                              .10
    Standard Algebra. With or without Answers                         1.00
      Answers to the same                                              .10
      Key to the same                                                 1.00
    Academic Algebra. With or without Answers                         1.25
      Answers to the same                                              .10
    Advanced Algebra. With or without Answers                         1.50
      Answers to the same                                              .10
      Key to Academic and Advanced Algebras                           1.50
    Inductive Algebra. With Answers                                    .80
      Key to the same                                                  .80

  =Nicholson's= (J. W.) School Algebra. With Answers                  1.00
      Key to the same                                                  .50

  =Ray's= New Elementary Algebra. With Answers                         .80
    New Higher Algebra. With Answers                                  1.00
      Key to New Elementary and Higher Algebras                       1.00

  =Rivenburg's= Review of Algebra                                      .36

  =Robbins & Somerville's= Exercises in Algebra. Without Answers       .50
      Answers to the same                                              .10

  =Robinson's= New Elementary Algebra. With Answers                   1.08
      Key to the same                                                  .90
    New University Algebra. With Answers                              1.58
      Key to the same                                                 1.50

  =Sabin & Lowry's= Elementary Lessons in Algebra. Without
      Answers                                                          .50
    Key to the same                                                    .50

  =Sanford's= Elementary Algebra. With Answers                        1.00

  =Sensenig's= Elementary Algebra. With Answers                       1.16
      The same. Without Answers                                       1.08
      Key to the same                                                 1.00
    Advanced Algebra. With Answers                                    1.40
      Key to the same                                                 1.40

  =Sheldon's= Elements of Algebra. With Answers                       1.08
    Complete Algebra. With Answers                                    1.30
      Key to Elementary and Complete Algebras                         1.50

  =Somerville's= First Year in Algebra.  With or without Answers.      .60
      Answers to the same                                              .10
    Elementary Algebra. Revised. With or without Answers              1.00
      Answers to the same                                              .10
    Elementary Algebra. Without Answers                               1.00
      Answers to the same                                              .10

  =Tanner's= Elementary Algebra.  Without Answers (Modern
        Mathematical Series)                                          1.00
      Answers to the same                                              .10
      Key to the same                                                 1.00

  =Tanner's= High School Algebra. Without Answers (Modern
        Mathematical Series)                                          1.00
      Answers to the same                                              .10
      Key to the same                                                  .75

  =Venable's= (C. S.) Easy Algebra. With Answers                       .60

  =White's= (E. E.) Grammar School Algebra. With Answers               .35
    School Algebra. With or without Answers                           1.00
      Key to the same                                                 1.00


  Geometry and Trigonometry

  =Campbell's= Observational Geometry                                  .80

  =Conant's= Original Exercises in Plane and Solid Geometry            .50
    Plane and Spherical Trigonometry. With Tables                     1.20
      The same. Without Tables                                         .85
    Plane Trigonometry. With Tables                                    .90
      The same. Without Tables                                         .60
    Logarithmic and Trigonometric Tables                               .50

  =Crockett's= Elements of Plane and Spherical Trigonometry.
        With Tables                                                   1.25
      The same. Without Tables                                        1.00
    Elements of Plane Trigonometry. With Tables                       1.00
    Logarithmic and Trigonometric Tables                              1.00

  =Davies's= Elementary Geometry and Trigonometry                     1.00
    Legendre's Geometry and Trigonometry                              1.60
      The same. Part I. Geometry                                      1.25
      The same.  Part II.  Trigonometry, Mensuration, and
        Tables                                                        1.00
      Key to Legendre's Exercises in Geometry                         1.60

  =Eclectic= School Geometry (Burns)                                   .60

  =Hart & Feldman's= Plane and Solid Geometry                         1.25
      Key to the same                                                 1.00
    Plane Geometry                                                     .80
    Solid Geometry                                                     .80

  =Hornbrook's= Concrete Geometry                                      .75

  =Hull's= Elements of Geometry                                       1.25

  =Loomis's= (E.) Plane and Spherical Trigonometry. With Tables       1.50
    Tables of Logarithms                                              1.00

  =Lyman's= Plane and Solid Geometry                                  1.25
      Key to the same                                                 1.00
    Plane Geometry                                                     .75
    Solid Geometry                                                     .75

  =Milne's= Plane and Solid Geometry                                  1.25
      Key to the same                                                 1.25
    Plane Geometry                                                     .75
    Solid Geometry                                                     .75

  =Phillips (A. W.) & Fisher's (I.)= Elements of Geometry             1.75
      Key to the same                                                 1.50
    Plane Geometry                                                     .80
    Geometry of Space or Solid Geometry                               1.25
    Elements of Geometry. Abridged                                    1.25
    Logarithms of Numbers                                              .30

  =Phillips (A. W.) & Strong's= Elements of Plane and Spherical
        Trigonometry. With Tables                                     1.40
      The same. Without Tables                                         .90
      Key to the same                                                 1.25
    Logarithmic and Trigonometric Tables                              1.00

  =Robbins's= Plane and Solid Geometry                                1.25
      Key to the same                                                 1.00
    Plane Geometry                                                     .75
    Solid Geometry                                                     .75
    Plane Trigonometry                                                 .60

  =Robinson's= New Geometry and Trigonometry                          1.60
      Key to the same                                                 1.60
    Geometry                                                           .90
    Trigonometry                                                       .90

  =Sanders's= (A.) Plane and Solid Geometry                           1.25
      Key to the same                                                 1.00
    Plane Geometry                                                     .75
    Solid Geometry                                                     .75

  =Smith's= (E. R.) Plane and Solid Geometry Developed by the
        Syllabus Method                                               1.25
    Plane Geometry                                                     .75
    Solid Geometry                                                     .75

  =Spencer's= (W. G.) Inventional Geometry                             .35

  =Venable's= (C. S.) Elements of Geometry (Modern Geometry in
        Appendix)                                                     1.50

  =White's= (E. E.) Elements of Geometry (Macnie)                     1.25
      Key to the same                                                 1.00
    Plane Geometry                                                     .75


  Higher Mathematics

  =Briot & Bouquet's= Analytical Geometry (Boyd)                      2.00

  =Church's= Descriptive Geometry, etc. (2 vols)                      2.50

  =Church & Bartlett's= Descriptive Geometry. Complete                2.25
      The same. Part I                                                1.75

  =Cornell Mathematical Series:= Now Modern Mathematical
  Series.

  =Davies's= Elements of Surveying (Van Amringe)                      1.75

  =Ferris's= Descriptive Geometry                                     1.25

  =McMahon & Snyder's= Differential Calculus. With Answers
          (Modern Mathematical Series)                                2.00

  =Merrill's= (G. A.) Elementary Theoretical Mechanics
          (Without Calculus)                                          1.00

  =Murray's= Integral Calculus. With Answers (Modern
          Mathematical Series)                                        2.00

  =Raymond's= Plane Surveying for Use in the Classroom and Field.
      With Tables                                                     3.00
    Plane Surveying and Tables                                        3.00

  =Richards's= Elementary Navigation and Nautical Astronomy            .75

  =Robinson's= Surveying and Navigation (Root)                        1.60

  =Rodgers's= Elements of Mensuration                                  .42
      Key to the same                                                  .42

  =Smith's= (P. F.) Elementary Calculus                               1.25

  =Snyder= (V.) & =Hutchinson's= Differential and Integral
  Calculus.
        With Answers (Modern Mathematical Series)                     2.00
    Elementary Textbook on the Calculus. With Answers (Modern
        Mathematical Series)                                          2.20

  =Tanner & Allen's= Elementary Analytic Geometry. With Answers
        (Modern Mathematical Series)                                  2.00
    Brief Course in Analytic Geometry. With Answers (Modern
        Mathematical Series)                                          1.50




  GEOGRAPHY

  =Appletons'= Standard Elementary Geography                           .55
    Standard Higher Geography[1]                                      1.25
    Lessons in Geography for Little Learners                           .31

  =Baldwin's= (C. W.) Geography of the Hawaiian Islands                .60

  =Barnes's= Elementary Geography                                      .55
      The same. Special Edition for the Pacific Coast                  .60
    Complete Geography[1]                                             1.25

  =Butler's= Elementary Geography                                      .54
    Complete Geography[1]                                             1.20

  =Cornell's= First Steps in Geography                                 .31
    Primary Geography                                                  .42

  =Eclectic= Elementary Geography                                      .55
    Complete Geography[1]                                             1.20
    Primary Geography. No. 1. Old                                      .55
    Intermediate Geography. No. 2. Old[1]                             1.10

  =Harper's= Introductory Geography                                    .48
    School Geography[1]                                               1.08

  =Maury's= New Elements of Geography                                  .55
      The same. Special Edition for New York City                      .60
      The same. Special Edition for New York State                     .60

  =Maury's= New Complete Geography[1]                                 1.25
    Elementary Geography                                               .55
    Manual of Geography[1]                                            1.25

  =Mitchell's= First Lessons in Geography                              .36
    New Primary Geography                                              .54
    New Intermediate Geography[1]                                     1.20
    Ancient Atlas                                                      .98

  =Monteith's= (Jas.) First Lessons in Geography (National Series)     .25
    Introduction to Geography (National Series)                        .40
    Manual of Geography (National Series)                              .75

  =Morton's= Elementary Geography                                      .55
    Advanced Geography[1]                                             1.20

  =Natural Geographies= (Redway & Hinman):
    Introductory Geography                                             .60
      The same. Part I                                                 .40
      The same. Part II                                                .40
    School Geography[1]                                               1.25
      The same. Part I[1]                                              .75
      The same. Part II                                                .75
    Atlas of Reference Maps from the Natural School Geography          .35
    Elementary Geography                                               .60
    Advanced Geography[1]                                             1.25
    Brief Geography--One Book Course                                   .80

  =Rabenort's= Geography--North and South America                      .50
    North America and the United States                                .50
    The United States by Groups and by States                          .50
    The United States as a Whole                                       .50
    Europe                                                             .50

  =Roddy's= Elementary Geography                                       .50
    Complete Geography[1]                                             1.00

  =Smith= (F. R.) =& Perry's= (A. C.) Geography of New York            .40

  =Swinton's= Introductory Geography                                   .55
    Grammar School Geography[1]                                       1.25
    Primary Geography                                                  .54
    Elementary Geography                                               .80

  =Tarbell's= Introductory Geography                                   .50
    Complete Geography                                                1.00
      The same.[1] With Special State Supplements                     1.10

  =Tozer's= Classical Geography                                        .35

  =Warren's= Primary Geography                                         .50
    Common School Geography                                           1.12

  _(See also Geographical Readers, page 10_)

  [1] _This book is published with special State Supplements. Every order
should specify the State Edition wanted_.


  Map Drawing

  =Butler's= Tracing Maps                                Per hundred  1.25

  =Eclectic= Map Blanks                                     "         1.50
    Twenty-three numbers as follows: No. 1. Hemispheres--No.
    2. North America--No. 3. South America--No. 4. Europe--No.
    5. Asia--No. 6. United States--No. 7. New England--No. 8.
    Middle States--No. 9. Southern States (E.)--No. 10. Southern
    States (W.)--No. 11. Central States (E.)--No. 12. Central
    States (W.)--No. 13. Northern States (E.)--No. 14. British
    Isles--No. 15. Africa--No. 16. Northern States (W.)--No.
    17. Australia--No. 18. Southwestern States--No. 19.
    Northwestern States--No. 20. Western States--No. 21.
    Ohio--No. 22. The World, double page--No. 23. The World,
    single page.

  =Greater New York= Elementary Outline Map                            .05

  =University= Map Studies:
    1. North America. 2. South America. 3. Europe. 4. Asia.
      5. Africa. 6. Oceanica. 7. United States. Set 1, with
      outlines and squares; Set 2, with squares only; Set 3,
      with marginal points only. In packages, 100 sheets of
      one kind                                           Per hundred  1.00
    Envelope "B." Second year's work, 10 sheets                        .10
      Three each of Europe, Asia, and Africa (one each from
      Sets 1, 2, and 3). One of Oceanica from Set 2.
    Commercial Set. 10 sheets with outlines and boundaries:
      1. North America. 2. South America. 3. Europe. 4. Asia.
      5. Africa. 6. Oceanica.  7. British Isles.  8. Central
      Europe. 9. United States. 10. World, Mercator's projection.
      Each, in packages of 100                           Per hundred  1.00




  HISTORY

  United States History

  =Barnes's= Elementary History of the United States (Baldwin)         .60
    School History of the United States                               1.00
    Primary History of the United States                               .60
    Brief History of the United States                                1.00

  =Bruce's= School History of the United States                       1.00

  =Burton's= Story of Our Country                                      .60

  =Eclectic= Primary History of the United States                      .50
    New History of the United States                                  1.00

  =Eggleston's= New Century History of the United States              1.00
    First Book in American History                                     .60
    History of the United States and Its People                       1.05

  =Ellis's= School History of the United States                       1.00

  =Field's= Grammar School History of the United States               1.00

  =Fish's= Development of American Nationality                        2.25

  =Foote & Skinner's= (A. W.) Explorers and Founders of America        .60

  =Goodrich's= Child's History of the United States. Boards            .36
    The same. Cloth                                                    .48

  =Hansell's= School History of the United States (Chambers)           .50
    Higher History of the United States (Chambers)                    1.00

  =Hart's= Essentials in American History                             1.50

  =McMaster's= Brief History of the United States                     1.00
    Primary History of the United States                               .60
    School History of the United States                               1.00

  =Newton & Treat's= (E. B.) Outline for Review in American History    .25

  =Perry & Price's= American History. First Book (1492-1763)           .60
    Second Book (1763 to the Present Time)                             .60

  =Quackenbos's= (G. P.) Elementary History of the United States       .60

  =Scudder's= Short History of the United States                       .60
    New History of the United States                                  1.00

  =Shinn's= History of the American People                            1.00

  =Swan's= History and Civics for Grade 5A                             .50

  =Swinton's= First Lessons in Our Country's History                   .48
    School History of the United States                                .90

  =White's= (F. H.) Pupils' Outline Studies in United States History   .30

  =White's= (H. A.) Beginners' History of the United States            .50


  State and Local History

  =Bandini's= History of California                                    .75

  =Bolton & Barker's= Makers of Texas                                  .60

  =Brevard & Bennett's= History and Government of Florida              .60

  =Brown's= (W. G.) History of Alabama                                1.00

  =DeThoma's= Historia de Nuevo Mexico                                 .75

  =Ellis & Snyder's= (H.) Brief History of New Jersey                  .60

  =Evans's= First Lessons in Georgia History                           .60
    History of Georgia                                                1.00

  =Ficklen's= History and Civil Government of Louisiana               1.00

  =Hinsdale's= History and Civil Government of Ohio                   1.00
    History and Civil Government of Pennsylvania                      1.00

  =Kinkead's= History of Kentucky                                      .75

  =Lewis's= (V. A.) History and Civil Government of West Virginia     1.00

  =Loeb & Viles's= Government and History of Missouri                 1.00

  =McGee's= History of Tennessee                                       .67

  =Moore's= (J. W.) School History of North Carolina                   .85

  =Niles's= History and Civil Government of Minnesota                 1.00

  =Robinson's= (D.) Brief History of South Dakota                      .60

  =Robinson= (L. E.) =& Moore's= (I.) History of Illinois              .60

  =Seerley & Parish's= History and Civil Government of Iowa           1.00

  =Smith= (G. M.) =& Young's= (C. M.) History and Civil
    Government of South Dakota                                        1.00

  =Smithey's= History of Virginia                                      .75

  =Spencer's= (C. P.) First Steps in North Carolina History            .75

  =Stetson's= History and Civil Government of Maine                   1.00

  =Todd's= (C. B.) Brief History of the City of New York               .75

  =Viles's= History of Missouri                                        .72

  (_See also Historical and Biographical Readers, page 11_)


  General History

  =Appletons'= School History of the World                            1.22

  =Barnes's= Brief General History of the World                       1.60

  =Colby's= Outlines of General History                               1.50

  =Fisher's= (G. P.) Brief History of the Nations                     1.50
    Outlines of Universal History. Revised                            2.40

  =Freeman's= History of Europe                                        .35

  =Parley's= Universal History                                        1.12

  =Swinton's= Outlines of the World's History                         1.44

  =Thalheimer's= General History. New Edition                         1.20


  Ancient History

  =Barnes's= Brief History of Ancient Peoples                         1.00

  =Fisher's= (G. P.) Outlines of Universal History. Revised.
          Part I, Ancient History                                     1.00

  =Lewis's= (L. B.) Pupil's Notebook and Study Outline in
          Oriental and Greek History                                   .25

  =Morey's= Outlines of Ancient History                               1.50

  =Thalheimer's= Manual of Ancient History                            1.60

  =Wendel's= History of Egypt                                          .35

  =Wolfson's= Essentials in Ancient History                           1.50


  Greek History

  =Barnes's= Brief History of Greece                                   .75

  =Castegnier's= Handbook of Greek and Roman History                   .50

  =Cox's= General History of Greece                                   1.25

  =Fyffe's= History of Greece                                          .35

  =Lewis's= (L. B.) Pupil's Notebook and Study Outline in
          Oriental and Greek History                                   .25

  =Mahaffy's= Old Greek Life                                           .35

  =Morey's= Outlines of Greek History                                 1.00
    Outlines of Greek and Roman History                               1.50

  =Newton & Treat's= (E. B.) Outline for Review in Greek History       .25

  =Smith's= (Wm.) Smaller History of Greece. Revised (Brownson)       1.00

  =Weissenborn's= Homeric Life (Scoggin & Burkitt) (Vanderbilt
          Oriental Series)                                            1.00


  Roman History

  =Bury's= History of the Roman Empire                                1.50

  =Castegnier's= Handbook of Greek and Roman History                   .50

  =Creighton's= History of Rome                                        .35

  =Gibbon's= Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. Abridged           1.25

  =Herbermann's= Business Life in Ancient Rome                         .30

  =Liddell's= History of Rome                                         1.25

  =McKinley's= Pupil's Notebook and Study Outline in Roman History     .25

  =Morey's= Outlines of Roman History                                 1.00
    Outlines of Greek and Roman History                               1.50

  =Newton & Treat's= (E. B.) Outline for Review in Roman History       .25

  =Smith's= (Wm.) Smaller History of Rome. Revised. (Greenidge)       1.00

  =Tighe's= Development of the Roman Constitution                      .35


  Medieval and Modern History

  =Adams's= (G. B.) Mediaeval Civilization                             .35

  =Barnes's= Brief History of Modern Peoples                          1.00

  =Besant's= Life of Gaspard de Coligny                                .30

  =Eginhard's= Life of Charlemagne                                     .30

  =Fisher's= (G. P.) Outlines of Universal History. Revised.
      Part II, Mediaeval History. Part III, Modern History      Each  1.00

  =Freeman's= History of Europe                                        .35

  =Hallam's= Middle Ages. Abridged                                    1.25

  =Harding's= New Medieval and Modern History                         1.50
    Essentials in Mediaeval History                                   1.00
    Essentials in Mediaeval and Modern History                        1.50

  =Lodge's= Student's History of Modern Europe                        1.50

  =Mueller's= Political History of Recent Times                        2.00

  =Ogg's= Source Book of Mediaeval History                            1.50

  =Thalheimer's= Mediaeval and Modern History                         1.60


  English History

  =Dickens's= Child's History of England                               .60

  =Green's= Short History of the English People                       1.20

  =Lancaster's= Manual of English History                             1.00

  =Newton & Treat's= (E. B.) Outline for Review in English History     .25

  =Niver's= School History of England                                  .90

  =Smith's= (P.) Smaller History of England                            .60

  =Smith's= (F.) Pupil's Notebook and Study Outline in English
      History                                                          .25

  =Strickland's= Lives of the Queens of England. Abridged             1.25

  =Thalheimer's= History of England                                   1.00

  =Walker's= (A. P.) Essentials in English History                    1.50


  French History

  =Barnes's= Brief History of France                                  1.00

  =Besant's= Life of Gaspard de Coligny                                .30

  =Jervis's= Student's History of France                              1.25

  =Yonge's= History of France                                          .35


  German History

  =Lewis's= (C. T.) Student's History of Germany                      1.50


  Hawaiian History

  =Alexander's= (M. C.) Story of Hawaii                                .75

  =Alexander's= (W. D.) Brief History of the Hawaiian People          1.50


  Sacred History

  =Smith's= (Wm.) Old Testament History                               1.25
    New Testament History                                             1.25
    Smaller Scripture History                                          .60




  MYTHOLOGY AND ANTIQUITIES

  =Guerber's= Myths of Greece and Rome. Illustrated                   1.50
      The same. Without illustrations                                 1.00
    Myths of Northern Lands                                           1.50
    Legends of the Middle Ages                                        1.50

  =Seemann's= Mythology of Greece and Rome                             .60

  =Skinner's= Readings in Folk-Lore                                   1.00

  =Wilkins's= Roman Antiquities                                        .35




  POLITICAL SCIENCE

  Civics

  =Alden's= Citizens' Manual                                           .36

  =Andrews's= (I. W.) New Manual of the Constitution                  1.00

  =Boyle's= Beginner's Civics for North Dakota                         .75
    Government of North Dakota                                        1.00

  =Brevard & Bennett's= History and Government of Florida              .60

  =Chandler's= Civics for the State of Washington                     1.00

  =Civic= Reader for New Americans                                     .38

  =Clark's= (S. S.) The Government: What It Is; What It Does           .75

  =Davison's= Government in Indiana                                    .35

  =Ficklen's= History and Civil Government of Louisiana               1.00

  =Finger's= Civil Government in North Carolina and the United
    States                                                             .60

  =Fitch's= New Civil Government of the United States                  .85

  =Forman's= (S. E.) Essentials in Civil Government                    .60
    Special editions for Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maryland, Michigan,
      New England, New Jersey, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin.
    First Lessons in Civics                                            .60
      Special editions for Maryland and Pennsylvania.

  =Garner's= Government in the United States                          1.00
    Special editions for Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, New York
      and Ohio.

  =Garner's= Introduction to Political Science                        2.50

  =Hinsdale's= American Government. Fourth edition                    1.25
    History and Civil Government of Ohio                              1.00
    History and Civil Government of Pennsylvania                      1.00

  =Hoxie's= Civics for New York State. New edition                    1.00

  =Lewis's= (V. A.) History and Civil Government of West Virginia     1.00

  =Loeb's= Government in Missouri                                      .72

  =Loeb & Viles's= Government and History of Missouri                 1.00

  =Maltby's= American Citizen in Pennsylvania and the Nation          1.00

  =Martin's= Civil Government. Eastern edition                         .90
    Civil Government. Western edition                                  .90

  =McCleary's= Studies in Civics                                      1.00
      Special editions for Indiana and Montana.
    Manual of Civics                                                  1.00

  =Messersmith's= Government of Delaware                              1.00

  =Morgan's= (T. J.) Patriotic Citizenship                            1.00

  =Niles's= History and Civil Government of Minnesota                 1.00

  =Nordhoff's= Politics for Young Americans                            .75

  =Peterman's= Civil Government                                        .60
      Special editions for Arkansas, Colorado, Georgia, Illinois,
        Iowa, Kentucky, Michigan, Mississippi, Nebraska, New
        Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Tennessee,
        Utah, and West Virginia.

  =Seerley & Parish's= History and Civil Government of Iowa           1.00

  =Smith= (G. M.) =& Young's= (C. M.) History and Civil Government
    of South Dakota                                                   1.00

  =Smithey's= Civil Government of Virginia                             .60

  =Stetson's= History and Civil Government of Maine                   1.00

  =Story's= Familiar Exposition of the Constitution of the United
    States                                                             .90

  =Sutton's= Civil Government in California                           1.00

  =Swan's= History and Civics for Grade 5A                             .50

  =Tighe's= Roman Constitution                                         .35

  =Townsend's= Shorter Course in Civil Government                      .72
    Analysis of Civil Government                                      1.08

  =Willoughby's= Rights and Duties of American Citizenship            1.00

  =Wolfson's= Outline for Review in Civics                             .25


  Economics and Sociology

  =Bly's= Descriptive Economics                                        .65

  =Burke's= Political Economy for Catholic Colleges and Schools       1.40

  =Chapin's= First Principles of Political Economy                     .60

  =Ellwood's= Sociology and Modern Social Problems. Revised           1.00

  =Gregory's= New Political Economy                                   1.20

  =Jevons's= Political Economy                                         .35

  =Laughlin's= Elements of Political Economy                          1.20

  =Small & Vincent's= Introduction to the Study of Society            1.80




  SCIENCE

  General Science

  =Clark's= General Science                                            .80
    Laboratory Manual in General Science                               .40

  =Doerner's= Treasury of General Knowledge. Part I                    .50
      The same. Part II                                                .65

  =Hooker's= Child's Book of Nature                                   1.00

  =Huxley's= Introductory Volume on Science                            .35

  =Steele's= Manual of Science--A Key                                 1.00

  =Wells's= (D. A.) Science of Common Things                           .85


  Astronomy

  =Bowen's= Astronomy by Observation                                  1.00

  =Burritt's= Celestial Atlas                                          .94

  =Lockyer's= Astronomy                                                .35
    Elements of Astronomy                                             1.22

  =Newcomb's= Elements of Astronomy                                   1.00
    Popular Astronomy.  School Edition                                1.30

  =Steele's= Popular Astronomy. Revised (M. L. Todd)                  1.00

  =Todd's= (D.) New Astronomy                                         1.30


  Physics

  =Adams's= (C. F.) Physics for Secondary Schools                     1.20
      Teacher's Manual to the same                                     .25
    New Physical Laboratory Manual                                     .60
    Physical Laboratory Manual                                         .75

  =Ames's= Text-Book of General Physics                               3.50
    Theory of Physics                                                 1.60

  =Ames & Bliss's= Manual of Experiments in Physics                   1.80

  =Appletons'= School Physics                                         1.20

  =Avery's= Elementary Physics                                        1.00
      Key to the same                                                  .50
    School Physics                                                    1.25
      Key to the same                                                  .75
    First Principles of Natural Philosophy                             .96
    Elements of Natural Philosophy                                    1.15
    Physical Technics and Teacher's Handbook for First Principles
      and Elements of Natural Philosophy                              1.25

  =Avery & Sinnott's= First Lessons in Physical Science                .60

  =Cheston, Dean, & Timmerman's= Laboratory Manual of Physics          .50

  =Coleman's= New Laboratory Manual of Physics                         .60

  =Cooley's= Easy Experiments in Physical Science                      .52
    Elements of Natural Philosophy                                     .72
    New Text-Book of Physics                                           .90
    Student's Manual of Physics                                       1.00

  =Hammel's= Observation Blanks in Physics                             .30

  =Harrington's= (C. L.) Grammar School Physics                        .50

  =Hoadley's= Essentials of Physics                                   1.25
      Teacher's Manual to the same                                     .25
    Elements of Physics                                               1.20
      Teacher's Manual to the same                                     .25
    Laboratory Handbook of Physics                                     .50
    Brief Course in General Physics                                   1.20
      Teacher's Manual to the same                                     .25
    Practical Measurements in Magnetism and Electricity                .75

  =Hooker's= (W.) Child's Book of Nature.  Part III, Air, Water,
         Heat, etc.                                                    .44

  =Merrill's= (G. A.) Elementary Theoretical Mechanics                1.00

  =Mumper's= Text-Book in Physics                                     1.20
      Teacher's Manual to the same                                     .25

  =Peck's= (W. G.) Ganot's Natural Philosophy                         1.20

  =Quackenbos's= (G. P.) Natural Philosophy                           1.22

  =Reeve's= Physical Laboratory Guide                                  .60

  =Steele's= Popular Physics                                          1.00
    Fourteen Weeks in Physics                                         1.00

  =Stewart's= (B.) Physics                                             .35

  =Woodhull's= Elementary Physical Science                             .40


  Scientific Memoirs (Ames)

  =Free Expansion of Gases.=  Memoirs by Gay-Lussac, Joule, and
          Joule and Thomson. (J. S. Ames)                              .75

  =Prismatic and Diffraction Spectra.=  Memoirs by Joseph von
          Fraunhofer. (J. S. Ames)                                     .60

  =Roentgen Rays.= Memoirs by Roentgen, Stokes, and Thomson.
          (George F. Barker)                                           .60

  =Modern Theory of Solution.= Memoirs by Pfeffer, Van't Hoff,
          Arrhenius, and Raoult. (H. C. Jones)                        1.00

  =Laws of Gases.=  Memoirs by Boyle and Amagat. (Carl Barus)          .75

  =Second Law of Thermodynamics.= Memoirs by Carnot, Clausius,
          and Thomson. (W. F. Magie)                                   .90

  =Fundamental Laws of Electrolytic Conduction.= Memoirs by
          Faraday, Hittorf, and Kohlrausch. (H. M. Goodwin)            .75

  =Effects of a Magnetic Field on Radiation.= Memoirs by Faraday,
          Kerr, and Zeeman.  (E. P. Lewis)                             .75

  =Laws of Gravitation.= Memoirs by Newton, Bouguer, and
          Cavendish. (A. S. Mackenzie)                                1.00

  =Wave Theory of Light.=  Memoirs by Huygens, Young, and
          Fresnel. (Henry Crew)                                       1.00

  =Discovery of Induced Electric Currents.= Memoirs by Joseph
          Henry. (J. S. Ames)                                          .75

  =Discovery of Induced Electric Currents.= Memoirs by Michael
          Faraday. (J. S. Ames)                                        .75

  =Foundations of Stereo-chemistry.=  Memoirs by Pasteur, Van't
          Hoff, Le Bel, and Wislicenus.  (G. M. Richardson)           1.00

  =Expansion of Gases by Heat.=  Memoirs by Gay-Lussac and
          Regnault. (W. W. Randall)                                   1.00

  =Laws of Radiation and Absorption.= Memoirs by Prevost,
          Balfour Stewart, Kirchhoff, and Kirchhoff and Bunsen.
          (D. B. Brace)                                               1.00


  Chemistry

  =Armstrong & Norton's= Laboratory Manual of Chemistry                .50

  =Avery's= School Chemistry                                          1.20
    Elements of Chemistry                                             1.10
    Complete Chemistry                                                1.40
    Teacher's Handbook of Chemistry                                    .75

  =Blanchard & Wade's= Foundations of Chemistry                       1.25

  =Clarke= (F. W.) =& Dennis's= Elementary Chemistry                  1.10
    Laboratory Manual                                                  .50

  =Cooley's= New Elementary Chemistry                                  .72
    New Text-Book of Chemistry                                         .90
    Laboratory Studies in Chemistry                                    .50

  =Irish's= (C. W.) Qualitative Analysis                               .50

  =Roscoe's= Chemistry                                                 .35

  =Shaw's= (G. W.) Laboratory Exercises in General Chemistry           .40

  =Steele's= Popular Chemistry                                        1.00

  =Stoddard's= Outline of Qualitative Analysis                         .75

  =Storer & Lindsay's= (W. B.) Elementary Manual of Chemistry         1.20

  =White's= (L. B.) Outline of Chemical Theory                         .25

  =Youmans's= (E. L.) Class Book of Chemistry                         1.22


  Biology

  =Dodge's= (C. W.) Introduction to Elementary Practical Biology      1.80

  =Hunter's= (G. W.) Civic Biology                                    1.25
    Elements of Biology                                               1.25
    Essentials of Biology                                             1.25

  =Sharpe's= Laboratory Manual in Biology                              .75


  Botany

  =Andrews's= (E. F.) Botany All the Year Round                       1.00
      The same. With Brief Flora of the Eastern U. S.                 1.50
    Practical Course in Botany                                        1.25
      The same. With Brief Flora of the Eastern U. S.                 1.50

  =Apgar's= (A. C.) Ornamental Shrubs of the United States            1.50
    Trees of the Northern United States                               1.00

  =Apgars'= (E. A. & A. C.) New Plant Analysis                         .55

  =Chapman's= Flora of the Southern United States. Third Edition      4.00

  =Coulter's= (J. G.) Plant Life and Plant Uses                       1.20

  =Coulter= (J. M.), =Barnes & Cowles's= Textbook of Botany:
    Volume I. Morphology and Physiology                               2.00
      The same. Part 1. Morphology                                    1.50
      The same. Part 2.  Physiology                                   1.25
    Volume II. Ecology                                                2.00

  =Coulter= (J. M.) =& Nelson's= New Manual of the Botany of the
        Central Rocky Mountains                                       2.50
      The same. Tourist's edition. Limp leather                       3.50

  =Frye & Rigg's= Elementary Flora of the Northwest                    .72
    The same. With Coulter's Plant Life and Plant Uses                1.60

  =Gray's= How Plants Behave                                           .54
    How Plants Grow. With a Popular Flora                              .80
    Lessons in Botany                                                  .94
    Outlines of Botany (Leavitt)                                      1.00
      The same. With Field, Forest, and Garden Flora                  1.80
      The same. With Manual of Botany, Sixth Edition                  2.25
    Field, Forest, and Garden Botany. Flora only                      1.44
    School and Field Book of Botany. Lessons and Flora                1.80
    New Manual of Botany. Seventh Edition. Illustrated. Flora
          only                                                        2.50
      The same. Tourist's edition. Limp leather                       3.00
    Lessons and Manual, Sixth Edition                                 2.16

  =Gray's= New Botanical Text-Book:
    Vol. I. Structural Botany (Gray)                                  2.00
    Vol. II. Physiological Botany (Goodale)                           2.00

  =Gray, Watson, & Robinson's= Synoptical Flora of North America.
    Vol. I, Part I, Fascicle I                                        2.60
      The same. Vol. I, Part I, Fascicle II                           2.60

  =Herrick's= (S. B.) Chapters on Plant Life                           .60

  =Hooker's= (J. D.) Botany                                            .35

  =Hooker's= (W.) Child's Book of Nature. Part I, Plants               .44

  =Leavitt's= Outlines of Botany                                      1.00
      The same. With Gray's Field, Forest, and Garden Flora           1.80
      The same. With Gray's Manual of Botany, Sixth Edition           2.25

  =Payne's= Manual of Experimental Botany                              .75

  =Willis's= Practical Flora                                          1.50

  =Wood's= (A.) Object Lessons in Botany                              1.00
    How to Study Plants                                               1.00
    Lessons in Botany                                                  .90
    New American Botanist and Florist (Willis)                        1.75
    Descriptive Botany. Flora only                                    1.25
    Illustrated Plant Record. With King's Check Tablets                .55

  =Youmans's= (E. A.) First Book of Botany                             .64
    Descriptive Botany                                                1.20

  (_See also Nature Readers, page 13_)


  Zooelogy

  =Apgar's= (A. C.) Birds of the United States                        2.00

  =Burnet's= School Zooelogy                                            .75
    Laboratory Manual of Zooelogy                                       .50

  =Cooper's= (S.) Animal Life                                         1.25

  =Davison's= Practical Zooelogy                                       1.00

  =Dodge's= (C. W.) General Zooelogy                                   1.80

  =Harvey's= (N. A.) Introduction to the Study of Zooelogy              .80

  =Herrick's= (G. W.) Laboratory Exercises in General Zooelogy          .60
    Text-Book in General Zooelogy                                      1.20

  =Holders'= (C. F. & J. B.) Elements of Zooelogy                      1.20

  =Hooker's= (W.) Natural History                                      .90
    Child's Book of Nature. Part II, Animals                           .44

  =Merrill's= (J. A.) Studies in Zooelogy                               .75

  =Morse's= First Book of Zooelogy                                      .87

  =Needham's= Elementary Lessons in Zooelogy                            .90

  =Orton's= Comparative Zooelogy (Dodge)                               1.80

  =Steele's= Popular Zooelogy (Steele & Jenks)                         1.20
    Fourteen Weeks in Zooelogy                                         1.00

  =Tenney's= (S.) Manual of Zooelogy                                   2.00

  =Tenneys'= (S. & A. A.)
          Natural History of Animals                                  1.20

  (_See also Nature Readers, page 13_)


  Anatomy, Physiology, and Hygiene

  =Baldwin's= (W. E.) Primary Lessons in Physiology                    .35
    Essential Lessons in Physiology                                    .50
    Advanced Lessons in Physiology                                     .80

  =Davison's= Human Body and Health. Elementary                        .40
    Human Body and Health. Intermediate                                .50
    Human Body and Health.  Advanced                                   .80
    Health Lessons. Book One                                           .35
    Health Lessons. Book Two                                           .60

  =Dunglison's= Elementary Physiology                                  .50
    School Physiology                                                 1.00

  =Eclectic= Physiology (Brown)                                        .60

  =Eddy's= Text-Book in General Physiology and Anatomy                1.20
    Experimental Physiology and Anatomy. Revised                       .60

  =Jenkins's= Primary Lessons in Human Physiology and Health           .30
    Physiology and Hygiene                                             .50

  =Johonnot & Bouton's= How We Live                                    .40

  =Kellogg's= First Book in Physiology and Hygiene                     .40
    Second Book in Physiology and Hygiene                              .80

  =Macy & Norris's= General Physiology for High Schools               1.10

  =Overton's= Applied Physiology. Primary                              .30
    Applied Physiology. Intermediate                                   .50
    Applied Physiology. Advanced                                       .80
    Personal Hygiene                                                   .40
    General Hygiene                                                    .60

  =Smith's= (W. T.) Primer of Physiology and Hygiene                   .30
    Elementary Physiology and Hygiene                                  .50

  =Steele's= Hygienic Physiology. Abridged                             .50
    Fourteen Weeks in Physiology                                      1.00

  =Tolman's= Hygiene for the Worker (Crampton's Hygiene Series)        .50

  =Tracy's= (R. S.) Essentials of Anatomy, Physiology, and Hygiene    1.00

  =Willis's= Essentials of Health for Intermediate Grades              .40
    Elementary Physiology for Advanced Grades                          .80


  Temperance Physiologies

  Approved by W. C. T. U.

  =Authorized= Physiology Series:
    No. 1. Health for Little Folks                                     .30
    No. 2. Lessons in Hygiene (Johonnot & Bouton)                      .45
    No. 3. Outlines of Anatomy, Physiology, and Hygiene (Tracy)       1.00

  =Eclectic= Temperance Physiologies:
    The House I Live In                                                .30
    Youth's Temperance Manual (Brown)                                  .40
    Guide to Health                                                    .60

  =New Century= Physiology Series:
    Oral Lesson Book in Hygiene. For Primary Teachers (Mirick)        1.00
    Primer of Hygiene (Mrs. J. W. Hall)                                .30
    Intermediate Physiology and Hygiene (W. S. Hall and Mrs.
        J. W. Hall)                                                    .40
    Elementary Anatomy, Physiology, and Hygiene (W. S. Hall)           .75
    Anatomy, Physiology, and Hygiene for High Schools (Hewes)         1.00

  =Pathfinder= Physiologies:
    No. 1. Child's Health Primer                                       .30
    No. 2. Young People's Physiology                                   .50
    No. 3. Hygienic Physiology (Steele)                               1.00

  =Union= Physiology Series:
    Physiology and Health, No. 1                                       .24
    Physiology and Health, No. 2                                       .30
    Physiology and Health, No. 3                                       .50


  Geology

  =Blackwelder & Barrows's= Elements of Geology                       1.40

  =Dana's= (J. D.) Geological Story Briefly Told                      1.15
    Revised Text-Book of Geology                                      1.40
    Manual of Geology. Fourth edition                                 5.00

  =Geikie's= Geology                                                   .35

  =Herrick's= (S. B.) The Earth in Past Ages                           .60

  =Le Conte's= Compend of Geology                                     1.20

  =Lyell's= Elements of Geology (Judd)                                2.25

  =Steele's= Fourteen Weeks in Geology                                1.00


  Physical and Commercial Geography

  =Appletons'= Physical Geography                                     1.60

  =Butler's= Physical Geography                                       1.08

  =Chamberlain's= Field and Laboratory Exercises in Physical
   Geography                                                           .50

  =Cornell's= New Physical Geography                                  1.12

  =Dryer's= High School Geography.  Physical, Economic, and
        Regional                                                      1.30
      Teacher's Manual to the same                                     .25
      Parts I and II. Physical and Economic. Half leather             1.20
        The same. Parts I and II. Cloth                               1.00
    Lessons in Physical Geography                                     1.20

  =Everly, Blount & Walton's= Laboratory Lessons in Physical
          Geography                                                    .56

  =Gannett, Garrison & Houston's= Commercial Geography. Revised.      1.25

  =Geikie's= Physical Geography                                        .35

  =Guyot's= Physical Geography                                        1.60

  =Hinman's= Eclectic Physical Geography                              1.00

  =Johnson's= (W. E.) Mathematical Geography                          1.00

  =Maury's= Physical Geography                                        1.20

  =Maury-Simonds's= Physical Geography                                1.20

  =Monteith's= (Jas.) New Physical Geography                            1.00

  =Olin's= Commercial Geography                                       1.00

  =National Geographic Monographs:=
      Physiographic Processes                            J. W. Powell  .20
      Physiographic Features                             J. W. Powell  .20
      Physiographic Regions of the U. S.                 J. W. Powell  .20
      Present and Extinct Lakes of Nevada               I. C. Russell  .20
      Beaches of the Atlantic Coast                      N. S. Shaler  .20
      The Northern Appalachians                         Bailey Willis  .20
      Niagara Falls and Their History                   G. K. Gilbert  .20
      Mt. Shasta--A Typical Volcano                      J. S. Diller  .20
      Physical Geography of Southern New England          W. M. Davis  .20
      The Southern Appalachians                           C. W. Hayes  .20
    Complete in bound volume                                          2.50


  Meteorology

  =Price's= (J. A.) Observations and Exercises on the Weather          .30

  =Waldo's= Elementary Meteorology                                    1.50


  Agriculture

  =Bexell & Nichols's= Principles of Bookkeeping and Farm Accounts     .65
    Teacher's Reference Book for the same                              .50
    Blanks for the same. Per set                                       .45
      No. 1                                                            .12
      No. 2                                                            .25
      No. 3                                                            .08

  =Bricker's= Agricultural Education for Teachers                      .80

  =Buffum & Deaver's= Sixty Lessons in Agriculture                     .60

  =Goff & Mayne's= First Principles of Agriculture                     .80

  =Lupton's= Scientific Agriculture                                    .35

  =Mayne & Hatch's= High School Agriculture                           1.00

  =Wilkinson's= Practical Agriculture                                 1.00

  =Winslow's= (I. O.) Principles of Agriculture                        .60


  Nature Study

  =Carter's= Nature Study with Common Things                           .60

  =Comstock's= Wild Flowers Which Blossom in April and May             .25
        Five Pupils' Books, with one Teacher's Book                   1.25

  =Cummings's= Nature Study for Primary Grades                         .90
        Nature Study for Lower Grammar Grades                          .60
        Nature Study for Higher Grammar Grades                         .75

  =Overton & Hill's= Nature Study                                      .40

  =Treat's= (M.) Home Studies in Nature                                .90




  FRENCH

  French Language

  =Bacon's= (E. F.) New French Course                                 1.00

  =Bullet's= First Lessons in French                                   .50

  =Decourbey's= French Verb Blank                                      .35

  =De Fivas's= (A.) Classic French Reader                             1.05

  =De Fivas's= (V.) Grammar of French Grammars                         .87

  =Dreyspring's= Easy Lessons in French                                .60
    French Reader                                                      .75

  =Duffet's= New French Method (Hennequin)                            1.20
    The same. Parts I and II                                     Each  .72
      Key to the same                                                  .60

  =Fasquelle's= Introductory French Course                             .65
    French Course, based on Woodbury's German                         1.35
      Key to the same                                                  .90

  =Fontaine's= French Prose Composition                                .35
      Key to the same                                                  .25

  =Francois'= Beginners' French                                        .65
    Essentials of French                                               .90
      Key to the same                                                  .50
    Introductory French Prose Composition                              .25
    Alternate Exercises for Introductory French Prose Composition      .25
    Advanced French Prose Composition                                  .80
      Key to all three of above Compositions                           .80
      Key to Introductory and Advanced Compositions                    .80

  =Gastineau's= Conversation Method in French                         1.25

  =Guerber's= Easy French Prose Composition                            .25
   Joan of Arc--French Prose Composition                               .30

  =Hennequin's= French Verbs                                           .65
    Practical Lessons in Idiomatic French                              .87

  =Kuhn's= Elements of Spoken French                                   .50

  =Languellier & Monsanto's= French Course                            1.45
      Key to the same                                                  .90

  =Martin's= (C. F.) The French Verb                                  1.25

  =Muzzarelli's= Academic French Course. First Year                   1.00
      Key to the same                                                 1.00
    Academic French Course. Second Year                               1.00
      Key to the same                                                 1.00
    Brief French Course                                               1.25

  =Ollendorff's= Method of Learning French (Value)                     .87
      Key to the same                                                  .70

  =Rogers's= (L. C.) French Sight Reading                              .40

  =Smith's= (Wm.) French Principia. Part I                             .50

  =Syms's= First Year in French                                        .50
    Second Year in French                                             1.00
    Third Year in French                                              1.20
      Key to First, Second, and Third Years                           1.00

  =Tuckerman's= Reader of French Pronunciation                         .50

  =Worman's= First French Book                                         .40
    Second French Book                                                 .40
    French Echo. Conversation                                          .90
    Grammaire Francaise. Revised                                      1.00


  French Literature, etc.

  =Augier & Sandeau.= Le Gendre de M. Poirier (Roedder)                .40

  =Bacon.= Une Semaine a Paris                                         .50

  =Bruno.= Le Tour de la France (Syms)                                 .60

  =Cameron.= Tales of France                                          1.00

  =Chateaubriand.= Les Aventures du Dernier Abencerage (Bruner)        .30

  =Conley.= La Fille de Thuiskon                                       .65

  =Corneille.= Le Cid (Bruner)                                         .45

  =Cramer.= Ca et La en France                                         .45

  =Cremieux & Decourcelle.= L'Abbe Constantin (Francois)               .35

  =Daudet.= La Belle Nivernaise and Other Stories (Jenkins)            .50
    Tartarin de Tarascon (Fontaine)                                    .45

  =Dumas.= La Tulipe Noire (Brandon)                                   .40
    Le Chevalier de Maison-Rouge (Sauveur & Jones)                     .40
    Le Comte de Monte-Cristo (Fontaine)                                .40
    Les Trois Mousquetaires (Fontaine)                                 .60
    Excursions sur les Bords du Rhin (Henckels)                        .40

  =Erckmann-Chatrian.= Madame Therese (Fontaine)                       .50

  =Foa.= Le Petit Robinson de Paris (De Bonneville)                    .45

  =Foncin.= Le Pays de France (Muzzarelli)                             .60

  =Fontaine.= Douze Contes Nouveaux                                    .45

  =Francois.= Easy Standard French                                     .40

  =Goncourt.= Selections (Cameron)                                    1.25

  =Goodell.= L'Enfant Espion and Other Stories                         .45

  =Guerber.= Contes et Legendes. Part I                                .60
      The same. Part II                                                .60
    Legends of the Middle Ages                                        1.50

  =Gyp.= Petit Bleu (Meylan)                                           .35

  =Harry.= French Anecdotes

  =Hatheway.= Modern French Stories

  =Healy.= La Comedie Classique en France                              .50

  =Hugo.= Hernani (Bruner)                                             .70
    La Chute (Kapp)                                                    .35

  =La Bedolliere.= La Mere Michel et Son Chat (Josselyn)               .30

  =Labiche & Martin.= La Poudre aux Yeux (Francois)                    .30
    Le Voyage de M. Perrichon (Castegnier)                             .35

  =La Brete.= Mon Oncle et Mon Cure (White)                            .50

  =La Fontaine.= Fifty Fables (McKenzie)                               .40

  =Laurie.= Memoires d'un Collegien (Borgerhoff)                       .50

  =Legouve & Labiche.= La Cigale (Farrar)                              .25

  =Mairet.= La Clef d'Or (Healy)                                       .35
    La Petite Princesse (Healy)                                        .35
    La Tache du Petit Pierre (Healy)                                   .35
    L'Enfant de la Lune (Healy)                                        .35

  =Merimee.= Colomba (Williamson)                                      .40

  =Moliere.= Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme (Roi & Guitteau)                 .35
    Les Femmes Savantes (Eggert)                                       .40

  =Racine.= Iphigenie (Woodward)                                       .60

  =Sand.= La Mare au Diable (Randall-Lawton)                           .35
    Le Meunier d'Angibault (Kuhne)                                     .40

  =Sandeau.= Mademoiselle de la Seigliere (White)                      .40

  =Schultz.= La Neuvaine de Colette (Lye)                              .45

  =Scribe & Legouve.= Bataille de Dames (Eggert)                       .30

  =Sevigne,= Mme. de. Selected Letters (Syms)                          .40

  =Shippee & Greene.= Stories from French Realists                     .40

  =Syms.= Easy First French Reader                                     .50
    Le Chien de Brisquet and Other Stories                             .35

  =Taine.= Les Origines de la France Contemporaine (Raschen)           .60

  =Verne.= Les Enfants du Capitaine Grant (Healy)                      .30

  =Voltaire.= Selected Letters (Syms)                                  .75

  =Weill.= French Newspaper Reader                                     .50
    Historical French Reader                                           .40




  GERMAN

  German Language

  =Ahn's= German Grammar                                               .70

  =Bernhardt's= Deutsches Sprach- und Lesebuch. Part I                1.10
      German-English Vocabulary to the same                            .75

  =Comfort's= German Course                                           1.00

  =Dresden's= German Composition                                       .40

  =Dreyspring's= Cumulative Method in German                          1.20
    Easy Lessons in German                                             .60
    First German Reader                                                .60
    German Verb Drill                                                 1.20

  =Gastineau's= Conversation Method in German                         1.25

  =Harris's= German Grammar                                           1.00

  =Jappe's= Elements of German Grammar                                 .60

  =Kayser & Monteser's= Brief German Course                           1.20
    Foundations of German                                              .80

  =Keller's= First Year in German                                     1.00
    Second Year in German                                             1.20

  =Kutner's= Commercial German                                        1.00

  =Martin's= (M. J.) First German Book                                 .30
    Second German Book                                                 .30
    Third German Book                                                  .30
    Fourth German Book                                                 .30

  =McCollom's= German Verb Form                                        .35

  =Ollendorff's= Method in German (Adler)                              .87
      Key to the same                                                  .70

  =Osthaus & Biermann's= German Prose Composition                      .65
      Key to the same                                                  .65

  =Schmitz's= Elements of the German Language. Complete               1.00
      The same. Part I                                                 .60
      The same. Part II                                                .60

  =Truscott & Smith's= Elementary German Composition                   .50

  =Woodbury's= Shorter Course with German                              .90
      Key to the same                                                  .72

  =Worman's= First German Book                                         .30
    Second German Book                                                 .40
    Elementary German Grammar                                         1.00
    Complete German Grammar                                           1.40
    German Echo (Conversation)                                         .90


  Graded German Readers

  Abrams's Primer for Pupils of Non-German Parentage (Fibel
      fuer Schueler nichtdeutscher Abkunft)                              .20

  =Eclectic= German Primer (Deutsche Fibel)                            .20
    German First Reader (Erstes Lesebuch)                              .25
    German Second Reader (Zweites Lesebuch)                            .35
    German Third Reader (Drittes Lesebuch)                             .42
    German Fourth Reader (Viertes Lesebuch)                            .60
    German Fifth Reader (Fuenftes Lesebuch)                             .72
    German Script Primer (Schreib- und Lesefibel)                      .20
    German First Book (Erstes Schulbuch)                               .20
    German Primer and First Reader (Fibel und Erstes Lesebuch)         .20
    German Advanced Fourth Reader (Hoeheres Viertes Lesebuch)           .60

  =Sanders's= (C. W.) German and English Pictorial Primer              .20


  German Literature, etc.

  =Arnold.= Ein Regentag auf dem Lande (Kern)                          .25
    Fritz auf Ferien (Thomas)                                          .30

  =Baumbach.= Im Zwielicht. Vol. I (Bernhardt)                         .65
    Im Zwielicht. Vol. II (Bernhardt)                                  .65

  =Baumbach & Wildenbruch.= Es War Einmal (Bernhardt)                  .65

  =Benedix.= Der Prozess, and Wilhelmi. Einer Muss Heiraten
          (Lambert)                                                    .30

  =Bernhardt.= Deutsche Litteraturgeschichte                           .75
    Freudvoll und Leidvoll                                             .65

  =Collitz.= Selections from Early German Literature                  1.00

  =Decker & Maerkisch.= Deutschland und die Deutschen                   .64

  =Dillard.= Aus dem Deutschen Dichterwald                             .60

  =Ebner-Eschenbach.= Krambambuli, and Klaussmann. Memoiren
          eines Offizierburschen (Spanhoofd)                           .25

  =Fahsel.= Allerlei                                                   .25

  =Fick.= Dies und Das                                                 .25
    Hin und Her                                                        .30
    Neu und Alt                                                        .30

  =Fouque.= Undine (Senger)                                            .50

  =Freytag.= Die Journalisten (Johnson)                                .35

  =Gerstaecker.= Germelshausen (Busse)                                  .30

  =Goethe.= Hermann und Dorothea (Hewett)                              .60

  =Grimm.= Die Sieben Reisen Sinbads (Drechsel)                        .40
    Kinder- und Hausmaerchen (Vos)                                      .45

  =Groller.= Inkognito, and Albersdorf. Cand. phil. Lauschmann
      (Lentz)                                                          .30

  =Guerber.= Legends of the Middle Ages                               1.50
    Myths of Northern Lands                                           1.50

  =Hauff.= Das Kalte Herz (Holzwarth & Gorse)                          .35

  =Hebel.= Schatzkaestlein (Stern)                                      .40

  =Heine.= Die Harzreise (Kolbe)                                       .50

  =Heyse.= Anfang und Ende (Lentz)                                     .30
    Das Maedchen von Treppi, and Marion (Bernhardt)                     .30
    Er soll dein Herr sein (Haertel)                                   .30
    L'Arrabbiata (Lentz)                                               .30

  =Hillern.= Hoeher als die Kirche (Dauer)                              .25

  =Holly.= German Epics Retold                                         .65

  =Holzwarth.= German Literature, Land, and People                    1.00

  =Keller.= Bilder aus der Deutschen Litteratur. Revised              1.00

  =Kern.= German Stories Retold                                        .30

  =Leander.= Traeumereien (Hanstein)                                    .35

  =Lessing.= Minna von Barnhelm (Lambert)                              .50
    Nathan der Weise (Diekhoff)                                        .80

  =Meyer.= Das Amulett (Glascock)                                      .35

  =Mezger & Mueller.= Kreuz und Quer durch Deutsche Lande              .60

  =Moser.= Der Bibliothekar (Cooper)                                   .45

  =Mueller.= Neue Maerchen (Little)                                      .30

  =Prehn.= Journalistic German                                         .50

  =Ranke.= Kaiserwahl Karls V (Schoenfeld)                             .35

  =Richter.= Selections (Collins)                                      .60

  =Riehl.= Das Spielmannskind, and Der Stumme Ratsherr (Priest)        .35
    Der Fluch der Schoenheit (Frost)                                    .30
    Die Vierzehn Nothelfer, and Trost um Trost (Sihler)                .30

  =Ries.= Easy German Stories (Biermann)                               .35

  =Roth.= Ein Nordischer Held (Boll)                                   .35

  =Schanz.= Der Assistent and Other Stories (Beinhorn)                 .35

  =Scheffel.= Der Trompeter von Saekkingen (Buehner)                    .75
    Ekkehard--Audifax und Hadumoth (Handschin & Luebke)                .60

  =Scherer & Dirks.= Deutsche Lieder                                   .25

  =Schiller.= Ballads and Lyrics (Rhoades)                             .60
    Gustav Adolf in Deutschland (Bernhardt)                            .45
    Die Jungfrau von Orleans (Florer)                                  .70
    Wilhelm Tell (Roedder)                                             .70

  =Schrakamp.= Deutsche Heimat                                         .80
    Ernstes und Heiteres                                               .35

  =Seidel.= Der Lindenbaum and Other Stories (Richard)                 .25
    Die Monate (Arrowsmith)                                            .25

  =Seidel.= Herr Omnia (Matthewman)                                    .25
    Leberecht Huehnchen und Andere Sonderlinge (Bernhardt)              .50

  =Spanhoofd.= Aus Vergangener Zeit                                    .50

  =Spyri.= Rosenresli and Der Toni von Kandergrund                     .25

  =Stern.= Geschichten vom Rhein                                       .85
    Geschichten von Deutschen Staedten                                 1.25
      The same. In two parts                                     Each  .70

  =Stern & Arrowsmith.= Aus deutschen Doerfern                          .36

  =Stifter.= Das Heidedorf (Lentz)                                     .25

  =Stoltze.= Bunte Geschichten                                         .30
    Lose Blaetter                                                       .30

  =Storm.= Immensee (Dauer)                                            .25
    Im Sonnenschein and Ein Gruenes Blatt (Swiggett)                    .25

  =Wagner.= Die Meistersinger von Nuernberg (Bigelow)                   .70

  =Wilbrandt.= Der Meister von Palmyra (Henckels)                      .80

  =Wildenbruch.= Das Edle Blut (Eggert)                                .30
    Der Letzte (Beckmann)                                              .30

  =Zschokke.= Der Zerbrochene Krug (Berkefeld)                         .25



  ITALIAN

  =Smith's= (Wm.) Italian Principia. Part I                            .75




  SPANISH

  Spanish Language

  =Dowling's= Reading, Writing and Speaking Spanish                    .75

  =Garner's= Essentials of Spanish Grammar                            1.00
    Spanish Grammar                                                   1.25

  =Monsanto & Languellier's= Practical Spanish Course. Revised.
          (Josselyn)                                                  1.25

  =Silva & Fourcaut's= Lectura y Conversacion                          .60

  =Traub's= Spanish Verb                                         1.00

  =Umphrey's= Spanish Prose Composition                                .75

  =Worman's= First Spanish Book. Revised                               .40
    Second Spanish Book. Revised                                       .40


  Spanish Literature

  =Alarcon.= El Capitan Veneno (Brownell)                              .50
    El Nino de la Bola (Schevill)                                      .90

  =Avellaneda.= Baltasar (Bransby)                                     .65

  =Breton.= ?Quien es Ella? (Garner)                                   .70

  =Calderon.= La Vida es Sueno (Comfort)                               .70

  =Conant.= Primer of Spanish Literature                               .30

  =Fontaine.= Flores de Espana                                         .45

  =Galdos.=
    Dona Perfecta (Lewis)                                             1.00
    Electra (Bunnell)                                                  .70
    Marianela (Gray)                                                   .90

  =Johnson.= Cuentos Modernos                                          .60

  =Larra.= Partir a Tiempo (Nichols)                                   .40

  =Moratin.= El Si de las Ninas (Geddes & Josselyn)                    .50

  =Turrell.= Spanish Reader                                            .80

  =Valera.= El Comendador Mendoza (Schevill)                           .85
    Pepita Jimenez (Cusachs)                                           .90


  Books for Spanish Speaking Pupils

  =Appletons'= Libro Primero de Lectura, Ingles-Espanol.
          English-Spanish Edition. Boards                              .30

  =De Thoma's= Historia de Nuevo Mexico                                .75

  =Mantilla's= Libro de Lectura. Nº. 1                                 .15
    Libro de Lectura. Nº. 2                                            .54
      The same. New Edition                                            .50
    Libro de Lectura. Nº. 3                                            .67

  =McGuffey's= Revised First Eclectic Reader. Spanish-English Ed.      .32
    Reading Charts.  Spanish Edition.  Manila, with Revolving
        Stand                                                Per set  5.00

  =Monroe's= Spanish-English First Reader (Libro Primario. Corella)    .30

  =Serie Moderna:=
    Libro Primero de Lectura. Cloth                                    .28
    Libro Segundo de Lectura. Cloth                                    .38
    Libro Tercero de Lectura. Boards                                   .50
      The same.  Cloth                                                 .55
    Lecciones de Lenguaje--Espanol-Ingles                              .40
    Monteith's (John) Geografia Universal                              .60
    McMaster's Historia de los Estados Unidos                         1.06
    Nociones de Historia de los Estados Unidos                         .60




  PORTUGUESE

  =Andrade's= Primeiro Livro de Leitura                                .22
    Segundo Livro de Leitura                                           .33
    Terceiro Livro de Leitura                                          .50

  =Grammatica= Portugueza                                              .40

  =Licoes= Elementares da Lingua Ingleza                               .40

  =Methodo= de Linguagem Escripta                                      .22

  =Geographia= Elementar                                               .33

  =Cadernos= de Arithmetica, N^s. 1-10                     Per doz.,  1.00

  =Novo= Systema de Calligraphia, N^s. 1-3                    "        .72
      The same. N^s. 4-7                                      "        .96




  LATIN

  Latin Language

  =Abbott's= (M. A.) First Latin Writer[2]                             .60

  =Arnold's= (T. K.) First and Second Latin Book (Mulholland)         1.00
    Latin Prose Composition (Mulholland)                              1.00
      Key to the same                                                  .60

  =Bingham's= Latin Grammar                                           1.08

  =Brittain's= Introduction to Caesar                                  .75

  =Coy's= (E. W.) Latin Lessons                                       1.00

  =Dodge= (C. C.) =& Tuttle's= Latin Prose Composition (Vocabulary
        separate)                                                      .75
      Key to the same                                                  .50

  =Hamer's= Easy Steps in Latin                                        .75

  =Harkness's= Complete Latin Grammar                                 1.25
    Short Latin Grammar                                                .80
    Standard Latin Grammar                                            1.12
    Easy Method for Beginners in Latin                                1.20
    Introductory Latin Book                                            .87
    Arnold's First Latin Book                                         1.05

  =Harper & Burgess's= Elements of Latin                              1.00
    Inductive Latin Method                                            1.00

  =Inglis's= Latin Composition Exercise Book                           .25

  =Jordan's= Elementary Latin Writing                                 1.00

  =Lane's= (G. M.) Latin Grammar. Revised                             1.50

  =Lane= (G. M.) & Morgan's (M. H.) School Latin Grammar[2]           1.00

  =Leiper's= Latin Subordinate Clause Syntax                           .30

  =Mather & Wheeler's= Latin Prose Writing[2]                         1.00
        Key to the same                                                .50

  =McCabe's= Bingham's Latin Grammar                                  1.08

  =Mellick's= Latin Composition                                        .40

  =Nutting's= Latin Primer                                             .50
    Latin Reader. With English-Latin Exercises                         .75
      The same. Without Exercises                                      .60

  =Pearson's= Essentials of Latin for Beginners[2]                     .90
      Perception Cards for the same (Young)           Per set of 500  2.00
      Key to the same                                                  .25
    Latin Prose Composition--Complete                                 1.00
      Key to the same                                                  .50
    Latin Prose Composition Based on Caesar                            .50
    Latin Prose Composition Based on Cicero                            .50

  =Reiley's= Practical Exercises on the Latin Verb                     .25

  =Smiley & Storke's= First Year Latin Course                         1.00
      Teachers' Handbook for the same                                  .24
    Beginner's Latin Book                                             1.00

  =Smith's= (Wm.) Principia Latina. Part I                             .55
      The same. Part II                                                .90


  Latin Literature, etc.

  CAESAR--

  =Harkness's= Caesar's Commentaries                                  1.20

  =Harkness & Forbes's= Caesar's Gallic War. Seven Books              1.25
      The same. Four Books                                            1.00

  =Harper & Tolman's= Caesar's Gallic War. Eight Books                1.20
      The same. Text edition                                           .40
    Caesar's Gallic War. Four Books                                   1.00

  =Mather's= Caesar. Episodes from the Gallic and Civil Wars[2]       1.25
      The same. Text edition                                           .40

  =McCabe's= Bingham's Caesar                                         1.08

  =Riess & Janes's= Caesar. Books I and II                             .85
        Key to Exercises in the same                                   .25
      The same. With Janes's Latin Sight Reading                      1.20

  =Caesar.= Commentarii de Bello Gallico. Text                         .50

  =Caesar.= The Gallic and Civil Wars. Translation                     .75


  CICERO--

  =Anthon's= Cicero's Tusculan Disputations                           1.10

  =Bishop, King & Helm's= Cicero.  Ten Orations and Selected
        Letters[2]                                                    1.25
      The same. Text edition                                           .40
      Cicero. Six Orations                                            1.00

  =Harkness, Kirtland & Williams's= Cicero. Nine Orations             1.25
      The same. Six Orations                                           1.00

  =Harper & Gallup's= Cicero's Orations with Selections from the
        Letters                                                        1.30
      The same. Text edition                                            .40

  =Kirtland's= Correspondence of Cicero                                .50

  =Lord's= Cicero's Laelius de Amicitia                                .70

  =Moore's= Cicero's Cato Maior de Senectute[2]                        .80
      The same. Text edition                                           .30

  =Price's= (C.) Cicero's Laelius de Amicitia[2]                       .75
      The same. Text edition                                           .30

  =Rockwood's= Cicero's Cato Maior de Senectute. With or without
          vocabulary                                                   .75

  =Stickney's= Cicero de Officiis                                     1.50

  =Cicero.= De Natura Deorum, De Divinatione, De Fato. Text            .50

  =Cicero.= De Senectute, De Amicitia, de Officiis Libri Tres. Text    .50

  =Cicero.= Orationes Selectae XIV. Text                               .50

  =Cicero.= Offices (Three Books) and Moral Works. Translation         .75

  =Cicero.= Orations. Translation                                      .75

  =Cicero.= Tusculan Disputations, etc.  Translation                   .75


  EPIGRAPHY--

  =Egbert's= Introduction to the Study of Latin Inscriptions          3.50


  ESSAYS--

  Morgan's Addresses and Essays                                       1.50


  EUTROPIUS--

  =Hazzard's= Eutropius                                                .75


  GELLIUS--

  =Knapp's= Stories from Aulus Gellius                                 .30


  GEOGRAPHY--

  =Tozer's= Classical Geography                                        .35


  HORACE--

  =Anthon's= Horace                                                   1.20

  =Lincoln's= Horace                                                  1.22

  =Moore's= (C. H.) Horace's Odes, Epodes, and Carmen Saeculare[2]    1.50
      The same. Text edition                                           .40

  =Moore & Morris's= Horace. Odes, Epodes, and Carmen Saeculare
          (Moore); and Satires and Epistles (Morris)[2]               2.00
      The same. Text edition                                           .60

  =Morris's= Satires and Epistles of Horace[2]                        1.25
    Epistles of Horace.[2] Text edition                                .30
    Satires of Horace[2]                                              1.00
      The same. Text edition                                           .30

  =Horace.= Quinti Horatii Flacci Opera Omnia. Text                    .50

  =Horace.= Translation                                                .75


  HYMNS--

  =March's= Latin Hymns                                               1.35


  JUVENAL--

  =Lindsay's= Satires of Juvenal                                      1.00

  =Juvenal.= Satires of Juvenal, Persius, Sulpicia, and Lucilius.
          Translation                                                  .75


  LAW--

  =Robinson's= Selections from the Public and Private Law of the
        Romans[2]                                                     1.25
      The same. Text edition                                           .40


  LIFE--

  =Herbermann's= Business Life in Ancient Rome                         .30

  =Wilkins's= Roman Antiquities                                        .35


  LIVY--

  =Burton's= Selections from Livy[2]                                  1.50
        The same. Text edition                                         .35

  =Livy.= History of Rome. Vol. I, Books I to XX. Vol. II, Books
          XXI to XXX. Translation                                Each  .75


  LUCRETIUS--

  =Merrill's= Lucretius. De Rerum Natura. Six Books[2]                2.25

  =Lucretius.= De Rerum Natura. Libri Sex. Text                        .50


  MYTHOLOGY--

  =Guerber's= Myths of Greece and Rome. Illustrated                   1.50
      The same. Without illustrations                                 1.00

  =Seemann's= Mythology of Greece and Rome                             .60


  NEPOS--

  =Lindsay's= Cornelius Nepos                                         1.10
      The same. Text edition                                           .40


  OVID--

  =Gleason's= A Term of Ovid                                           .75

  =Lincoln's= Ovid                                                    1.22

  =Miller's= Ovid                                                     1.40
      The same. Text edition                                           .50


  PERSIUS--

  =Gildersleeve's= Satires of Persius                                  .90

  =Persius.= Satires of Juvenal, Persius, Sulpicia, and Lucilius.
         Translation                                                   .75


  PLAUTUS--

  =Harrington's= (C. S.) Plautus. Captivi, Trinummus et Rudens         .90


  QUINTILIAN--

  =Frieze's= Quintilian. Books X and XII                              1.20


  SALLUST--

  =Anthon's= Sallust's Jugurthine War and Conspiracy of Catiline      1.10

  =Harkness's= Sallust's Catiline                                      .90

  =Herbermann's= Sallust's Jugurthine War                             1.12


  SENECA--

  =Hurst & Whiting's= Seneca                                          1.30


  SIGHT AND SELECTED READINGS--

  =Arrowsmith & Whicher's= First Latin Readings                       1.25

  =Barss's= Third Year Latin for Sight Reading                         .40

  =Franklin & Greene's= Latin Prose Authors for Sight Reading[2]       .40

  =Gallup's= Latin Reader                                              .50

  =Gudeman's= Latin Literature of the Empire.[2] Vol. I, Prose        1.80
      The same. Vol. II, Poetry                                       1.80

  =Harkness's= Course in Caesar, Sallust, and Cicero                  1.40
    New Latin Reader                                                   .87

  =Harrington's= Roman Elegiac Poets                                  1.50

  =Janes's= Second Year Latin for Sight Reading                        .40

  =Latin Sight Reading=--Second Year                                   .30

  =McCabe's= Bingham's Latin Reader                                   1.08

  =Peck & Arrowsmith's= Roman Life in Latin Prose and Verse           1.50


  TACITUS--

  =Anthon's= Tacitus's Germania and Agricola                          1.10

  =Tyler's= Tacitus's Germania and Agricola                            .87

  =Tacitus.= Translation. 2 vols                                 Each  .75


  TERENCE--

  =Sturtevant's= Terence's Andria                                      .72
      The same. Text edition                                           .30

  =Terence.= Translation                                               .75


  TIBULLUS--

  =Smith's= Tibullus[2]                                               1.50
      The same. Text edition                                           .30


  VIRGIL--

  =Frieze's= Virgil's Aeneid. First Six Books. Revised (Dennison)     1.30
    Virgil's Aeneid. Complete. Revised. (Dennison)                    1.50
    Virgil's Aeneid. Complete. Text edition. Revised (Dennison)        .50
    Vergil's Aeneid (Six Books), Bucolics, and Georgics. Old          1.30

  =Harper & Miller's= Vergil's Aeneid. Six Books                      1.25
    Vergil's Aeneid (Six Books) and Bucolics                          1.50

  =Vergil.= Complete Works. Text                                       .50

  =Virgil.= Complete Works. Translation                                .75


  VIRI ROMAE--

  =Arrowsmith & Knapp's= Selections from Viri Romae                    .75
      The same. Text edition                                           .25


  Latin Dictionaries

  =Anthon's= Dictionary. Latin-English and English-Latin              2.50

  =Harper's= Latin Dictionary (Lewis & Short). Sheep                  6.50
      The same. Russia                                               10.00

  =Lewis's= (C. T.) Elementary Latin Dictionary. Half leather         2.00
    Latin Dictionary for Schools. Cloth                               4.50
      The same. Half leather                                          5.00

  =Smith's= (Wm.) Dictionary. English-Latin. Sheep                    4.00


  Classical Dictionaries

  (_See page 68_)




  GREEK

  Greek Language

  =Arnold's= (T. K.) Greek Prose Composition (Spencer)                1.05

  =Babbitt's= Grammar of Attic and Ionic Greek                        1.50

  =Benner & Smyth's= Beginner's Greek Book[3]                         1.25

  =Bevier's= Brief Greek Syntax[3]                                     .90

  [2] _Morris & Morgan's Latin Series._

  =Flagg's= A Writer of Attic Prose                                   1.00

  =Gildersleeve's= Syntax of Classical Greek. Part I                  1.50
      The same. Part II                                               1.50

  =Gleason's= Greek Primer                                            1.00
    Greek Prose Composition for Schools[3]                             .80

  =Gleason & Atherton's= First Greek Book                             1.00
      Key to the same                                                  .50

  =Hadley & Allen's= Greek Grammar                                    1.50

  =Harkness's= First Greek Book, including a Greek Reader             1.05

  =Harper & Castle's= Inductive Greek Primer                          1.25
    Greek Prose Composition                                            .75

  =Harper & Waters's= Inductive Greek Method                          1.00

  =Pearson's= Greek Prose Composition                                  .90
      Key to the same                                                  .50

  =Smith's= (Wm.) First Greek Course (Initia Graeca--Part I)           .60

  =Spieker's= Greek Prose Composition for Colleges[3]                 1.30

  =Stedman's= Modern Greek Mastery                                    1.50


  Greek Literature, etc.

  AESCHYLUS--

  =Harry's= Prometheus of Aeschylus[3]                                1.50
      The same. Text edition                                           .30

  =Aeschylus.= Translation                                             .75


  ARCHAEOLOGY--

  =Fowler & Wheeler's= Handbook of Greek Archaeology[3]               2.00

  =Tolman & Scoggin's= Mycenaean Troy                                 1.00


  DEMOSTHENES--

  =Humphreys's= Demosthenes on the Crown[3]                           1.25
      The same. Text edition                                           .30

  =Demosthenes.= Olynthiacs, Philippics, etc. Translation              .75

  =Demosthenes.= On the Crown, On the Embassy, etc.  Translation       .75


  EURIPIDES--

  =Bates's= Euripides's Iphigenia in Tauris[3]                        1.25
      The same. Text edition                                           .30

  =Earle's= Euripides's Medea[3]                                      1.25
      The same. Text edition                                           .30

  =Euripides.= Text. 2 vols                                      Each  .50

  =Euripides.= Tragedies. Translation. 2 vols                    Each  .75


  GEOGRAPHY--

  =Tozer's= Classical Geography                                        .35


  HERODOTUS--

  =Johnson's= (H. M.) Herodotus                                       1.05

  =Keep's= Stories from Herodotus                                      .90

  =Smith & Laird's= Herodotus. Books VII and VIII[3]                  1.75
      The same. Text edition                                           .40

  =Herodotus.= Text. 2 vols                                      Each  .50

  =Herodotus.= Translation                                             .75


  HOMER--

  =Gladstone's= Homer                                                  .35

  =Merriam's= Homer's Phaeacian Episode of the Odyssey                1.50

  =Sterrett's= Homer's Iliad.[3]  First Three Books and Selections    1.60
      The same. Text edition                                           .40
    Homer's Iliad. First Three Books                                  1.20

  =Weissenborn's= Homeric Life (Scoggin & Burkitt)                    1.00

  =Homer.= Iliad. Translation                                          .75

  =Homer.= Odyssey. Translation                                        .75


  JUSTIN MARTYR--

  =Gildersleeve's= Apologies of Justin Martyr                         1.30


  LIFE--

  =Mahaffy's= Old Greek Life                                           .35

  =Weissenborn's= Homeric Life                                        1.00


  LITERATURE--

  =Gladstone's= Homer                                                  .35

  =Jebb's= Greek Literature                                            .35

  =Wright's= (W. C.) Short History of Greek Literature[3]             1.50


  LYSIAS--

  =Adams's= (C. D.) Selected Speeches of Lysias[3]                    1.50
    The same. Text edition                                             .30

  =Wait's= Orations of Lysias                                         1.25
    The same. Text edition                                             .30


  MYTHOLOGY--

  =Guerber's= Myths of Greece and Rome. Illustrated                   1.50
      The same. Without illustrations                                 1.00

  =Seemann's= Mythology of Greece and Rome                             .60


  NEW TESTAMENT--

  =Westcott & Hort's= Greek New Testament                             1.00
    Greek-English New Testament                                       3.50


  PHILOSOPHY--

  =Hunter's= History of Philosophy                                     .35


  PINDAR--

  =Gildersleeve's= Olympian and Pythian Odes of Pindar                1.50


  PLATO--

  =Flagg's= Plato's Apology and Crito[3]                              1.40
      The same. Text edition                                           .30

  =Heidel's= Plato's Euthyphro[3]                                     1.00
      The same. Text edition                                           .30

  =Kitchel's= Plato's Apology, Crito, and a Part of the Phaedo        1.25
      The same. Text edition                                           .30

  =Newhall's= Plato's Charmides, Laches, and Lysis                    1.25
      The same. Text edition                                           .30

  =Tyler's= Plato's Apology and Crito                                 1.05

  =Plato.= Select Dialogues. Translation                               .75


  RELIGION--

  =Fairbanks's= Handbook of Greek Religion[3]                         1.50


  ST. BASIL--

  =Maloney's= St. Basil the Great                                      .75


  SCULPTURE--

  =Richardson's= History of Greek Sculpture[3]                        1.50


  SOPHOCLES--

  =Earle's= Oedipus Tyrannus of Sophocles                             1.25
      The same. Text edition                                           .30

  =Humphreys's= Antigone of Sophocles                                 1.50

  =Smead's= Antigone of Sophocles                                     1.22

  =Sophocles.= Text                                                    .50

  =Sophocles.= Tragedies.  Translation                                 .75


  THUCYDIDES--

  =Lamberton's= Thucydides. Books II and III[3]                       1.75
      The same. Text edition                                           .40
    Thucydides. Books VI and VII                                      1.50

  =Thucydides.= History of the Peloponnesian War. Translation.         .75


  XENOPHON--

  =Brownson's= Xenophon's Hellenica. Selections.[3]                   1.65
      The same. Text edition                                           .40

  =Gleason's= Story of Cyrus                                           .75

  =Xenophon's= Cyropaedia                                             1.25

  =Harper & Wallace's= Xenophon's Anabasis. Seven Books               1.50

  =Mather & Hewitt's= Xenophon's Anabasis. Books I-IV[3]              1.50
      The same. Text edition                                           .40

  =Xenophon.= Anabasis. Text                                           .50

  =Xenophon.= Libri Socratici. Text                                    .50

  =Xenophon.= Anabasis and Memorabilia. Translation                    .75


  Greek Lexicons

  =Autenrieth's= Homeric Dictionary (Keep)                            1.10

  =Jannaris's= Modern English-Greek Dictionary                        2.50

  =Liddell & Scott's= Greek-English Lexicon.  Sheep                  10.00
      The same. Abridged Edition. Half leather                        1.25
      The same. Intermediate Edition. Cloth                           3.50
      The same. Intermediate Edition. Half leather                    4.00

  =Thayer's= Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament. Cloth        5.00
      The same. Half leather                                          6.50

  =Yonge's= English-Greek Lexicon. Sheep                              4.50


  Classical Dictionaries

  =Harper's= Dictionary of Classical Literature and Antiquities
        (Peck). Cloth                                                 6.00
      The same. Half leather                                          8.00
      The same in 2 vols. Cloth                                       7.00
      The same in 2 vols. Half leather                               10.00

  Smith's (Wm.) Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities
        (Anthon).  Sheep                                              4.25
    Smaller Classical Dictionary                                      1.25

  [3] _Smyth's Greek Series._




  ORIENTAL LANGUAGES


  Vanderbilt Oriental Series

  =Little's= (C. E.) Index to the Ch[=a]ndogya-Upani[s.]ad            1.00

  =Stevenson's= Assyrian and Babylonian Contracts                     2.50

  =Tolman's= Ancient Persian Lexicon and Texts                        1.25
    Cuneiform Supplement                                              1.25

  =Tolman & Scoggin's= Mycenaean Troy                                 1.00

  =Tolman & Stevenson's= Herodotus and the Empires of the East        1.00

  =Weissenborn's= Homeric Life (Scoggin & Burkitt)                    1.00




  COMMERCIAL SUBJECTS

  _Including the Williams & Rogers Series_


  Bookkeeping and Business Practice

  =Belding's= Accounts and Accounting Practice                         .90

  =Modern Illustrative= Bookkeeping, Introductory Course. Revised
        (W. & R. Series)                                              1.00
      Key to same                                                .50
      Vouchers for same                                                .45
      Forms for same                                                   .50
      Blanks for same                                                  .40

  =Modern Illustrative= Bookkeeping, Advanced Course. Revised
        (W. & R. Series)                                         .85
      Key to same                                                .50
    Grocery Business Section                                     .25
      Key to same                                                .20
    Commission Business Section                                  .25
      Key to same                                                .20
    Wholesale Dry Goods Business Section                         .25
      Key to the same                                            .30
    Manufacturing Section                                        .30
      Key to the same                                            .25
    Grocery Business Outfit; forms and blanks                          .38
    Commission Business Outfit; vouchers, forms, and blanks            .70
    Dry Goods Business Outfit; vouchers, forms, and blanks             .78
    Manufacturing Business Outfit; vouchers, forms, and blanks         .90

  =Modern Illustrative= Bookkeeping, Complete Course. Revised
        (W. & R. Series)                                        1.50
      Key to same                                                .75
    Outfits comprising Blanks, Vouchers, and Forms same as for
        both Introductory and Advanced Courses.

  =Office Routine= and Bookkeeping, Introductory Course (W. & R.
  Series)                                                             1.00
    Key to same                                                        .50
    Vouchers for same                                                  .65
    Forms for same                                                     .85
    Blanks for same                                                    .45

  =Office Routine= and Bookkeeping, Complete Course (W. & R.
        Series)                                                       1.35
    Key to same                                                        .75
    Vouchers for same                                                  .75
    Forms for same                                                    1.30
    Blanks for same:
      Introductory                                                     .45
      Commission Business                                              .20
      Department Store                                                 .24
      Manufacturing                                                    .16
      New Banking                                                      .45
    Supplementary Mail Package Practice:
      Exercise Pads for the same:
        Fifth and Sixth Exercises                                      .10
        Seventh and Eighth Exercises                                   .10
      Reference Book and Key to Practice Exercises                     .25
      Mail Packages for the same
        Fifth and Sixth Exercises                                      .25
        Seventh and Eighth Exercises                                   .30
      Forms for the same:
        Fifth to Eighth Exercises                                      .45
      Blanks for the same:
        Mail Packages, Five to Eight                                   .30

  =Bookkeeping and Business Practice,= Introductory Course (W. &
          R. Series)                                                  1.00
    Reference Book and Key to the same                                 .50
    Blanks (New Introductive) for the same                             .75
    Mail Package Practice (use optional):
      Exercise Pads for the same:
        First and Second Exercises                                     .10
        Third and Fourth Exercises                                     .10
        Fifth and Sixth Exercises                                      .10
        Seventh and Eighth Exercises                                   .10
      Reference Book and Key to Practice Exercises                     .25
      Mail Packages for the same:
        Third and Fourth Exercises                                     .25
        Fifth and Sixth Exercises                                      .25
        Seventh and Eighth Exercises                                   .30
      Forms for the same:
        First to Fourth Exercises                                      .30
        Fifth to Eighth Exercises                                      .45
      Blanks (Elementary) for the same                                 .25

  =Bookkeeping and Business Practice,= Complete Course (W. & R.
          Series)                                                     1.60
    Reference Book for the same                                        .50
    Key to the same                                                    .50
    Blanks for the same:
      New Initiatory                                                   .60
      New Advanced. Tag covers                                        1.05
      New Advanced. Cloth covers                                      1.65
      New Banking                                                      .45
    Mail Package Practice (use optional):
      Supplies same as for Introductory Course.

  =Three Weeks in Business Practice= (W. & R. Series). Pad             .25
    Key to same                                                        .50
    Selling Price Lists for same                                       .20
    Merchant's Emporium Price Lists for same                           .20
    Forms for same:
      With Legal Blanks                                                .70
      Without Legal Blanks                                             .60
    Blanks for same                                                    .35

  =Practice System= of Business Training, First Course, Vertical
        Script Edition (W. & R. Series). Complete outfit              1.00
    Guide to same                                                      .50


  Bookkeeping

  =First Lessons= in Bookkeeping (W. & R. Series)                      .70
    Key to same                                                        .50
    Blanks for same                                                    .45
    Forms for same (use optional)                                      .30

  =New Introductive= Bookkeeping (W. & R. Series)                     1.00
    Reference Book and Key to same                                     .50
    Blanks for same                                                    .75
    Forms for same (use optional):
      April and May pad                                                .15
      July and August pad                                              .15
      September and October pad                                        .15
      November and December package                                    .35

  =New Complete= Bookkeeping (W. & R. Series)                         1.60
    Reference Book for same                                            .50
    Key to same                                                        .50
    January Business Practice pad                                      .12

    Blanks for same:
      New Initiatory                                                   .60
      New Advanced. Tag covers                                        1.05
      New Advanced. Cloth covers                                      1.65
      New Banking                                                      .45
    New Advanced Blanks in parts:
      Single Entry                                                     .18
      Special Column Journal                                           .15
      Retail                                                           .18
      Coal                                                             .18
      Lumber                                                           .18
      Commission                                                       .18
      Jobbing                                                          .18
      Installment                                                      .15
      Manufacturing                                                    .25
      January Business Practice                                        .18
    Forms for same (use optional):
      April and May pad                                                .15
      July and August pad                                              .15
      September and October pad                                        .15
      November and December package                                    .35
      January package                                                  .60

  =Advanced Bookkeeping= and Banking (W. & R. Series)                  .80
    Reference Book and Key to same                                     .50
    Blanks for same:
      Commission                                                       .18
      Lumber                                                           .18
      Jobbing                                                          .18
      Manufacturing                                                    .25
      New Banking                                                      .45

  =Supplementary Exercises= in Bookkeeping (W. & R. Series)            .20
      Key to the same                                                  .20

  =Bennett's= Bookkeeping and Accounting Exercises:
    Part One                                                           .40
      Key to the same                                                  .75
    Part Two                                                           .45
      Key to the same                                                  .75

  =Bexell & Nichols's= Principles of Bookkeeping and Farm Accounts     .65
    Teacher's Reference Book for the same                              .50
    Blanks for the same                                       Per set  .45
      No. 1                                                            .12
      No. 2                                                            .25
      No. 3                                                            .08

  =Bryant & Stratton= Common School Bookkeeping                        .80
      Key to the same                                                  .36
      Blanks for the same                             Per set of five  .30
      Blanks. Separate                                           Each  .06
    New High School Bookkeeping                                       1.50
      Blanks for the same                              Per set of six  .84
      Part I. Journal, Ledger, Daybook                                 .45
      Part II. Blank Book, Cash Book, Six Column Journal               .40
    New Countinghouse Bookkeeping                                     2.00

  =Curtiss's American Standard= Bookkeeping.  High School
        edition                                                       1.00
      Key to the same                                                  .50
      Blanks for the same:
        First and Second Sets                                          .35
        Third to Sixth Sets                                            .50
        Seventh and Eighth Sets                                        .30
      Forms for the same:
        First and Second Sets                                          .30
        Third to Sixth Sets                                            .80
        Seventh and Eighth Sets                                        .50

  =Duffs'= (C. P., W. H., & R. P.) Common School Bookkeeping           .44

  =Duff's= (P.) Single and Double Entry Bookkeeping                   2.25

  =Eclectic= Complete Bookkeeping (Mayhew)                             .50
      Key to the same                                                  .50
      Blanks for the same                             Per set of five  .45


  Business Forms

  =Eaton's= Business Forms, Customs, and Accounts                     1.00
    Exercise Manual of Business Forms                                  .50
      Key to the same                                                  .50

  =Ward's= Letter Writing and Business Forms
    Nos. 1 and 2                                                 Each  .10
      The same. Nos. 3 and 4                                       "   .15


  Banking

  =Bolles's= Money, Banking, and Finance                              1.25

  =Modern Illustrative= Banking (W. & R. Series)                       .55
      Key to same                                                      .25
      Outfit, comprising vouchers, supplies, and blanks                .80


  Commercial Arithmetic

  =Bookman's= Business Arithmetic. With or without Answers             .65
      Key to the same                                                  .40

  =King's= (J. E.) Business Arithmetic. With Answers (W. & R.)         .80
      Key to same                                                      .50

  =Moore's= (J. H.) New Commercial Arithmetic (W. & R. Series)
        With or without Answers                                       1.00
      Key to same                                                      .50

  =Thurston's= Mental Commercial Arithmetic. Without Answers
        (W. & R. Series)                                               .45
      Key to same                                                      .25

  =Van Tuyl's= Complete Business Arithmetic. With or without          1.00
      Answer Key to same                                               .60
    Essentials of Business Arithmetic. With or without Answers         .70
      Answers to the same                                              .10
      Key to the same                                                  .25

  =Williams's= (O. F.) Commercial Arithmetic (W. & R. Series)
        With or without Answers                                       1.10
      Key to same                                                      .50


  Commercial Law

  =Bly's= Business Law (W. & R. Series)                                .80

  =Fitch's= New Commercial Law (W. & R. Series)                       1.05

  =Gano's= Commercial Law (W. & R. Series)                            1.00
    Teacher's Handbook to same                                         .50

  =Nichols & Rogers's= Short Course in Commercial Law (W. & R.
        Series)                                                        .60
    Teacher's Handbook to the same                                     .25

  =Test Questions= in Commercial Law (W. & R. Series)                  .20


  Penmanship

  =Mills's= Modern Business Penmanship (W. & R. Series)                .30

  =Pen-Written= Slant Copies (reproduced). Abridged (W. & R.)          .35

  =Bound= Practice Paper (W. & R. Series)              Per 100 books  3.75

  =Commercial= Foolscap (W. & R. Series)                    Per ream  2.50

  =Business= Foolscap (W. & R. Series)                         "      2.00


  English

  =Baskervill & Sewell's= School Grammar                               .50

  =Belding's= Commercial Correspondence (W. & R. Series)               .50

  =Benedict's= English Punctuation (W. & R. Series)                    .60

  =Buehler's= Practical Exercises in English                           .50

  =Correspondence= (W. & R. Series)                                    .35

  =New= Practical Grammar (W. & R. Series)                             .35

  =New= Practical Grammar and Correspondence (W. & R. Series)          .60


  Spelling and Dictionaries

  =Eldridge's= Business Speller                                        .25

  =Osborn & King's= Seventy Lessons in Spelling (W. & R. Series)       .20
      Blank for the same                                               .07

  =Test= Lessons in Spelling (W. & R. Series)                          .15

  =Webster's= Secondary-School Dictionary                             1.50
    Elementary-School Dictionary                                       .90
    Shorter School Dictionary                                          .60
    Handy Dictionary                                                   .15


  Stenography and Typewriting

  =Eldridge's= Shorthand Dictation Exercises                           .65
      Six editions--Benn Pitman, Isaac Pitman, Gregg, Graham,
        Munson, and edition without shorthand outlines.

  =Fritz & Eldridge's= Expert Typewriting                              .85
      Business Forms for the same                                      .20
      Keyboard Chart for the same                                      .05
      Pupil's Record Card for the same                                 .02
      Oliver Typewriter Keyboard Exercises                             .05
      Oliver Typewriter Keyboard Chart                                 .03

  =Heffley's= Manual of Pitman Phonography                            1.00

  =Lester & Barker's= English-Spanish Phonography (W. & R.)           1.25

  =Munson's= Complete Phonographer                                    1.50
    Pocket Phonographic Dictionary                                    1.00

  =Platt's= Pitmanic Shorthand Instructor (W. & R. Series)            1.20

  =Stenographer's= Note Books (W. & R. Series):
    Single ruled, for pen use                                          .08
    Double ruled, for pen use                                          .08

  =Typewriting= Practice Paper (W. & R. Series):
    100 sheets, 8 x 12-1/2                                      Per pad  .10
    100 sheets, 8 x 10-1/2                                         "     .09


  Commercial Geography

  =Dryer's= High School Geography.  Physical, Economic, and
        Regional                                                      1.30
      Teacher's Manual to the same                                     .25
      Parts I and II. Physical and Economic. Half leather             1.20
        The same. Parts I and II. Cloth                               1.00

  =Gannett, Garrison & Houston's= Commercial Geography. Revised       1.25

  =Olin's= Commercial Geography                                       1.00


  Civics

  =Fitch's= New Civil Government (W. & R. Series)                      .85


  Currency

  =College Currency= (W. & R. Series):
    Bills in any denomination, blank panel          Per 1,000 pieces  2.50
    Fractional, any denomination, blank panel        "     "     "    1.75




  MUSIC

  =Abbott's= Music Manual for Teachers of Rural Schools                .15
    Rudiments of Music                                                 .20

  =Aiken's= (W. H.) Music Course. In one book                          .50
    Part Songs for Mixed Voices                                        .65

  =Baker's= (E. L.) Song Blanks. Nos. 2 and 3                    Each  .25

  =Bartley's= Songs for the School                                     .35

  =Betz's= Gems of School Song. Complete                               .70
      Songs of Nature                                                  .15
      Songs of the Seasons                                             .15
      Songs of Home and Pleasure                                       .15
      Songs for Morning, Evening, and Night                            .15

  =Birge's= Choruses and Part Songs for High Schools                   .65

  =Brewster= (F. S.) =& Thomas's= Song Stories and Songs for
        Children                                                       .60

  =Dann's= Christmas Carols and Hymns                                  .45
    First Year Music                                                   .60
    Musical Dictation. Book One                                        .50
      The same. Book Two                                               .65
    Music Writing Books. Nos. 1, 2 and 3                         Each  .10
    School Hymnal                                                      .50

  =Earhart's= Art Songs for High Schools                               .80

  =Farnsworth's= Education Through Music                              1.00

  =Franklin Square= Song Collection. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, and 8      Each  .60

  =Gantvoort's= Music Reader for Rural and Village Schools             .40
    High School Ideal                                                  .60
    School Music Reader                                                .40

  =Howliston's= Child's Song Book                                      .25

  =Johnson's= (C.) Songs Every One Should Know                         .50

  =Jones's= (M. B.) Songs of Seasons                                   .25

  =Loomis's= (G. B.) Progressive Music Lessons.  Book 1                .14
    Progressive Music Lessons. Book II                                 .18
    Progressive Music Lessons. Book III                                .25
    Progressive Music Lessons. Book IV                                 .43
    Progressive Music Lessons. Book V                                  .72
    Progressive Glee and Chorus Book                                   .84

  =MacConnell's= Standard Songs and Choruses for High Schools          .75

  =Mathews's= Songs of All Lands                                       .50

  =McCaskey's= Favorite Songs and Hymns                                .80

  =Model Music Course for Schools= (Broekhoven & Gantvoort):
    Primer                                                             .25
    First Reader                                                       .30
    Second Reader                                                      .30
    Third Reader                                                       .30
    Fourth Reader                                                      .40
    Fifth Reader                                                       .40
    Sixth Reader                                                       .40
    Manual                                                             .50

  =Music Writing Pad=                                                  .10

  =National School Singer=                                             .30

  =Natural Music Course= (Ripley & Tapper):
    Rote Song Book (First steps in music)                              .40
    Charts. Sets: A, B, C, D, E, F and G            Each, with stand  4.00
    Harmonic Primer                                                    .30
    Harmonic First Reader                                              .30
    Harmonic Second Reader                                             .35
    Harmonic Third Reader                                              .40
    Harmonic Fourth Reader                                             .40
    Harmonic Fifth Reader. For unchanged voices                        .50
      The same. With bass                                              .50
    Melodic First Reader                                               .25
    Melodic Second Reader                                              .30
    Melodic Third Reader                                               .40
    Melodic Fourth Reader                                              .50
    Music in the Grades. (Teacher's Manual for Melodic Series)         .15
    Natural Music Primer                                               .30
    Natural Music Reader, No. 1                                        .30
    Natural Music Reader, No. 2                                        .35
    Natural Music Reader, No. 3                                        .35
    Natural Music Reader, No. 4                                        .35
    Natural Music Reader, No. 5                                        .50
    Natural Advanced Music Reader                                     1.00
    Short Course in Music. Book I                                      .35
    Short Course in Music. Book II                                     .40
    Manual for Teachers of Rural Schools (Abbott) To accompany
      Short Course in Music                                            .15
    Natural Music Leaflets:
      Prices from 2c to 8c each. Special list on application.

  =NeCollins's= Glee and Chorus Book                                   .65
      The same. With Responsive Readings                               .75

  =Neidlinger's= Earth, Sky, and Air in Song. Book I                   .70
      The same. Book II                                                .80

  =Parsons's= Calisthenic Songs                                        .28

  =Rix's= Mastersinger                                                 .65

  =Scherer & Dirks's= Deutsche Lieder                                  .25

  =Shirley's= Part Songs for Girls' Voices                             .75
    Part Songs for Mixed Voices                                        .75
    School and Festival Songs                                          .25
    Two-Part Songs for Intermediate Grades                             .25

  =Siefert's= Choice Songs. Book 1                                     .50
      The same. Book II                                                .40
      The same. Book II. Revised edition                               .50

  =Smith= (Eleanor) =Music Course=:
    Primer                                                             .25
    Book One                                                           .25
    Book Two                                                           .30
    Alternate Book Two                                                 .30
    Book Three                                                         .40
    Book Four                                                          .50
    Teacher's Manual                                                   .50

  =Smith's= (W. L.) Practical Music Reader                             .30

  =Song Sheaf= (Phelps & Lewis)                                        .60

  =Song Wave= (Perkins, Danforth & DeGraff)                            .65

  =Standard Musical Library:=
    =Abbott's= (A. J.) Individual Singing Exercises. Five Books.
        For Grades Four to Eight                                 Each  .10
      Individual Songs for Grammar Grades                              .15
    =Aiken's= First Studies in Two-Part Singing                        .10
      Melody Studies for Primary Grades                                .15
      The Fairies' Festival                                            .20
    =Anderton's= Wreck of the Hesperus (Dann)                          .20
    =Barri's= Flower Queen (Aiken)                                     .20
    =Bryant's= Christmas Carols for Primary and Grammar Grades         .10
    =Dann's= Commencement Trios                                        .20
    =Farge's= St. Teresa, or the Garden of the Soul (Bauve)            .20
    =Futterer's= Sight Reading Studies for Primary Grades              .10
      Sight Reading Studies for Grammar Grades                         .10
    =MacConnell's= Seventy Solfeggio Studies                           .20
    =Mitchell's= Ten Familiar Songs                                    .15
    =Myers's= Part Songs for Male Voices                               .20
      Part Songs for Female Voices                                     .20
    =NeCollins's= Institute Songs                                      .15
    =Romberg's= Lay of the Bell (Aiken)                                .20

  =Storer's= Music Writing Book                                        .10

  =Tomlins's= Christmas Carols                                         .10

  =Wavelet= (Abridgment of the Song Wave)                              .32

  =Zundel & Ryan's= School Harmonist. Vocal                            .40




  DRAWING

  =Aborn's= Mechanical Drawing                               Per copy  .35

  =American= Blank Drawing Book                             Per doz.,  .84

  =Bartholomew's Drawing:=
    Free-hand Tracing, Primary. Nos. 2 and 4                   "       .45
    Grammar School Course. Nos. 5 to 13                        "       .96
    High School Course. Nos. 14 to 17                          "      1.44
      The same. No. 18, Linear Perspective                     "      2.25
    Practice Paper (Packages of 20 sheets)                     "       .42

  =Eclectic Industrial Drawing:=
      Nos. 1, 2, and 3                                         "      1.20
      Nos. 4 and 5                                             "      1.75
      Nos. 6, 7, and 8                                         "      2.00
    Practice Drawing Books                                     "       .50
    Slate Exercise Drawing Cards (12 nos. in envelope)        Per set  .05

  =Standard= Drawing Books. Small                           Per doz.,  .45
      The same.  Medium                                        "       .75
      The same.  Large                                         "      1.00

  =Tracy's= (J. C.) Introductory Course in Mechanical Drawing         1.80




  MANUAL TRAINING

  =Golden's= Laboratory Course in Wood-Turning                         .80

  =Ham's= Mind and Hand                                               1.25

  =Hoffman's= Sloyd System of Wood-Working                            1.00

  =Ilgen's= Forge Work                                                 .80

  =King's= (C. A.) Elements of Woodwork                                .60
    Elements of Construction                                           .70
    Elements of Woodwork and Construction                              .90
    Constructive Carpentry                                             .70
    Inside Finishing                                                   .80
    Handbook for Teachers                                             1.00

  =Ritchey's= High School Manual Training Course in Woodwork          1.45

  =Sickels's= Exercises in Wood-Working                               1.00




  DOMESTIC SCIENCE

  =Conley's= Nutrition and Diet                                        .60
    Principles of Cooking                                              .52

  =Household= Economy                                                  .42

  =Kirkwood's= Sewing Primer                                           .30
    School Sewing Practice-Cloth with Folders                          .36

  =Morris's= Household Science and Arts                                .60




  PHYSICAL TRAINING

  =Blaikie's= Sound Bodies for Our Boys and Girls                      .40

  =Morris's= (R. A.) Physical Education                               1.00

  =Smart's= Manual of School Gymnastics                                .30




  PHILOSOPHY, PSYCHOLOGY, LOGIC, AND ETHICS

  =Bain's= Logic--Deductive and Inductive                             1.40

  =Bowne's= Metaphysics                                               1.60
    Philosophy of Theism                                              1.75
    Principles of Ethics                                              1.75
    Psychological Theory                                              1.75
    Theism                                                            1.75
    Theory of Thought and Knowledge                                   1.50

  =Cadieux's= Practical Talks with the Christian Child                 .20

  =Davis's= Elements of Deductive Logic                                .90
    Elements of Inductive Logic                                       1.00
    Theory of Thought                                                 2.00

  =Dewey's= Psychology                                                1.25

  =Fairchild's= Moral Science                                         1.12

  =Gow's= Good Morals and Gentle Manners                              1.00

  =Halleck's= Psychology and Psychic Culture                          1.25

  =Hewett's= Psychology for Young Teachers                             .85

  =Hill's= Jevons's Elements of Logic                                 1.00
    Elements of Psychology                                            1.28

  =Hunter's= (T.) History of Philosophy                                .35

  =Janet's= Elements of Morals                                        1.00

  =Jevons's= Logic                                                     .35

  =Peabody's= Moral Philosophy                                         .90

  =Putnam's= Text-Book of Psychology                                  1.00

  =Roark's= Psychology in Education                                   1.00




  EDUCATION

  Pedagogy and School Supervision

  =Aiken's= Methods of Mind-Training                                  1.00
    Exercises in Mind-Training                                        1.00

  =Beebe's= First School Year                                          .75

  =Blaikie's= Sound Bodies for Our Boys and Girls                      .40

  =Blaisdell's= English [Grammar] in the Grades                        .15

  =Bliss's= History in the Elementary Schools                          .80

  =Bricker's= Agricultural Education for Teachers                      .80

  =Burns's= (J. J.) How to Teach Reading and Composition               .50

  =Butler's= Education in the United States                           2.50
    In twenty separate monographs, as follows:                   Each  .20

    Educational Organization and Administration (Draper)
    Kindergarten Education (Blow)
    Elementary Education (Harris)
    Secondary Education (Brown)
    The American College (West)
    The American University (Perry)
    Education of Women (Thomas)
    Training of Teachers (Hinsdale)
    School Architecture and Hygiene (Morrison)
    Professional Education (Parsons)
    Agricultural Education (Dahney)
    Scientific, Technical, and Engineering Education (Mendenhall)
    Commercial Education (James)
    Art and Industrial Education (Clarke)
    Education of Defectives (Allen)
    Summer Schools and University Extension (Vincent)
    Scientific Societies and Associations (Cattell)
    Education of the Negro (Washington)
    Education of the Indian (Hailmann)
    Education through the Agency of Religious Organizations (Larrabee)

  =Chamberlain's= Standards in Education, including Industrial
          Training                                                    1.00

  =Dinsmore's= Teaching a District School                             1.00
    The Training of Children                                          1.00

  =Farnsworth's= Education Through Music                              1.00

  =Garrison's= Suggestions to Teachers of Geography                    .10

  =Gillette's= Vocational Education                                   1.00

  =Hailmann's= History of Pedagogy                                     .60
    Kindergarten Culture                                               .60
    Primary Methods                                                    .60

  =Ham's= Mind and Hand                                               1.25

  =Hewett's= Pedagogy for Young Teachers                               .85

  =Hinsdale's= Art of Study                                           1.00

  =Hoffman's= Sloyd System of Wood-Working                            1.00

  =Jones's= Sources of Interest in High School English                 .80

  =King's= (R. M.) School Interests and Duties                        1.00

  =Mann's= School Recreations and Amusements                          1.00

  =Maxwell's= A Quarter Century of Public School Development          1.25

  =Monroe's= How to Teach Reading                                      .12

  =Morris's= (R. A.) Physical Education                               1.00

  =Page's= Theory and Practice of Teaching (Branson)                  1.00
    Theory and Practice of Teaching (Payne)                           1.00

  =Painter's= Great Pedagogical Essays                                1.25

  =Payne's= (W. H.) Contributions to the Science of Education         1.25

  =Report= of the Committee of Ten                                     .30

  =Report= of the Committee of Fifteen                                 .30

  =Roark's= Psychology in Education                                   1.00
    Method in Education                                               1.00
    Economy in Education                                              1.00

  =Seeley's= History of Education                                     1.25

  =Shoup's= History and Science of Education                          1.00

  =Stamper's= Textbook on the Teaching of Arithmetic                  1.00

  =Swett's= (John) American Public Schools                            1.00
    Methods of Teaching                                               1.00
    Public Education in California                                    1.00

  =White's= (E. E.) Elements of Pedagogy                              1.00
    School Management                                                 1.00
    Art of Teaching                                                   1.00

  =Winship's= Great American Educators                                 .50


  School Registers

  =American= School Diary. No. 2                            Per doz.,  .72

  =Bartley's= Improved School Record                            Each,  .60

  =Brooks's= (N. C.) School Teacher's Register                         .70

  =Complete= School Register                                           .60

  =Harvey's= (L. D.) District School Register                         1.25

  =Houck's= Book of Forms for Pennsylvania School Boards              5.00

  =Standard= Register of Attendance and Deportment                     .60

  =Teacher's= Complete Pocket Record                                   .45

  =Tracy's= (J. L.) School Record                                      .55
    Teacher's Pocket Record                                            .45

  =White's= (E. E.) New School Register                                .60
    New Common School Register                                         .60
    New Graded School Register                                         .60
    Teacher's Class Record                                             .60
    Monthly School Record                                              .40





INDEX


                                    PAGE
  Agriculture                        52

  Algebra                            34

  Anatomy                            50

  Ancient History                    42

  Anglo-Saxon                        23

  Arithmetic                     28, 73

  Astronomy                          46

  Banking                            73

  Bible Reading                      14

  Biographical Readers               11

  Biology                            48

  Bookkeeping                        71

  Botany                             48

  Business                           68

  Business Forms                 18, 72

  Business Practice                  68

  Charts                         14, 16

  Chemistry                          48

  Civics                         44, 74

  Comm'l Correspondence              73

  Commercial Geography           51, 74

  Commercial Law                     73

  Commercial Readers                 10

  Commercial Subjects                68

  Composition                        21

  Copy Books                     16, 73

  Dictionaries: English              23
    Latin                            64
    Greek                            68
    Classical                        68

  Domestic Science                   78

  Dramatic Stories                   10

  Drawing                            77

  Eclectic English Classics          25

  Economics                          45

  Education                          79

  Elocution                          23

  English Grammar                    19

  English History                    43

  English Literature                 23

  Ethical Readers                    14

  Ethics                             78

  Etymology                          22

  Evening School Books                7

  Fairy Tales                         8

  Famous Stories                      9

  French                             53

  Gateway Series of English Texts    24

  General History                    42

  Geography                          38

  Geographical Readers               10

  Geology                            51

  Geometry                           36

  German                             55

  German Copy Books                  18

  Greek                              64

  Harper's School Classics           27

  Higher Mathematics                 37

  Historical Readers                 11

  History                            40

  Hygiene                            50

  Italian                            58

  Language Lessons                   19

  Latin                              59

  Logic                              78

  Manual Training                    78

  Mathematics                        28

  Medieval and Modern History        43

  Meteorology                        52

  Music                              75

  Mythology                          44

  Nature Readers                     13

  Nature Study                       52

  Oriental Languages                 68

  Patriotic Readers                  14

  Pedagogy                           79

  Penmanship                     16, 73

  Philosophy                         78

  Physical Geography                 51

  Physical Training                  78

  Physics                            46

  Physiology                         50

  Political Science                  44

  Portuguese                         59

  Primers                             6

  Psychology                         78

  Readers                             1

  Rhetoric                           21

  Rolfe's English Classics           27

  Rolfe's Shakespeare                27

  School Registers                   80

  School Supervision                 79

  Science, General                   46

  Scientific Memoirs                 47

  Sociology                          45

  Spanish                            58

  Spelling                           14

  State and Local History            41

  Stenography                        74

  Supplementary Reading               8

  Temperance Physiologies            51

  Trigonometry                       36

  Typewriting                        74

  United States History              40

  Williams & Rogers Series           68

  Zooelogy                            49




  AMERICAN
  BOOK COMPANY

  NEW YORK
  CHICAGO
  CINCINNATI
  BOSTON
  ATLANTA
  SAN FRANCISCO
  SEATTLE




    +-----------------------------------------------+