[Illustration: Book Cover]




THE IVORY GATE


  _Sunt geminae Somni portae: quarum altera fertur
  Cornea, qua veris facilis datur exitus umbris:
  Altera candenti perfecta nitens elephanto:
  Sed falsa ad caelum mittunt insomnia manes._

  VIRGIL, _AEn._ VI.




NOTE.


After this novel was commenced in _Chambers's Journal_ it was discovered
that the title had already been used by the late Mr. Mortimer Collins,
for a novel published in the year 1865. The Author communicated with Mr.
Collins's representatives, and has to thank them for making no
opposition to the use of this title.




THE IVORY GATE


BY
WALTER BESANT

AUTHOR OF 'ALL SORTS AND CONDITIONS OF MEN' ETC.


[Illustration]


_A NEW EDITION_


London
CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY
1893




_TO_
_S. SQUIRE SPRIGGE, ESQ., M.D._


     _MY DEAR SPRIGGE,_

     _Since it was you who first instructed me in the existence
     of the brain disease which forms the motif of this story,
     and furnished me with such illustrations of its working as
     enabled me to write the story, I am in honour bound to make
     the most public acknowledgment possible of this fact._

     _I therefore beg to inscribe your name on the title page of
     this volume in grateful recognition of an obligation which
     is not by any means discharged by such recognition. I am
     also moved to do so in remembrance of another kind of work
     in which I have been so fortunate as to have your invaluable
     collaboration._

  _Very sincerely yours,_
  _WALTER BESANT._

  UNITED UNIVERSITY CLUB, S.W.
  _September 12, 1892._




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                           PAGE
         PROLOGUE: WHO IS EDMUND GRAY?                                 1
       I.  UP THE RIVER                                               29
      II.  IN THE OFFICE                                              37
     III.  THE SELECT CIRCLE                                          47
      IV.  A REBELLIOUS CHILD                                         56
       V.  SOMETHING HAPPENS                                          65
      VI.  SOMETHING MORE HAPPENS                                     74
     VII.  SOMETHING ELSE HAPPENS                                     83
    VIII.  IN HONOUR OF THE EVENT                                     93
      IX.  AT THE GATES OF PARADISE                                  102
       X.  A MYSTERIOUS DISCOVERY                                    110
      XI.  A MYSTERIOUS DISCOVERY                                    118
     XII.  THE FIRST FIND                                            134
    XIII.  THINGS MORE REMARKABLE                                    142
     XIV.  CHECKLEY'S CASE                                           152
      XV.  WHO IS EDMUND GRAY?                                       162
     XVI.  THE VOICE OF DUTY                                         172
    XVII.  WAS HE IN RAGS?                                           180
   XVIII.  THE PRODIGAL AT HOME                                      188
     XIX.  THE WHISPER OF CALUMNY                                    195
      XX.  HE COMES FROM EDMUND GRAY                                 205
     XXI.  I AM EDMUND GRAY                                          213
    XXII.  MASTER AND DISCIPLE                                       223
   XXIII.  THE HALL OF THE NEW FAITH                                 231
    XXIV.  CAN HE REMEMBER?                                          240
     XXV.  WILL HE REMEMBER?                                         248
    XXVI.  THE LESSON OF THE STREET                                  255
   XXVII.  'I KNOW THE MAN'                                          272
  XXVIII.  ATHELSTAN'S DISCOVERY                                     280
    XXIX.  CHECKLEY SEES A GHOST                                     288
     XXX.  THE DAY AFTER THE GHOST                                   296
    XXXI.  THE THREE ACCOMPLICES                                     304
   XXXII.  ELSIE AND HER MOTHER                                      315
  XXXIII.  PLENARY CONFESSION                                        320
   XXXIV.  LE CONSEIL DE FAMILLE                                     338
    XXXV.  THE LAST                                                  355




PROLOGUE

WHO IS EDMUND GRAY?


Mr. Edward Dering, in a rare interval of work, occupied himself with
looking into his bank book. Those humble persons whom the City,
estimating the moral and spiritual worth of a man by his income, calls
'small,' frequently and anxiously examine their bank books, add up the
columns, and check the entries. Mr. Dering, who was not a small man, but
a big man, or rather, from a City point of view, a biggish man, very
seldom looked at his bank book; first because, like other solicitors in
large practice, he had clerks and accountants to do that kind of work
for him: next because, like many solicitors, while he managed the
affairs of other people with unceasing watchfulness, he was apt to
neglect his own affairs. Happily, when one has an income of some
thousands, private affairs from time to time force themselves upon their
owner in the most agreeable manner possible. They obtrude themselves
upon him. They insist upon being noticed. They compel him to look after
them respectfully: to remove them from the dulness of the bank, and to
make them comfortable in investments.

Mr. Dering opened the book, therefore, having for the moment nothing
else to do, looked at the balance, was satisfied with its appearance,
and began working backwards, that is to say, upwards, to read the
entries. Presently, he came to one at which he stopped, holding his
forefinger on the name.

It was on the right-hand side, the side which to small men is so
terrifying, because it always does its best to annihilate the cash
balance, and seems bent upon transforming addition into multiplication,
so amazing are the results. The name which Mr. Dering read was Edmund
Gray. The amount placed in the same line opposite to that name was
720_l_. Therefore, he had drawn a cheque to the order of Edmund Gray for
the sum of 720_l_.

Now, a man may be in very great practice indeed; but if, like Mr.
Dering, he knows the details of every case that is brought into the
House, he would certainly remember drawing a cheque for 720_l_., and the
reason why it was drawn, and the person for whom it was drawn,
especially if the cheque was only three weeks old. Seven hundred and
twenty pounds! It is a sum in return for which many and very substantial
services must be rendered.

'Edmund Gray!' he murmured. 'Strange! I cannot remember the name of
Edmund Gray. Who is Edmund Gray? Why did I give him 720_l_.?'

The strange fact that he should forget so large a sum amused him at
first. Beside him lay a book which was his private Diary. He opened it
and looked back for three months. He could find no mention anywhere of
Edmund Gray. To repeat: he knew all the details of every case that came
into the House: he signed all the cheques: his memory was as tenacious
and as searching as the east wind in April; yet this matter of Edmund
Gray and his cheque for 720_l_. he could not recall to his mind by any
effort.

There is a certain stage in brain fatigue when one cannot remember
names: it is the sure and certain symptom of over-work: the wise man
recognises the symptom as a merciful warning and obeys it. Mr. Dering
knew this symptom. 'I must take a holiday,' he said. 'At sixty-seven,
one cannot afford to neglect the least loss of memory. Edmund Gray! To
forget Edmund Gray and 720_l_.! I must run down to the sea-side for a
fortnight's rest.'

He shut up the bank book and tried to go back to his work. But this name
came back to him. 'Edmund Gray,' he murmured--'Edmund Gray. Who on earth
is this Edmund Gray? Why did he get a cheque for 720_l_.?'

The thing ceased to amuse him: it began to irritate him: in two minutes
it began to torture him: he leaned back in his chair: he drummed with
his fingers on the table: he took up the book and looked at the entry
again. He got up and walked about the room--a long lean figure in a
tight frock-coat. To walk about the room and to swing your arms often
stimulates the memory. In this case, however, no good effect followed.
The _nomme_ Edmund Gray remained a name and nothing more--the shadow of
a name. Mr. Dering rapped the table with his paper-knife, as if to
conjure up that shadow. Futile superstition! No shadow appeared. But how
could the shadow of a name--an unknown name--carry off 720 golden
sovereigns?

'I feel as if I am going mad,' he murmured. 'Seven hundred and twenty
pounds paid by myself in a single lump, only three weeks ago, and I
remember nothing about it! I have no client named Edmund Gray. The money
must therefore have been paid by me for some client to this unknown
person. Yet it was paid by my cheque, and I don't remember it. Strange!
I never forgot such a thing before.'

There was an office bell on the table. He touched it. A clerk--an
elderly clerk--an ancient clerk--obeyed the call. He was the clerk who
sat in the room outside Mr. Dering's office: the clerk who wrote the
cheques for the chief to sign, brought back the letters when they had
been copied, directed the letters for the post, received visitors, and
passed in cards: in fact, the private secretary, stage-manager--we all
want a stage-manager in every profession--or confidential clerk. As
befits a man of responsibility, he was dressed all in black, his office
coat being as shiny as a mirror on the arms and on the shoulders: by
long habit it hung in certain folds or curves which never unbent: his
face was quite shaven and shorn: all that was left of his white hair was
cut short: his eyes were keen and even foxy: his lips were thin: his
general expression was one of watchfulness: when he watched his master
it was with the attention of a servant: when he watched anybody else it
was as one who watches a rogue, and would outwit him, if he could, at
his own roguery. In certain commercial walks of the lower kind, where
honour and morality consist in the success of attempts to cheat each
other, this kind of expression is not uncommon. Whether his expression
was good or bad, he was an excellent clerk: he was always at his post at
nine in the morning: he never left the office before seven, and, because
Mr. Dering was a whale for work, he sometimes stayed without a grumble
until eight or even nine. Man and boy, Checkley had been in the office
of Dering & Son for fifty-five years, entering as an errand-boy at
twelve.

'Checkley,' said his master, 'look at this bank book. Credit side.
Fourth entry. Have you got it?'

'Edmund Gray, 720_l_.,' the clerk read.

'Yes. What is that cheque for? Who is Edmund Gray?'

The clerk looked surprised. 'I don't know,' he said.

'Why did I pay that money?'

The clerk shook his head.

'Did you look at the book when you laid it on the table?'

The clerk nodded.

'Well--what did you think of it?'

'I didn't think of it at all. It wasn't one of the cheques you told me
to draw about that time ago. If I had thought, I should have supposed it
was your private business.'

'I was not aware, Checkley, that I have any private affairs that you do
not know.'

'Well--but you might have.'

'True. I might have. Just so. As I haven't--who, I ask you again--who is
this Edmund Gray?'

'I don't know.'

'Have you ever heard of any Edmund Gray?'

'Never to my knowledge.'

'This is the first time you have heard that name?' the lawyer persisted.

'The very first time.'

'Consider. Is there any Edmund Gray in connection with any of my
clients?'

'Not to my knowledge.'

'Not to your knowledge. Has any Edmund Gray ever been employed about the
office?'

'No--certainly not.'

'We have recently been painted and papered and whitewashed and new
carpeted at great expense and inconvenience. Did Edmund Gray conduct any
of those operations?'

'No.'

'Has the name of Edmund Gray ever been mentioned in any letters that
have come here?'

It was notorious in the office that Checkley read all the letters that
came, and that he never forgot the contents of any. If you named any
letter he would at once tell you what was written in it, even if it were
twenty years old.

'I have never even heard the name of Edmund Gray in any letter or in any
connection whatever,' the clerk replied firmly.

'I put all these questions, Checkley, because I was pretty certain
myself from the beginning; but I wanted to make myself quite certain. I
thought it might be a trick of failing memory. Now, look at the name
carefully'--the clerk screwed up his eyes tightly in order to get a good
grip of the name. 'You see I have given him a cheque for 720_l_., only
three weeks ago. I am not the kind of man to give away 720_l_. for
nothing. Yet I have actually forgotten the whole business.'

Certainly he did not look the kind of man to forget such a simple thing
as the giving away of 720_l_. Quite the contrary. His grave face, his
iron-grey hair, his firm lips, his keen, steady eyes, apart from the
methodical regularity with which his papers were arranged before him,
all proclaimed that he was very far from being that kind of man. Very
much the reverse, indeed.

'You don't mean to say, sir,' Checkley began, with a change in his face
from watchfulness to terror--'you can't mean----'

'I mean this, Checkley. I know of no Edmund Gray; and unless the bank
has made a mistake, there has been committed--a--what do they call it in
the law-courts?'

The clerk held the bank book in his hand, staring at his master with
open eyes. 'What?' he repeated. 'What do they call it? Good Lord! They
call it forgery--and for 720_l_.! And on you, of all people in the
world! And in this office! In our office!--our office! What a dreadful
thing, to be sure! Oh, what a dreadful thing to happen! In our
office--here!' The clerk seemed unable to express his astonishment.

'First of all, get me the returned cheques.'

The cheques always came back in the pocket of the bank book. Checkley
was accustomed to take them out and to file them in their proper place.

Again, Mr. Dering neither drew his cheques nor wrote his letters with
his own hand. He only signed them. One clerk wrote the letters; another
drew the cheques by his instruction and dictation.

Checkley went back to his own room and returned with a bundle of
returned drafts. He then looked in the safe--a great fireproof
safe--that stood open in one corner of the room, and took out the
current cheque book.

'Here it is,' he said. 'Check drawn by you yourself in your own
handwriting, and properly signed, payable to order--not crossed--and
duly endorsed. Now you understand why I know nothing about it. Edmund
Gray, Esquire, or order. Seven hundred and twenty pounds. Signed Dering
& Son. Your own handwriting and your own signature.'

'Let me look.' Mr. Dering took the paper and examined it. His eyes
hardened as he looked. 'You call this my handwriting, Checkley?'

'I--I--I did think it was,' the clerk stammered. 'Let me look again. And
I think so still,' he added more firmly.

'Then you're a fool. Look again. When did I ever sign like that?'

Mr. Dering's handwriting was one of those which are impossible to be
read by any except his own clerks, and then only when they know what to
expect. Thus, when he drew up instructions in lawyer language, he
expressed the important words by an initial, a medial, or a final
consonant, and made scratches for all the words between; his clerks,
however, understood him very well. If he had written a love letter, or a
farce, or a _ballade_, or a story, no one, either clerks, or friends, or
compositors, would have understood anything but a word here and a word
there. For his signature, however, that was different. It was the
signature of the Firm: it was a signature a hundred and twenty years
old: it was an eighteenth-century signature: bold, large, and clear,
every letter fully formed: with dots and flourishes, the last letter
concluding with a fantasia of penmanship belonging to a time when men
knew how to write, belonging to the decorative time of penmanship.

'Two of the dots are out of place,' said Checkley, 'and the flourish
isn't quite what it should be. But the cheque itself looks like your
hand,' he added stoutly. 'I ought to have seen that there was something
wrong about the signature, though it isn't much. I own to that. But the
writing is like yours, and I would swear to it still.'

'It isn't my handwriting at all, then. Where is the counterfoil?'

Checkley turned over the counterfoils. 'What is the date?' he asked.
'March the 4th? I can't find it. Here are cheques for the 3rd and for
the 6th, but none at all for the 4th.'

'Let me look.' Strange! There was no counterfoil. And the numbers did
not agree with that on the cheque.

'You haven't got another cheque book, have you?'

'No; I certainly have not.'

Mr. Dering sat with the cheque in his hand, looking at it. Then he
compared it with a blank cheque. 'Why,' he said, 'this cheque is drawn
from an old book--two years old--one of the books before the bank
amalgamated and changed its title and the form of the cheques--not much
of a change, it is true--but--how could we be such fools, Checkley, as
not to see the difference?'

'Then somebody or other must have got hold of an old cheque book.
Shameful! To have cheque books lying about for every common rogue to go
and steal!'

Mr. Dering reflected. Then he looked up and said: 'Look again in the
safe. In the left-hand compartment over the drawer, I think you will
find an old cheque book. It belonged to a separate account--a Trust.
That has been closed. The book should be there.--Ah! There it is.--I
wonder now,' the lawyer went on, 'how I came to remember that book? It
is more than two years since I last used it or even thought of it.
Another trick of memory. We forget nothing, in fact, nothing at all.
Give it to me. Strange, that I should remember so slight a thing.
Now--here are the cheques, you see--colour the same--lettering the
same--size the same--the only difference being the style and title of
the Company. The fellow must have got hold of an old book left about, as
you say, carelessly. Ah!' His colour changed. 'Here's the very
counterfoil we wanted! Look! the number corresponds. The cheque was
actually taken from this very book! a book in my own safe! in this very
office! Checkley, what does this mean?'

Checkley took the book from his master with a trembling hand, and read
feebly the writing of the counterfoil, March 4th, 1883. Edmund Gray,
720_l_.'

'Lord knows what it means,' he said. 'I never came across such a thing
in my life before.'

'Most extraordinary! It is two years since I have given a thought to
the existence of that book. Yet I remembered it the moment when it
became useful. Well, Checkley, what have you got to say? Can't you
speak?'

'Nothing--nothing. O Lord, what should I have to say. If you didn't draw
that cheque with your own hand----'

'I did not draw that cheque with my own hand.'

'Then--then it must have been drawn by somebody else's hand.'

'Exactly.'

'Perhaps you dictated it.'

'Don't be a fool, Checkley. Keep your wits together, though this is a
new kind of case for you. Criminal law is not exactly in your line. Do
you think I should dictate my own handwriting as well as my own words?'

'No. But I could swear--I could indeed--that it is your writing.'

'Let us have no more questions and answers. It is a forgery. It is a
forgery. It is not a common forgery. It has been committed in my own
office. Who can have done it? Let me think'--he placed the cheque and
the old cheque book before him. 'This book has been in my safe for two
years. I had forgotten its very existence. The safe is only used for my
private papers. I open it every morning myself at ten o'clock. I shut it
when I go up-stairs to lunch. I open it again when I return. I close it
when I go away. I have not departed from this custom for thirty years. I
could no more sit in this room with the safe shut--I could no more go
away with the safe open--than I could walk the streets in my shirt
sleeves. Therefore, not only has the forgery been committed by some one
who has had access to my safe, but by some one who has stolen the cheque
in my very presence and before my eyes. This consideration should narrow
the field.' He looked at the cheque again. 'It is dated March the 4th.
The date may mean nothing. But it was presented on the 5th. Who came to
my room on the 4th or the days preceding? Go and find out.'

Checkley retired and brought back his journal.

'You saw on the 4th----' He read the list of callers.

'That doesn't help,' said Mr. Dering.

'On the 1st, 2d, 3d, and 4th you had Mr. Arundel working with you here
every day from ten till twelve.'

'Mr. Arundel. Yes, I remember. Anybody else?'

'Nobody else.'

'You forget yourself, Checkley,' Mr. Dering said. 'You were, as usual,
in and out at different times.'

'O Lord! sir-- I hope you don't think----' The old clerk stammered,
turning pale.

'I think nothing, I want to find out. Go to the bank. See the manager.
Let him tell you if he can find out by whom the cheque was cashed. If in
notes--it must have been in notes--let those notes be instantly stopped.
It is not crossed, so that we must not expect anything so simple as the
Clearing House. Go at once and find out exactly what happened.'

This happened at about half-past ten. The bank was no more than five
minutes' walk. Yet it was twelve o'clock when the clerk returned.

'Well, what have you found out?' asked the master.

'I have found out a great deal,' Checkley began eagerly. 'First, I saw
the manager, and I saw the pay clerk. The cheque was handed in by a
commissionaire. Everybody trusts a commissionaire. The pay clerk knows
your signature, and thought it was all right. I showed the cheque to the
manager. He knows your handwriting, and he says he would swear that the
cheque was drawn by you yourself. So I am not such a fool as you think.'

'Go on.'

'The commissionaire told the pay clerk that he was ordered to take it
all in ten-pound notes. He took them, put them in his pouch, and walked
away. He was a one-armed man, and took a long time over the job, and
didn't seem a bit in a hurry.'

'About the notes?'

'The manager will stop them at once. But he says that if the thing was
done by an old hand, there must be confederates in it, and there will be
trouble. However, the notes are stopped. That's done. Then I went on to
the commissionaires' barracks in the Strand. The sergeant very soon
found the man, and I had a talk with him. He was employed by an old
gentleman, he says, staying at the Cecil Hotel, Strand. The old
gentleman sent him to the bank with instructions to get the money in
ten-pound notes; and very particular he was with him about not losing
any of them on the way. He didn't seem a bit in a hurry either. Took
the notes from the man and laid them in a pocket-book. It was in the
coffee-room, and half a dozen other gentlemen were there at the same
time. But this gentleman seemed alone.'

'Humph! A pretty cool business, upon my word! No hurry about it. Plenty
of time. That was because they knew that the old cheque book would not
be found and examined.'

'Why did they write the cheque on the counterfoil? Why did they put the
cheque book back again--after they had taken it out?'

'I don't know. The workings of a forger's brain are not within the
compass of my experiences. Go on, Checkley.'

'The commissionaire says that he is certain he would know the gentleman
again.'

'Very good indeed, if we can only find the gentleman.'

'I then went on to the Cecil Hotel and saw the head waiter of the
coffee-room. He remembered the commissionaire being sent for: he saw the
bundle of bank-notes brought back from the bank, and he remembers the
old gentleman very well. Says he should certainly know him again.'

'Did he describe him?'

'There didn't seem anything particular to describe. He was of average
height, so to speak, dressed in grey trousers and a black frock-coat,
and was grey-haired. Much as if I was to describe you.'

'Oh! The notes are stopped. Yet in three weeks there has been ample time
to get them all changed. Every note may have been changed into gold in
three weeks. An elderly gentleman: grey hair: average height: that tells
us nothing. Checkley, the thing has been done by some one who had, or
still has, access to my safe. Perhaps, in some way or other, keys have
been procured. In that case----' He stepped over to the safe and opened
a drawer. 'See, Checkley; this drawer is untouched: it is full of
jewellery and things which belonged to my mother. Nothing touched. Here
is a bag of spade guineas again--nothing taken. What do you say to that?
If the forger had possessed keys, he would, first of all, have cleared
out the things which he could turn into money without any difficulty and
very little risk. Nothing taken except that cheque, and the cheque book
replaced. What do you say to that? Eh?'

'I don't know what to say. I'm struck stupid. I never heard of such a
thing before.'

'Nor I. Why, it must have been done in this room, while the safe was
open, while I was actually present. That is the only solution possible.
Again, who has been in this room?'

'All the callers--I read their names to you--your clients.'

'They all sit in that chair. They never leave that chair so long as they
are with me.' He indicated the chair which stood at the corner of the
lawyer's great table at his left hand. Now the safe was in the far
corner, on the other side of the room. 'They could not possibly----
Checkley, the only two who could possibly have access to that safe in
office hours are yourself and Mr. Arundel.'

'Good heavens! sir--you can't believe--you can't actually think----'

'I believe nothing. I told you so before. I think nothing. I want the
facts.'

The room was long rather than square, lit by two large windows,
overlooking the gardens of New Square, Lincoln's Inn. The lawyer sat
with his back to the fire, protected by a cane-screen, before a large
table. On his left hand, at the corner of the table, stood the clients'
chair: on his right hand, between the two windows, was a small table
with a couple of drawers in it. And in the corner, to the left of any
one writing at the small table, and on the right hand of the lawyer, was
the open safe already mentioned. There were two doors, one communicating
with the clerk's room, the other opening directly on the stairs. The
latter was locked on the inside.

'Call Mr. Arundel,' said the chief.

While Checkley was gone, he walked to the window and observed that any
one sitting at the table could, by merely reaching out, take anything
from the safe and put it back again unobserved, if he himself happened
to be occupied or looking another way. His grave face became dark. He
returned to his own chair, and sat thinking, while his face grew darker
and his eyes harder, until Mr. Arundel appeared.

Athelstan Arundel was at this time a recently admitted member of the
respectable but too numerous family of solicitors. He was between two
and three and twenty years of age, a tall and handsome young fellow, of
a good manly type. He was an ex-articled clerk of the House, and he had
just been appointed a Managing Clerk until something could be found for
him. The Arundels were a City family of some importance: perhaps
something in a City Firm might presently be achieved by the united
influence of family and money. Meantime, here he was, at work, earning a
salary and gaining experience. Checkley--for his part, who was as
jealous of his master as only an old servant, or a young mistress, has
the right to be--had imagined symptoms or indications of a growing
preference or favour toward this young gentleman on the part of Mr.
Dering. Certainly, he had Mr. Arundel in his own office a good deal, and
gave him work of a most confidential character. Besides, Mr. Dering was
Executor and Trustee for young Arundel's mother, and he had been an old
friend and schoolfellow of his father, and had known the young man and
his two sisters from infancy.

'Mr. Arundel,' the lawyer began. At his own house, he addressed his ward
by his Christian name: in the office, as managing clerk, he prefixed the
courtesy title. 'An extremely disagreeable thing has happened here.
Nothing short of a forgery.--Don't interrupt me, if you please'--for the
young man looked as if he was about to practise his interjections.--'It
is a most surprising thing, I admit. You needn't say so, however. That
wastes time. A Forgery. On the fifth of this month, three weeks ago, a
cheque, apparently in my handwriting, and with my signature, so
skilfully executed as to deceive even Checkley and the manager of the
bank, was presented at my bank and duly cashed. The amount
is--large--720_l_.--and the sum was paid across the counter in ten-pound
notes, which are now stopped--if there are any left.' He kept his eyes
fixed on the young man, whose face betrayed no other emotion than that
of natural surprise. 'We shall doubtless trace these notes, and through
them, of course, the forger. We have already ascertained who presented
the cheque. You follow?'

'Certainly. There has been a forgery. The forged cheque has been cashed.
The notes are stopped. Have you any clue to the forgery--any
suspicions?'

'As yet, none. We are only beginning to collect the facts.' The lawyer
spoke in the coldest and most austere manner. 'I am laying them, one by
one, before you.'

Young Arundel bowed.

'Observe then, that the forged cheque belongs to a cheque book which
has been lying, forgotten by me, in this safe for two years. Here is the
book. Turn to the last counterfoil. Here is the cheque, the forged
cheque, which corresponds. You see?'

'Perfectly. The book has been in the safe for two years. It has been
taken out by someone--presumably the forger--the cheque has been forged;
the counterfoil filled up; and the book replaced. Why was all this
trouble taken? If the man had got the cheque, why did he fill up the
counterfoil? Why did he return the book? I beg your pardon.'

'Your questions are pertinent. I come to the next point. The safe is
never opened but by myself. It is open so long as I am in the room, and
at no other time.'

'Certainly, I know that.'

'Very well. The man who took out this cheque book, forged the cheque,
and replaced the book, must have done it in my very presence.'

'Oh! Could not someone--somehow--have got a key?'

'I thought of that. It is possible. But the drawers are full of
valuables, jewellery--curios--all kinds of things which could easily be
turned into money. And they were not touched. Now, had the safe been
opened by a key, these things would certainly have vanished.'

'So it would seem.'

'These are the main facts, Mr. Arundel. Oh! one more. We have found the
messenger who cashed the cheque. Perhaps there are one or two other
points of more or less importance. There is only one more point I wish
to bring before you. Of course--I make no charge--I insinuate none. But
this must be remembered--there are only two persons who have had access
to this safe in such a manner as to make it possible for them to take
anything out of it-- Checkley----'

'No--no--no,' cried the old man.

'And you yourself. At the time of the robbery, you were working at that
table with the safe open and within reach of your left hand. This is a
fact, mind--one of the facts of the case--not a charge.'

'What?' cried the young man, his cheek aflame--'you mean----'

'I mean nothing--nothing at all. I want you--and Checkley--who alone
have used this room, not counting callers who sat in that chair--to know
the facts.'

'The facts--yes--of course--the facts. Well'--he spoke rapidly and a
little incoherently--'it is true that I worked here--but--oh! it is
absurd. I know nothing of any cheque book lying in your safe. I was
working at this table'--he went to the table--'sitting in this chair.
How could I get up and search about in a safe for an unknown and
unsuspected cheque book before your very eyes?'

'I do not know. It seems impossible. I only desire you to consider, with
me, the facts.'

Had Mr. Dering spoken just a little less coldly, with just a little less
dryness in his manner, what followed would perhaps have been different.

'Yes--the facts,' repeated the young man. 'Well--let us get at the
facts. The chief fact is that whoever took that cheque and filled it up
must have known the existence of that cheque book more than two years
old.'

'It would seem so.'

'Who could know about that old cheque book? Only one who had been about
your office more than two years, or one who had had opportunities of
examining the safe. Now, you sat there--I sat here'--he seated himself,
only turning the chair round. 'How is it possible for a man sitting here
to take anything out of that safe without your seeing him? How is it
possible for him, without your knowledge, to examine slowly and
carefully the contents of the safe?'

'Everything is possible,' said Mr. Dering, still coldly. 'Let us not
argue on possibilities. We have certain facts before us. By the help of
these, I shall hope to find out others.'

'At five o'clock every day I put the work in the drawer of this table
and I go away.' He opened the drawer, as if to illustrate this
unimportant fact. He saw in it two or three pieces of paper with writing
on them. He took them out. 'Good Heavens!' he cried. 'They are
imitations of your handwriting.'

Checkley crossed the room swiftly, snatched them from him, and laid them
before his master. 'Imitations of your handwriting,' he said,
'imitations--exercises in forgery--practice makes perfect. Found in the
drawer. Now!'

Mr. Dering looked at the papers and laid them beside the forged cheque.
'An additional fact,' he said. 'These are certainly imitations. The
probable conclusion is that they were made by the same hand that forged
this cheque.'

'Found in the drawer,' said Checkley, 'used by Mr. Arundel. Never by me.
Ah! The only two, are we? These imitations will prove that I'm not in
it.'

'The fact that these imitations are found in the drawer,' said Mr.
Dering, 'is a fact which may or may not be important.'

'What?' cried the young man, flaring up. 'You think that I made those
imitations?'

'I do not permit myself--yet--to make any conclusions at all.
Everything, however, is possible.'

Then this foolish young man lost his temper and his head.

'You have known me all my life,' he cried. 'You have known me and all my
people. Yet at the first moment you are ready to believe that I have
committed a most abominable forgery! You--my father's oldest friend--my
mother's Trustee! My own Guardian! You!'

'Pardon me. There are certain facts in this case. I have laid them
before you. I have shown----'

'To suspect me,' Arundel repeated, 'and all the time another man--that
man--your clerk--who knows everything ever done in this office, is in
and about the place all day long.'

'The imitations,' said Checkley quietly, 'were found in his own
drawer--by himself.'

'Who put them there? Who made them? You--villain and scoundrel!'

'Stop, stop,' said Mr. Dering coldly. 'We go too fast. Let us first
prove our facts. We will then proceed to conclusions.'

'Well, sir, you clearly believe that I forged your name and robbed you
of all this money. I have not got ten pounds in the world; but that is
not, I suppose, a fact which bears on the case. You think I have seven
hundred pounds somewhere. Very good. Think so, if you please. Meanwhile,
I am not going to stay in the service of a man who is capable of
thinking such a thing. I leave your service--at once. Get some one else
to serve you--somebody who likes being charged with forgery and theft.'
He flung himself out of the room and banged the door behind him.

'He has run away,' said Checkley. 'Actually, run away at the very
outset! What do you think now?'

'I do not think. We shall, I daresay, find out the truth in due course.
Meantime, these documents will remain in my keeping.'

'Only, I hope, sir,' the clerk began, 'that after what you've just seen
and heard, after such insolence and running away and all----'

'Don't be an ass, Checkley. So far as appearances go, no one could get
at the safe except you and Arundel. So far as the ascertained facts go,
there is nothing to connect either of you with the thing. He is a
foolish young man; and if he is innocent, which we must, I suppose,
believe'--but his look did not convey the idea of robust faith--'he will
come back when he has cooled down.'

'The imitations of your handwriting in his drawer----'

'The man who forged the cheque,' said Mr. Dering, 'whoever he was, could
easily have written those imitations. I shall see that hot-headed boy's
mother, and bring him to reason.--Now, Checkley, we will resume work.
And not a word of this business, if you please, outside. You have
yourself to think of as well, remember. You, as well as that boy, have
access to the safe. Enough--enough.'

Athelstan Arundel walked home all the way, foaming and raging. No
omnibus, cab, or conveyance ever built could contain a young man in such
a rage. His mother lived at Pembridge Square, which is four good
measured miles from Lincoln's Inn. He walked the whole way, walking
through crowds, and under the noses of dray-horses, carriage-horses, and
cart-horses, without taking the least notice of them. When he reached
home, he dashed into the drawing-room, where he found his two
sisters--Hilda and Elsie--one of them a girl of eighteen, the other of
thirteen. With flaming cheeks and fiery eyes he delivered himself of his
story; he hurled it at their heads; he called upon them to share his
indignation, and to join with him in scorn and contempt of the
man--their supposed best friend, Trustee, Guardian, Adviser--their
father's best friend--who had done this thing--who had accused him, on
the bare evidence of two or three circumstantial facts, of such a crime!

There is something magnetic in all great emotions: one proof of their
reality is that they are magnetic. It is only an actor who can endow an
assumed emotion with magnetism. Elsie, the younger girl, fell into a
corresponding sympathy of wrath: she was equal to the occasion: passion
for passion, she joined him and fed the flame. But--for all persons are
not magnetic--the elder sister remained cold. From time to time she
wanted to know exactly what Mr. Dering had said: this her brother was
too angry to remember: she was pained and puzzled: she neither soothed
him nor sympathised with him.

Then the mother returned, and the whole story was told again, Elsie
assisting. Now, Mrs. Arundel was a woman of great sense: a practical
woman: a woman of keen judgment. She prided herself upon the possession
of these qualities, which are not supposed to be especially feminine.
She heard the story with disturbed face and knitted brow.

'Surely,' she said, 'what you tell me, Athelstan, is beyond belief. Mr.
Dering, of all men, to accuse you--you--of such a thing! It is
impossible.'

'I wish it was impossible. He accuses me of forging that cheque for
720_l_. He says that while I was working in his office for him, a
fortnight ago, I took a certain cheque book out of the safe, forged his
writing on a cheque, and returned the cheque book. This is what he says.
Do you call that accusing, or don't you?'

'Certainly. If he says that. But how can he--Mr. Dering--the most exact
and careful of men? I will drive to Lincoln's Inn at once and find out.
My dear boy, pray calm yourself. There is--there must be--some terrible
mistake.'

She went immediately; and she had a long interview with the solicitor.

Mr. Dering was evidently much disturbed by what had happened. He did not
receive her as he usually received his clients, sitting in his
arm-chair. He pushed back the chair and stood up, leaning a hand on the
back of it, a tall, thin, erect figure, gray-haired, austere of face.
There was little to reassure the mother in that face. The very trouble
of it made her heart sink.

'I certainly have not accused Athelstan,' he said. 'It is, however,
quite true that there has been a robbery here, and that of a large sum
of money--no less than 720_l_.'

'But what has that to do with my boy?'

'We have made a few preliminary inquiries. I will do for you, Mrs.
Arundel, what I did for your son, and you shall yourself understand
what connection those inquiries have with him.'

He proceeded coldly and without comment to set forth the case so far as
he had got at the facts. As he went on, the mother's heart became as
heavy as lead. Before he finished, she was certain. There is, you see, a
way of presenting a case without comment which is more efficacious than
any amount of talk; and Mrs. Arundel plainly perceived--which was indeed
the case--that the lawyer had by this time little doubt in his own mind
that her son had done this thing.

'I thought it right,' he continued, 'to lay before him these facts at
the outset. If he is innocent, I thought, he will be the better able to
prove his innocence, and perhaps to find the guilty person. If he is
guilty, he may be led to confession or restitution. The facts about the
cheque book and the safe are very clear. I am certain that the safe has
not been opened by any other key. The only persons who have had access
to it are Checkley and your son Athelstan. As for Checkley--he couldn't
do it, he could not possibly do it. The thing is quite beyond him.'

Mrs. Arundel groaned. 'This is terrible!' she said.

'Meantime, the notes are numbered: they may be traced: they are stopped:
we shall certainly find the criminal by means of those notes.'

'Mr. Dering'--Mrs. Arundel rose and laid her hand on his--'you are our
very old friend. Tell me--if this wretched boy goes away--if he gives
back the money that remains--if I find the rest--will there be--any
further--investigation?'

'To compound a felony is a crime. It is, however, one of those crimes
which men sometimes commit without repentance or shame. My dear lady, if
he will confess and restore--we shall see.'

Mrs. Arundel drove home again. She came away fully persuaded in her own
mind that her son--her only son--and none other, must be that guilty
person. She knew Mr. Dering's room well: she had sat there hundreds of
times: she knew the safe: she knew old Checkley. She perceived the
enormous improbability of this ancient clerk's doing such a thing. She
knew, again, what temptations assail a young man in London: she saw what
her Trustee thought of it: and she jumped to the conclusion that her
son--and none other--was the guilty person. She even saw how he must
have done it: she saw the quick look while Mr. Dering's back was turned:
the snatching of the cheque book: the quick replacing it. Her very
keenness of judgment helped her to the conviction. Women less clever
would have been slower to believe. Shameful, miserable termination of
all her hopes for her boy's career! But that she could think of
afterwards. For the moment the only thing was to get the boy away--to
induce him to confess--and to get him away.

He was calmer when she got home, but he was still talking about
the thing: he would wait till the right man was discovered: then
he would have old Dering on his knees. The thing would be set right
in a few days. He had no fear of any delay. He was quite certain
that it was Checkley--that old villain. Oh! He couldn't do it by
himself, of course--nobody could believe that of him. He had
accomplices--confederates--behind him. Checkley's part of the job was to
steal the cheque book and give it to his confederates and share the
swag.

'Well, mother?' he asked.

His mother sat down. She looked pale and wretched.

'Mother,' cried Hilda, the elder sister. 'Quick! What has happened? What
does Mr. Dering say?'

'He accuses nobody,' she replied in a hard dry voice. 'But----'

'But what?' asked Hilda.

'He told me everything--everything--and--and----Oh!' She burst into sobs
and crying, though she despised women who cry. 'It is terrible-- It is
terrible-- It is incredible. Yet, what can I think? What can any one
think? Leave us, Hilda. Leave us, Elsie.' The two girls went out
unwillingly. 'Oh! my son--how can I believe it? And yet--on the one
hand, a boy of two-and-twenty exposed to all the temptations of town: on
the other, an old clerk of fifty years' service and integrity. And when
the facts are laid before you both--calmly and coldly--you fly into a
rage and run away, while Checkley calmly remains to await the inquiry.'

Mrs. Arundel had been accustomed all her life to consider Mr. Dering as
the wisest of men. She felt instinctively that he regarded her son with
suspicion: she heard all the facts: she jumped to the conclusion that he
was a prodigal and a profligate: that he had fallen into evil ways, and
spent money in riotous living: she concluded that he had committed these
crimes in order to get more money for more skittles and oranges.

'Athelstan '--she laid her hand upon his arm, but did not dare to lift
her eyes and behold that guilty face--'Athelstan'--confess--make
reparation so far as you can--confess--oh! my son--my son! You will be
caught and tried and found guilty, and--oh! I cannot say it--through the
notes which you have changed. They are all known and stopped.'

The boy's wrath was now changed to madness.

'You!' he cried. 'You! My own mother! You believe it, no! Oh! we are all
going mad together. What? Then I am turned out of this house, as I am
turned out of my place. I go, then--I go; and'--here he swore a mighty
oath, as strong as anybody out of Spain can make them--'I will
never--never--never come home again till you come yourself to beg
forgiveness--you--my own mother!'

Outside, in the hall, his sisters stood, waiting and trembling.

'Athelstan,' cried the elder, 'what, in the name of Heaven, have you
done?'

'Go, ask my mother. She will tell you. She knows, it seems, better than
I know myself. I am driven away by my own mother. She says that I am
guilty of--of--of forgery.'

'If she says so, Athelstan,' his sister replied coldly, 'she must have
her reasons. She would not drive you out of the house for nothing. Don't
glare like that. Prove your innocence.'

'What? You, too? Oh! I am driven away by my sisters as well----'

'No, Athelstan--no,' cried Elsie, catching his hand. 'Not both your
sisters.'

'My poor child;' he stooped and kissed her. 'They will make you believe
what they believe. Good Heavens! They make haste to believe it; they are
glad to believe it.'

'No--no. Don't go, Athelstan.' Elsie threw her arms about him. 'Stay,
and show that they are wrong. Oh! you are innocent. I will
never--never--never believe it.'

He kissed her again, and tore himself away. The street door slammed
behind him: they heard his footsteps as he strode away. He had gone.

Then Elsie fell into loud weeping and wailing. But Hilda went to comfort
her mother.

'Mother,' she said, 'did he really, really and truly do it?'

'What else can I believe? Either he did it or that old clerk. Where is
he?'

'He is gone. He says he will come back when his innocence is proved.
Mother, if he is innocent, why does he run away? It's foolish to say
that it is because we believe it. I've said nothing except that you
couldn't believe it without reasons. Innocent young men don't run away
when they are charged with robbery. They stay and fight it out.
Athelstan should have stayed.'

Later on, when they were both a little recovered, Hilda tried to
consider the subject more calmly. She had not her mother's cleverness,
but she was not without parts. The following remarks--made by a girl of
eighteen--prove so much.

'Mother,' she said, 'perhaps it is better, so long as this suspicion
rests upon him, that he should be away. We shall certainly know where
he is: he will want money, and will write for it. If it should prove
that somebody else did the thing, we can easily bring him back as a
martyr--for my own part I should be so glad that I would willingly
beg his pardon on my knees--and of course we could easily get him
replaced in the office. If it is proved that he did do it--and that,
you think, they will be certain to find out--Mr. Dering, for your sake,
will be ready to hush it up--perhaps we may get the notes back--he
can't have used them all; in any case it will be a great comfort to
feel that he is out of the way: a brother convicted--tried in open
court--sentenced--oh!' She shuddered. 'We should never get over it:
never, never! It would be a most dreadful thing for Elsie and me. As for
his going away, if people ask why he is gone and where, we must invent
something--we can easily make up a story--hint that he has been
wild--there is no disgrace, happily, about a young man being wild--that
is the only thing that reconciles one to the horrid selfishness of wild
young men--and if, by going away in a pretended rage, Athelstan has
really enabled us to escape a horrid scandal--why, mother, in that
case--we may confess that the blow has been by Providence most
mercifully softened for us--most mercifully. We ought to consider that,
mother.'

'Yes, dear, yes. But he is gone. Athelstan is gone. And his future
seems ruined. There is no hope for him. I can see no hope whatever. My
dear, he was so promising. I thought that all the family influence would
be his--we haven't got a single City solicitor in the whole family. I
thought that he was so clever and so ambitious and so eager to get on
and make money and be a credit to the family. Solicitors do
sometimes--especially City solicitors--become so very, very rich; and
now it is all gone and done--and nothing left to hope but the miserable
wish that there should be no scandal.'

'It is indeed dreadful. But still--consider--no scandal. Mother, I think
we should find out, if we can, something about his private life--how he
has been living. He has been out a good deal of evenings lately. If
there is any--any person--on whom he has been tempted to spend money--if
he has been gambling--or betting, or any of the things that I read
of'--this young lady, thanks to the beneficent assistance of certain
works of fiction, was tolerably acquainted with the ways of young men
and their temptations--'it would be a satisfaction to know it at least.'

The ladies of a family where there is a 'wild' young man do not
generally find it easy to get at the facts of his wildness: these remain
locked up in the bosoms of his companions. No details could be learned
about any wildness--quite the contrary. He seemed, so far as could be
learned, to have led a very quiet and regular life. 'But then,' said the
philosopher of eighteen, quoting from a novel, 'men shelter each other.
They are all bad together.'

But--no scandal.

Everybody knows that kind of brother or sister by whom all family events
are considered with a view to the scandal likely to be caused and the
personal injury resulting to himself; or the envy that will follow and
the personal advantage accruing from that event. That her brother was
perhaps a shameful criminal might be considered by Hilda Arundel later
on: at first, she was only capable of perceiving that this horrid fact,
unless it could be hidden away and kept secret, might very materially
injure herself.

Almost naturally, she folded her hands sweetly and laid her comely head
a little on one side--it is an attitude of resignation which may be
observed in certain pictures of saints and holy women. Hilda knew many
little attitudes. Also, quite naturally, she glanced at a mirror on the
wall and observed that her pose was one of sorrow borne with Christian
resignation.

We must blame neither Hilda nor her mother. The case as put by Mr.
Dering in the form of plain fact without any comment, did seem very
black indeed against Athelstan. In every family the first feeling in
such a case--it is the instinct of self-preservation--is to hush up the
thing if possible--to avoid a scandal.

Such a scandal as the prosecution of a brother for forgery--with a
verdict of guilty--is a most truly horrible, deplorable, fatal thing. It
takes the respectability out of a family perhaps at a critical moment,
when the family is just assuming the robes of respectability: it ruins
the chances of the girls: it blights the prospects of the boys: it
drives away friends: it is a black spot which all the soaps ever
advertised could never wash off. Therefore, while the mother hoped,
first of all, that the boy would escape the clutch of the law, Hilda
was, first of all, grateful that there would be no scandal. Mr. Dering
would not talk about it. The thing would not interfere with her own
prospects. It was sad: it was miserable; but yet--no scandal. With what
a deep, deep sigh of satisfaction did the young lady repeat that there
would probably be no scandal!

As for Elsie, that child went about for many days with tearful eyes, red
cheeks, and a swollen nose. She was rebellious and sharp with her
mother. And to her sister she refused to speak. The days went on. They
became weeks, months, years. Otherwise they would not have been days.
Nothing at all was heard of Athelstan. He sent no letters to any one: he
did not even write for money: they knew not where he was or what he was
doing. He disappeared. It was understood that there had been wildness.

Now--which was very remarkable--though the forger had had a clear run of
three weeks, it could not be discovered that any of the notes had been
presented. Perhaps they were sent abroad: yet foreign and colonial banks
would know the numbers of stopped notes. And towards the discovery of
the forger no further step had been taken. The commissionaire who took
the cheque had been, as you have seen, easily found: he said he should
know the old gentleman who gave him the forged draft to cash. He said,
being again interrogated, that Checkley was not in the least like that
old gentleman. What could be thought, then? Athelstan must have 'made
up' as an old man: he was fond of private theatricals: he could make up
very well: of course he had made up. And then, this point being settled,
they left off talking about the business.

Other things happened--important things--which made the memory of the
prodigal son to wax dim. First of all came Hilda's case. She was a
graceful young person, with features of great regularity: her expression
was cold, her eyes were hard, and her lips were a little thin, but these
things at nineteen are hardly perceived. She was that sort of a girl who
seems created for the express purpose, first of wearing and beautifying
costly raiment, and next of sitting in a splendid vehicle. The finer the
dress, the more beautiful she looked. The grander the carriage, the more
queenly she seemed. In rags her coldness would be arctic, her hardness
would be granitic: in silk and velvet she became a goddess. It was
therefore most fitting that she should marry a rich man. Now, to be rich
in these days, one must be old. It is the price that one has to pay for
wealth. Sometimes one pays the price and gets old, and yet does not get
what one has paid for. That seems hardly fair. There was a certain rich
man, Mr. Dering's younger brother, Sir Samuel Dering, Knight, one of the
most substantial City men, a man who had a house in Kensington Palace
Gardens, a yacht, a country place in Sussex, and piles of papers in a
safe, meaning investments. He was a widower without encumbrance: he was
fifty-seven years of age, not yet decayed: he wanted a wife to be the
mistress of his house, and to look well at his dinner-parties. Of
course, when one does want a wife, at any age, one wants her young.
Hilda Arundel, his brother's ward, looked as if she would discharge the
duties required of the position admirably. He suggested the arrangement
to his brother, who spoke about it.

There was a good deal of taking about it. Mrs. Arundel showed that she
knew the value of her daughter; but there was no doubt about the
conclusion of the matter. There was a grand wedding, at which all the
richer Arundels were present, and none of the poor relations. Mr.
Dering, the young lady's guardian, gave her away; Hilda became Lady
Dering, and has been perfectly happy ever since. Elsie remained with her
mother. Her brother was never spoken of between them. But she
remembered him, and she was firm in her conviction that his innocence
would be some day established.

After five years, nothing at all having been heard of the notes, Mr.
Dering made application to the Bank of England, and received from them
the sum of 720_l_. in new crisp notes in the place of those of which he
had been robbed, so that the actual loss at 4 per cent. compound
interest amounted to no more than 155_l_. 19_s_. 9-3/4_d_., which is
more than one likes to lose, yet is not actually embarrassing to a man
whose income is about ten thousand a year. He ceased to think about the
business altogether, except as a disagreeable episode of his office.

Then Athelstan Arundel became completely forgotten. His old friends, the
young men with whom he had played and sported, only remembered him from
time to time as a fellow who had come to some unknown grief, and had
gone away. There is always some young fellow in every set of young
fellows who gets into some scrape, and so leaves the circle, and is no
more seen or heard of. We go on just the same without him: very seldom
is such a man remembered long: it is the way of the world: we cannot
stop to lament over the fallen: we must push on: others fall: close up
the ranks: push on: Time drives: the memory of the fallen swiftly waxes
dim.

Fours years or so after the mysterious business of Edmund Gray, Mr.
Dering received a letter with an American stamp marked 'Private and
Confidential.' He laid this aside until he had got through the business
letters; then he opened it. He turned first to the signature. 'Ha!' he
said, 'Athelstan Arundel. At last. Now we shall see. We shall see.'

He expected a full confession of the crime. We should never expect, says
the Sage, what we desire, because we never obtain what we expect. It
would have made Mr. Dering more comfortable in his mind had the letter
contained a confession. Of course, Athelstan had done it. Nobody else
could have done it. Yet when he thought about the business at all, there
always arose in his mind an uneasy feeling that perhaps the boy had been
treated unwisely. It might have been more prudent to have kept the facts
from him, although they pointed so strongly in his direction, until
proof positive was obtained. It might, again, have been better had the
facts been put before him with a few words of confidence, even though
that confidence did not exist. Time only strengthened Mr. Dering's
suspicions against the young man. The thing _must_ have been done by
Checkley or by him. Now, Checkley was not able, if he had wished, to
imitate any handwriting. No! It was done by Athelstan. Why he did it,
what he got by it, seeing that those notes had never been presented, no
one could explain. But he did it--he did it. That was certain.

Mr. Dering therefore began to read the letter with interest. Its
commencement was without any opening words of respect or friendliness.
And it was not by any means the letter of a wicked man turning away from
his wickedness. Not a word of repentance from beginning to end.

'Four years ago,' Mr. Dering read, 'you drove me from your place and
changed my whole life, by a suspicion--amounting to a charge--of the
gravest kind. You assumed, without explanation or examination, that
because certain facts seemed to point in a certain direction, I had been
guilty of an enormous crime, that I had robbed my father's oldest
friend, my mother's Trustee, my own guardian, my employer, of a great
sum of money. You never asked yourself if this suspicion was justified
by any conduct of mine--you jumped at it.'

'Quite wrong. Wilfully wrong,' said Mr. Dering. 'I laid the facts before
him. Nothing but the facts. I brought no charge.'

'I daresay that by this time the criminal has been long since detected.
Had I remained, I would have brought the thing home to him. For of
course it could be none other than your clerk. I have thought over the
case thousands of times. The man who forged the cheque must have been
one of two--either your clerk--the man Checkley--or myself. It did not
take you long, I apprehend, to learn the truth. You would discover it
through the presentation of the notes.'--'This is a very crafty letter,'
said Mr. Dering; 'when he never presented any of the notes. Very
crafty.' He resumed the letter--'Enough said about that. I daresay,
however, that I shall some day or other--before you are dead, I
hope--return in order to receive some expression of sorrow from you if
you can feel shame.'--'Certainly not,' said Mr. Dering with
decision.--'Meantime, there is a service which I must ask of you for
the sake of my people. There is no one else whom I can ask. It is the
reason of my writing this letter.

'I came away with ten pounds--all I had in the world--in my pocket. Not
seven hundred and twenty pounds, as you imagined or suspected. Ten
pounds. With that slender capital I got across the Atlantic. I have now
made twelve thousand pounds. I made it in a very short time by
extraordinary good luck.' Mr. Dering laid down the letter and
considered. Twelve thousand pounds might be made--perhaps--by great good
luck--with a start of seven hundred and twenty, but hardly with ten
pounds. A silver reef--or more likely a gambling table, or a second
crime, or a series of crimes. It will be observed that his opinion of
the young man was now very bad indeed: otherwise, he would have
reflected that as none of those notes had been presented, none of them
had been used. Even if an English ten-pound note is converted into
American dollars, the note comes home before ten years. 'Extraordinary
good luck.' He read the words again, and shook his head. 'Now, I want
you to take charge of this money, to say nothing at all about it, to
keep the matter a profound secret, to invest it or put it in some place
of safety, where confidential clerks with a taste for forgery cannot get
at it, and to give it, on her twenty-first birthday, to my sister Elsie.
Do not tell her or anybody from whom the money comes. Do not tell
anybody that you have heard from me. When I came away, she was the only
one of all my friends and people who declared that she believed in me. I
now strip myself of my whole possessions in order to show this mark of
my love and gratitude towards her. In sending you this money I go back
to the ten pounds with which I started.'

Mr. Dering laid the letter down. The words, somehow, seemed to ring
true. Could the boy--after all----? He shook his head, and went on. 'You
will give Elsie this money on her twenty-first birthday, to be settled
on her for herself.'

  'ATHELSTAN ARUNDEL.'

The letter was dated, but no address was given. The post-mark was Idaho,
which, as we all know, belongs to a Western State.

He looked into the envelope. There fell out a paper, which was a draft
on a well-known London Firm, payable to his order for twelve thousand
and fifty pounds.

'This is very unbusiness-like,' said Mr. Dering. 'He puts all this money
into my hands, and vanishes. These are the ways he learns in America, I
suppose. Puts the money blindly in my hands without giving me the means
of communicating with him. Then he vanishes. How could he prove that it
was a Trust? Well, if I could only think--but I cannot--the
circumstantial evidence is too strong--that the boy was innocent--I
should be very sorry for him. As for Elsie--she must be eighteen
now--about eighteen--she will get this windfall in three years or so. It
will be a wonderful lift for her. Perhaps it may make all the difference
in her future! If I could only think that the boy was innocent--a clever
lad, too--which makes his guilt more probable. But I can't--no--I can't.
Either Checkley or that boy--and Checkley couldn't do it. He couldn't if
he were to try. What did the boy do it for? And what did he do with the
notes?'




CHAPTER I

UP THE RIVER


'Can you not be content, George?' asked the girl sitting in the stern.
'I think that I want nothing more than this. If we could only go on
always, and always, and always, just like this.' She had taken off her
right-hand glove, and she was dipping her fingers into the cool waters
of the river as the boat slowly drifted down stream. 'Always like this,'
she repeated softly. 'With you close to me--so that I could touch you if
I wanted to--so that I could feel safe, you know--the sun behind us,
warm and splendid, such a sweet and fragrant air about us, trees and
gardens and fields and lanes on either side--and both of us always
young, George, and--and nice to look at, and all the world before us.'

She, for one, was not only young and nice to look upon, but fair--very
fair to look upon. Even young persons of her own sex, critics and
specialists in the Art and Science of Beauty--rivals as well--had to
confess that Elsie was rather pretty. I believe that few such critics
ever go farther. She was, to begin with, of sufficient stature, in a
time when dumpy women are not considered, and when height is a first
necessity of comeliness: she paid, next, such obedience to the laws of
figure as becomes the age of twenty, and is, with stature, rigorously
demanded at this end of the century. Her chief points, perhaps, lay in
her eyes, which were of a darker shade of blue than is common. They were
soft, yet not languid; they were full of light; they were large, and yet
they could be quick. Her face was subject to sudden changes that made it
like a spring-time sky of shower, rainbow, sunshine, and surprise. Her
hair was of a very common brown, neither dark nor light. She was
attired, this evening, in a simple gray frock of nun's cloth with a
bunch of white roses on her left shoulder.

When one says that her companion was a young man, nearly all is said,
because the young men of the present day are surprisingly alike.
Thousands of young men can be found like George Austin: they are all
excellent fellows, of much higher principles, on some subjects, than
their fathers before them; not remarkably intellectual, to judge by
their school record: yet with intelligence and application enough to get
through their examinations moderately: for the most part they do pass
them with moderate success: they are not ambitious of obtaining any of
the great prizes--which, indeed, they know to be out of their reach--but
they always set before themselves and keep always well in sight the
ideal suburban villa and the wife: they always work steadily, if not
feverishly, with the view of securing these two blessings; they always
hope to secure an income that will enable them to maintain that
wife--with a possible following of babies--in silk attire (for Sundays);
in ease as to household allowance; and in such freedom of general
expenditure as may enable her to stand up among her neighbours in church
without a blush.

The world is quite full of such men: they form the rank and file, the
legionaries: their opinion on the subject of labour is purely
Scriptural--namely, that it is a curse: they do not particularly love
any kind of work: they would prefer, if they had the choice, to do
nothing at all: when they get their summer holiday they do nothing all
day long, with zeal: they give no more thought to their work than is
sufficient for the bread-winning: whether they are professional men or
trading men their view of professional work is solely that it brings in
the money. If such a young man becomes a clerk, he never tries to learn
any more after he has left school: he accepts the position: a clerk and
a servant he is, a clerk and a servant he will remain. If he is engaged
in trade he gives just so much attention to his business as will keep
his connection together: that and no more: others may soar: others may
become Universal Providers: for his part he is contented with his shop
and his Sunday feast. If he becomes a professional man he learns no more
of his science than is wanted every day. The lawyer passes his exam, and
puts away his law-books; he knows enough for professional purposes: the
doctor reads no more; he knows enough for the ordinary needs of the
G. P.: the schoolmaster lays aside his books; scholarship and science
interest him no longer; he has learned enough to teach his boys: the
curate makes no farther research into the history and foundations of his
church; he has learned enough. In a word, the average young man is
without ambition; he is inclined to be lazy; he loves the present far
more than the future--indeed, all his elders unite in letting him know
that his own is quite the most enviable time of life; he likes to enjoy
whatever he can afford, so that he very often eats up all his wages: he
does not read too much; he does not think too much: he does not vex his
soul too much with the problems of life--greater problems or lesser
problems--he accepts the teaching of his newspaper, and agrees with the
words and the wisdom of yesterday's leading article: he accepts
religion, politics, morals, social systems, constitutions, things
present, past, and future, as if--which is perfectly true--he had
nothing to do with them, and could not help it whatever was to happen.
He never wants to alter anything; he believes that all British
institutions are built on the solid rock and fashioned out of the
hardest granite: any exceptions to this rule, he thinks, have come
straight down from Heaven.

Observe, if you please, that this kind of young man confers the greatest
possible benefits upon the country. He ought to be made a Baronet at
least, if honours meant anything. His apparent sluggishness keeps us
from the constant changes which trouble some nations: his apparent lack
of ambition makes it easy for the restless spirits to rise: were the
country full of aspiring young men we should be for ever having civil
wars, revolutions, social upsydowns, new experiments, new religions, new
governments, new divisions of property, every year. Again, it is this
young man who by his steady attention to business, his readiness to work
as much as is wanted, but no more; his disregard of theories and
speculations, his tenacity; his honesty, his loyalty, his courage, and
his stout heart, has built up the British name so that there has never
been any name like unto it, nor ever will be again, for these solid and
substantial virtues.

Being, then, just a young man of the time, George Austin was naturally
like most young men in dress, in appearance, in language, and in
manners. And had it not been for the strange experience which he was to
undergo, he would have remained to this day just like other young men.
He was better looking than most, having a good figure, a well-shaped
head, and regular features, with eyes rather fuller of possibilities
than falls to the lot of most young men. In short, a good-looking
fellow, showing a capability for something or other in his firm mouth,
ample cheek, strong chin, and resolute carriage. He would have made a
fine soldier; but perhaps an unsuccessful general, for want of that
quality which in poets is called genius. In the same way he would in a
lower walk keep a business together, but would fail to achieve a great
fortune for lack of the same quality. As for his age, he was
seven-and-twenty.

'Always like this,' the girl went on. 'Always floating down the stream
under a summer sky. Always sweet looks and love and youth. It seems as
if we could never be unhappy, never be worried, never want anything, on
such an evening as this.' She turned and looked up the stream, on which
lay the glory of the sinking sun--she sighed. 'It is good to come out on
such an evening only to have a brief dream of what might be. When will
the world give up their foolish quarrels, and join together to make the
lives of all happy?'

They had been talking, among other things, of socialism, all out of
yesterday's leading article.

'When,' George replied, 'there is enough of good things to go round:
when we invent a way to make all men ready to do their share as well as
to devour it: when we find out how to make everybody contented with his
share.'

Elsie shook her head, which was filled with vague ideas--the ideas of a
restless and a doubting time. Then she went back to her original
proposition. 'Always like this, George--and never to get tired of it.
Time to stand still--nothing to change: never to get tired of it: never
to want anything else. That is Heaven, I suppose.'

'We are on earth, Elsie,' said her lover. 'And on earth Everything
changes. If we were to go on drifting down the stream, we should get
into trouble over the weir. To capsize would be a pretty interruption to
your Heaven, wouldn't it! And the sun will soon be setting and the river
will get misty; and the banks will grow ugly. But the chief thing is
that we shall both grow old. And there is such a lot that we have got to
do before we grow old.'

'Everything has to be done,' said Elsie. 'I suppose we have done nothing
yet.'

'We have got to get married for the first thing, before we grow old.'

'Couldn't you love an old woman, George?'

'Not so well, Elsie,' her lover replied, truthfully. 'At least, I think
not.--And oh! Elsie, whenever I do think of the future, my heart goes
down into my boots. For the prospect grows darker and darker.'

Elsie sighed. She knew, already, too well, what was in his mind. Plenty
of girls, in these days, know the familiar tale.

'Darker every day,' he repeated. 'They keep on crowding into the
profession by multitudes, as if there was room for any number. They
don't understand that what with the decay of the landed interest and of
the country towns, and the cutting down of the costs, and the work that
goes to accountants, there isn't half the business to do that there was.
There don't seem any partnerships to be had for love or money, because
the few people who have got a good thing have got no more than enough
for themselves. It is no use for the young fellows to start by
themselves; so they have got to take whatever they can get, and they are
glad to get even a hundred a year to begin with--and I am
seven-and-twenty, Elsie, and I'm drawing two hundred pounds a year.'

'Patience, George! something will turn up. You will find a partnership
somewhere.'

'My child, you might as well tell Robinson Crusoe that a boiled leg of
mutton with caper sauce was going to turn up on his desert island. We
must not hope for the impossible. I ought to be grateful, I suppose,
considering what other men are doing. I am planted in a good solid
House. It won't run away, so long as the old man lives.'

'And after that?'

'Well, Mr. Dering is seventy-five. But he will not die yet, not for a
long time to come. He is made of granite: he is never ill: he never
takes a holiday: he works harder than any of his people; and he keeps
longer hours. To be sure, if he were to die without taking a
partner--well--in that case, there would be an end of everything, I
suppose.--Elsie, here's the position.' She knew it already, too
well--but it pleased them both to parade the facts as if they were
something quite novel. 'Let us face it'--they were always facing it. 'I
am Managing Clerk to Dering & Son--I get two hundred pounds a year--I
have no prospect of anything better. I am bound all my life to be a
servant. Elsie, it is not a brilliant prospect: I found out at school
that it was best not to be too ambitious. But--a servant all my life--I
confess that did not enter into my head. If I knew any other trade, I
would cut the whole business. If there was any mortal thing in the whole
world by which I could keep myself, I would try it. But there's nothing.
I have but one trade. I can't write novels, or leading articles; I can't
play on any instrument; I can't paint or act or sing or anything--I am
only a solicitor--that's all. Only a solicitor who can't get on--a
clerk, Elsie. No wonder her ladyship turns up her nose--a clerk.' He
leaned his chin upon his hands and laughed the conventional laugh of the
young man down on his luck.

'Poor George!' she sighed. In such a case there are only two words of
consolation. One may say 'Poor George!' or one may say 'Patience!' There
is nothing else to say. Elsie first tried one method and then the other,
as a doctor tries first one remedy and then another when Nature sulks
and refuses to get well.

'And,' he went on, piling up the misery, 'I am in love with the sweetest
girl in the whole world--and she is in love with me!'

'Poor George!' she repeated with a smile. 'That is indeed a dreadful
misfortune.'

'I am wasting your youth, Elsie, as well as my own.'

'If it is wasted for your sake, George, it is well spent. Some day,
perhaps----'

'No--no--not some day--immediately--at once.' The young man changed
colour and his eyes sparkled. It was not the first time that he had
advanced this revolutionary proposal. 'Let prudence go to the----'

'Not there, George--oh! not there. To the winds, perhaps, or to that
famous city of Palestine. But not there. Why, we might never get her
back again--poor Prudence! And we shall be sure to want her all our
lives--very badly. We will, if you please, ask her to go for a short
voyage for the benefit of her health. We will give her six months' leave
of absence: but we shall want her services again after her holiday--if
you think we can do without her for so long.'

'For a whole twelvemonth, Elsie. Let us brave everything, get married at
once, live in a garret, and have a splendid time--for a whole
twelvemonth--on my two hundred pounds.'

'And am I to give up my painting?'

'Well, dear, you know you have not yet had a commission from anybody.'

'How can you say so, George? I have painted you--and my sister--and my
mother--and your sisters. I am sure that no studio even of an R.A. could
make a braver show of work. Well--I will give it up--until Prudence
returns. Is it to be a garret? A real garret, with sloping walls, where
you can only stand upright in the middle?'

'We call it a garret. It will take the form, I suppose, of a tiny house
in a cheap quarter. It will have six rooms, a garden in front and a
garden behind. The rent will be thirty pounds. For a whole twelvemonth
it will be a real slice of Eden, Elsie, and you shall be Eve.'

Elsie laughed. 'It will be great fun. We will make the Eden last longer
than a twelvemonth. I daresay I shall like it. Of course I shall have to
do everything for myself. To clean the doorstep will be equivalent to
taking exercise in the fresh air: to sweep the floors will be a kind of
afternoon dance or a game of lawn-tennis: to wash up the cups and
saucers will be only a change of amusement.--There is one thing,
George--one thing'--she became very serious--'I suppose you never--did
you ever witness the scouring of a frying-pan? I don't think I _could_
do that. And did you ever see beef-steaks before they are cooked? They
suggest the animal in the most terrible way. I don't really think I
could handle those bleeding lumps.'

'You shan't touch a frying-pan, and we will have nothing roasted or
fried. We will live on cold Australian beef eaten out of its native tin:
the potatoes shall be boiled in their skins. And perhaps--I don't
know--with two hundred pounds a year we could afford a servant--a very
little one--just a girl warranted not to eat too much.'

'What shall we do when our clothes are worn out?'

'The little maid will make some more for you, I suppose. We certainly
shall not be able to buy new things--not nice things, that is--and you
must have nice things, mustn't you?'

'I do like things to be nice,' she replied, smoothing her dainty skirts
with her dainty hand. 'George, where shall we find this house--formerly
Eve's own country villa before she--resigned her tenancy, you know?'

'There are places in London where whole streets are filled with families
living on a hundred and fifty pounds a year. Checkley--the chief's
private clerk--lives in such a place: he told me so himself. He says
there is nobody in his parish who has got a bigger income than himself:
he's a little king among them because he gets four hundred pounds a
year, besides what he has saved--which is enormous piles. Elsie, my
dear, we must give up our present surroundings, and take up with
gentility in its cheapest form.'

'Can we not go on living among our own friends?'

George shook his head wisely. 'Impossible. Friendship means equality of
income. You can't live with people unless you do as they do. People of
the same means naturally live together. Next door to Lady Dering is
another rich Madam, not a clerk's wife. For my own part I shall sell my
dress clothes for what they will fetch--you can exchange your evening
things for morning things. That won't matter much. Who cares where we
live, or how we live, so that we live together? What do you say, Elsie
dear?'

'The garret I don't mind--nor the door-steps--and since you see your way
out of the difficulty of the frying-pan----'

'You will be of age next week, when you can please yourself.'

'Hilda gives me no peace nor rest. She says that there can be no
happiness without money. She has persuaded my mother that I am going to
certain starvation. She promises the most splendid establishment if I
will only be guided by her.'

'And marry a man fifty years older than yourself with one foot already
well in----'

'She says she has always been perfectly happy.--Well, George, you know
all that. Next Wednesday, which is my birthday, I am to have a grand
talk with my guardian. My mother hopes that he will bring me to my
senses. Hilda says that she trusts entirely to Mr. Dering's good sense.
I shall arm myself with all my obstinacy. Perhaps, George--who knows?--I
may persuade him to advance your salary.'

'No, Elsie. Not even you would persuade Mr. Dering to give a managing
clerk more than two hundred pounds a year. But arm yourself with all you
have got--don't forget any piece of that armour, child. The
breastplate--there was a poor damsel once who forgot that and was caught
by an appeal to her heart--nor the helmet--another poor damsel was once
caught by an appeal to her reason after forgetting the helmet. The
shield, of course, you will not forget--and for weapons, my dear, take
your sweet eyes and your lovely face and your winning voice--and I
swear that you will subdue even Mr. Dering himself--that hardened old
parchment.'

This was the kind of talk which these lovers held together whenever they
met. George was poor--the son of a clergyman, whose power of advancing
him ceased when he had paid the fees for admission. He was only a clerk,
and he saw no chance of being anything else but a clerk. Elsie could
bring nothing to the family nest, unless her mother made her an
allowance. Of this there could be no hope. The engagement was considered
deplorable: marriage, under the circumstances, simple madness. And Hilda
had done so well for herself, and could do so much for a sister so
pretty, so bright as Elsie! Oh! she was throwing away all her chances.
Did one ever hear of anything so lamentable? No regard for the family:
no ambition: no sense of what a girl owes to herself: no recognition nor
gratitude for the gift of good looks--as if beauty was given for the
mere purpose of pleasing a penniless lover! And to go and throw herself
away upon a twopenny lawyer's clerk!

'George,' she said seriously, 'I have thought it all out. If you really
mean it--if you really can face poverty--mind--it is harder--much--for a
man than a woman----'

'I can face everything--with you, Elsie,' replied the lover. Would he
have been a lover worth having if he had not made that answer? And,
indeed, he meant it, as every lover should.

'Then--George--what in the whole world is there for me unless I can make
my dear boy happy? I will marry you as soon as you please, rich or poor,
for better for worse--whatever they may say at home.--Will that do for
you, George?'

Since man is so constituted that his happiness wholly depends upon the
devotion of a woman, I believe that no dear boy ever had a better chance
of happiness than George Austin--only a managing clerk--with his Elsie.
And so this history begins where many end, with an engagement.




CHAPTER II

IN THE OFFICE


'I'll take in your ladyship's name. There is no one with him at this
moment.--Oh yes, my lady,' Checkley smiled superior. 'We are always
busy. We have been busy in this office for fifty years and more.--But I
am sure he'll see you. Take a chair, my lady. Allow me.'

Checkley, the old clerk, had other and younger clerks with him; but he
kept in his own hands the duty, or the privilege, of going to the
private room of the chief. He was sixty-seven when last we saw him.
Therefore, he was now seventy-five; a little more bent in the shoulders,
a little more feeble; otherwise unaltered. In age we either shrivel or
we swell. Those live the longest who shrivel; and those who shrivel
presently reach a point when they cease to shrink any more till they
reach the ninetieth year. Checkley was bowed and bent and lean: his face
was lined multitudinously: his cheeks were shrunken: but not more so
than eight years before. He wrote down the name of the caller--Lady
Dering--on a square piece of paper, and opened the door with an
affectation of extreme care not to disturb the chief's nerves by a sharp
turn of the handle, stepped in as if it was most important that no one
should be able to peep into the room, and closed the door softly behind
him. Immediately he reappeared, and held the door wide open, inviting
the lady to step in. She was young; of good stature and figure,
extremely handsome in face; of what is called the classical type, and
very richly dressed. Her carriage might have been seen, on looking out
of the window, waiting in the square.

'Lady Dering, sir,' said Checkley. Then he swiftly vanished, closing the
door softly behind him.

'I am glad to see you, Hilda.' The old lawyer rose, tall and commanding,
and bowed, offering his hand with a stately and old-fashioned courtesy
which made ladies condone his unmarried condition. 'Why have you called
this morning? You are not come on any business, I trust. Business with
ladies who have wealthy husbands generally means trouble of some kind.
You are not, for instance, in debt with your dressmaker?'

'No--no. Sir Samuel does not allow of any difficulties or awkwardness of
that kind. It is not about myself that I am here, but about my sister,
Elsie.'

'Yes? What about her? Sit down, and let me hear.'

'Well, you know Elsie has always been a trouble to us on account of her
headstrong and wilful ways. She will not look on things from a
reasonable point of view. You know that my mother is not rich, as I have
learnt to consider rich, though of course she has enough for a simple
life and a man-servant and a one-horse brougham. Do you know,' she added
pensively, 'I have often found it difficult not to repine at a
Providence which removes a father when he was beginning so well, and
actually on the high-road to a great fortune.'

'It is certainly difficult to understand the wisdom of these
disappointments and disasters. We must accept, Hilda, what we cannot
escape or explain.'

'Yes--and my mother had nothing but a poor thousand a year!--though I am
sure that she has greatly bettered her circumstances by her transactions
in the City. Well--I have done all I can, by precept and by example, to
turn my sister's mind into the right direction. Mr. Dering'--by long
habit Hilda still called her guardian, now her brother-in-law, by his
surname--'you would hardly believe the folly that Elsie talks about
money.'

'Perhaps because she has none. Those who have no property do not
understand it. Young people do not know what it means or what it
commands. And whether they have it or not, young people do not know what
the acquisition of property means--the industry, the watchfulness, the
carefulness, the self-denial. So Elsie talks folly about money--well,
well'--he smiled indulgently--'we shall see.'

'It is not only that she talks, but she acts. Mr. Dering, we are in
despair about her. You know the Rodings?'

'Roding Brothers? Everybody knows Roding Brothers.'

'Algy Roding, the eldest son of the senior partner--enormously rich--is
gone--quite gone--foolish about Elsie. He has been at me a dozen times
about her. He has called at the house to see her. He cares nothing at
all about her having no money. She refuses even to hear his name
mentioned. Between ourselves, he has not been, I believe, a very steady
young man; but of course he would settle down; we could entirely trust
to a wife's influence in that respect: the past could easily be
forgotten--in fact, Elsie need never know it: and the position would be
splendid. Even mine would not compare with it.'

'Why does she object to the man?'

'Says he is an ugly little snob. There is a becoming spirit for a girl
to receive so rich a lover! But that is not all. She might have him if
she chose, snob or not, but she prefers one of your clerks--actually,
Mr. Dering, one of your clerks.'

'I have learned something of this from your mother. She is engaged, I am
told, to young Austin, one of my managing clerks.'

'Whose income is two hundred pounds a year. Oh! think of it! She refuses
a man with ten thousand a year at the very least, and wants to marry a
man with two hundred.'

'I suppose they do not propose to marry on this--this pittance--this two
hundred a year?'

'They are engaged: she refuses to break it off: he has no money to buy a
partnership: he must therefore continue a clerk on two hundred.'

'Managing clerks get more, sometimes; but, to be sure, the position is
not good, and the income must always be small.'

'My mother will not allow the man in the house: Elsie goes out to meet
him: oh, it is most irregular. I should be ashamed for Sir Samuel to
know it. She actually goes out of the house every evening, and they walk
about the square garden or in the Park till dark. It is exactly like a
housemaid going out to meet her young man.'

'It does seem an unusual course; but I am no judge of what is becoming
to a young lady.'

'Well--she needn't go on like a housemaid,' said her sister. 'Of course
the position of things at home is strained, and I don't know what may
happen at any moment. Elsie says that she shall be twenty-one next week,
and that she means to act on her own judgment. She even talks of setting
up a studio somewhere and painting portraits for money. That is a
pleasant thing for me to contemplate. My own sister earning her own
living by painting!'

'How do you think I can interfere in the matter? Lovers' quarrels or
lovers' difficulties are not made or settled in this room.'

'Mr. Dering, there is no one in the world of whom she is afraid, except
yourself. There is no one of whose opinion she thinks so much. Will you
see her? Will you talk with her? Will you admonish her?'

'Why, Hilda, it so happens that I have already invited her to call upon
me on her birthday, when she ceases to be my ward. I will talk to her
if you please. Perhaps you may be satisfied with the result of my
conversation.'

'I shall--I am sure I shall.'

'Let me understand. You desire that your sister shall marry a man who,
if he is not already rich, should be at least on the high road to
wealth. You cannot force her to accept even the richest young man in
London unless she likes him, can you?'

'No. Certainly not. And we can hardly expect her to marry, as I did
myself, a man whose wealth is already established. Unless she would take
Algy Roding.'

'Very good. But he must have a certain income, so as to ensure the means
of an establishment conducted at a certain level.'

'Yes. She need not live in Palace Gardens, but she ought to be able to
live--say in Pembridge Square.'

'Quite so. I suppose, with an income of fifteen hundred or so to begin
with. If I make her understand so much, you will be satisfied?'

'Perfectly.--My dear Mr. Dering, I really believe you have got the very
young man up your sleeve. But how will you persuade her to give up the
present intruder?'

'I promise nothing, Hilda--I promise nothing. I will do my best,
however.'

Hilda rose and swept back her dress.

'I feel an immense sense of relief,' she said. 'The dear child's
happiness is all I desire. Perhaps if you were to dismiss the young man
immediately, with ignominy, and were to refuse him a written character
on the ground of trying to win the affections of a girl infinitely above
him in station, it might produce a good effect on Elsie--showing what
you think of it--as well as an excellent lesson for himself and his
friends. There is no romance about a cast-off clerk. Will you think of
this, Mr. Dering? The mere threat of such a thing might make him ready
to give her up; and it might make her inclined for his own sake to send
him about his business.'

'I will think of it, Hilda.--By the way, will you and my brother dine
with me on Monday, unless you are engaged? We can talk over this little
affair then at leisure.'

'With pleasure. We are only engaged for the evening. Now I won't keep
you any longer.--Good-bye.'

She walked away, smiling graciously on the clerks in the outer office,
and descended the stairs to the carriage, which waited below.

Mr. Dering returned to his papers. He was not changed in the eight years
since the stormy interview with this young lady's brother: his small
whiskers were a little whiter: his iron-gray hair was unchanged; his
lips were as firm and his nostrils as sharp, his eyes as keen as then.

The room looked out pleasantly upon the garden of New Square, where the
sunshine lay warm upon the trees with their early summer leaves.
Sunshine or rain, all the year round, the solicitor sat in his
high-backed chair before his great table. He sat there this morning
working steadily until he had got through what he was about. Then he
looked at his watch. It was past two o'clock. He touched a bell on the
table, and his old clerk came in.

Though he was the same age as his master, Checkley looked a great deal
older. He was bald, save for a small white patch over each ear; he was
bent, and his hands trembled. His expression was sharp, foxy, and
suspicious. He stood in the unmistakable attitude of a servant, hands
hanging in readiness, head a little bent.

'The clerks are all gone, I suppose?' said Mr. Dering.

'All gone. All they think about when they come in the morning is how
soon they will get away. As for any pride in their work, they haven't
got it.'

'Let them go.--Checkley, I have wanted to speak to you for some time.'

'Anything the matter?' The old clerk spoke with the familiarity of long
service which permits the expression of opinions.

'The time has come, Checkley, when we must make a change.'

'A change? Why--I do my work as well as ever I did--better than any of
the younger men. A change?'

'The change will not affect you.'

'It must be for you then. Surely you're never going to retire!'

'No--I mean to hold on as long as I can. That will only be for a year or
two at most. I am seventy-five, Checkley.'

'What of that? So am I. You don't find me grumbling about my work, do
you? Besides, you eat hearty. Your health is good.'

'Yes, my health is good. But I am troubled of late, Checkley--I am
troubled about my memory.'

'So is many a younger man,' returned the clerk stoutly.

'Sometimes I cannot remember in the morning what I was doing the evening
before.'

'That's nothing. Nothing at all.'

'Yesterday, I looked at my watch, and found that I had been unconscious
for three hours.'

'You were asleep. I came in and saw you sound asleep.' It was not true,
but the clerk's intentions were good.

'To go asleep in the morning argues a certain decay of strength. Yet I
believe that I get through the work as well as ever. The clients do not
drop off, Checkley. There are no signs of mistrust--eh? No suspicion of
failing powers?'

'They think more of you than ever.'

'I believe they do, Checkley.'

'Everybody says you are the top of the profession.'

'I believe I am, Checkley--I believe I am. Certainly, I am the oldest.
Nevertheless, seventy-five is a great age to be continuing work. Things
can't last much longer.'

'Some men go on to eighty, and even ninety.'

'A few--a few only.' The lawyer sighed. 'One may hope, but must not
build upon the chance of such merciful prolongation. The older I grow,
Checkley, the more I enjoy life, especially the only thing that has ever
made life happy for me--this work. I cling to it'--he spread his hands
over the papers--'I cling to it. I cannot bear to think of leaving it.'

'That--and your savings,' echoed the clerk.

'It seems as if I should be content to go on for a hundred years more at
the work of which I am never tired. And I must leave it before long--in
a year--two years--who knows? Life is miserably short--one has no time
for half the things one would like to do. Well'--he heaved a deep
sigh--'let us work while we can. However, it is better to climb down
than to be pulled down or shot down. I am going to make preparations,
Checkley, for the end.'

'What preparations? You're not going to send for a minister, are you?'

'No. Not that kind of preparation. Nor for the doctor either. Nor for a
lawyer to make my will. All those things are duly attended to. I have
resolved, Checkley, upon taking a partner.'

'You? Take a partner? You? At your time of life?'

'I am going to take a partner. And you are the first person who has been
told of my intention. Keep it a secret for the moment.'

'Take a partner? Divide your beautiful income by two?'

'Yes, Checkley. I am going to give a share in that beautiful income to a
young man.'

'What can a partner do for you that I can't do? Don't I know the whole
of the office work? Is there any partner in the world who can draw up a
conveyance better than me?'

'You are very useful, Checkley, as you always have been. But you are not
a partner, and you never can be.'

'I know that very well. But what's the good of a partner at all?'

'If I have a partner, he will have his own room, and he won't interfere
with you. There's no occasion for you to be jealous.'

'As for jealous--well--after more than sixty years' work in this office,
it would seem hard to be turned out by some new-comer. But what I say
is--what is the good of a partner?'

'The chief good is that the House will be carried on. It is a hundred
and twenty years old. I confess I do not like the thought of its coming
to an end when I disappear. That will be to me the most important
advantage to be gained by taking a partner. The next advantage will be
that I can turn over to him a quantity of work. And thirdly, he will
bring young blood and new connections. My mind is quite made up,
Checkley. I am going to take a partner.'

'Have you found one yet?'

'I have. But I am not going to tell you who he is till the right time
comes.'

Checkley grumbled inaudibly.

'If I had been less busy,' Mr. Dering went on, 'I might have married and
had sons of my own to put into the House. But somehow, being very much
occupied always, and never thinking about such things, I let the time
pass by. I was never, even as a young man, greatly attracted to love or
to young women. Their charms, such as they are, seem to me to depend
upon nothing but a single garment.'

'Take away their frocks,' said Checkley, 'and what are they? All
alike--all alike. I've been married myself--women are expensive frauds.'

'Well--things being as they are, Checkley, I am going to take a
partner.'

'You'll do as you like,' said his servant. 'Mark my words, however;
you've got ten years more of work in you yet--and all through these ten
years you'll regret having a partner. Out of every hundred pounds his
share will have to come. Think of that!'

'It is eight years, I remember,' Mr. Dering went on, 'since first I
thought of taking a partner. Eight years--and for much the same reason
as now. I found my memory going. There were gaps in it--days, or bits of
days, which I could not recollect. I was greatly terrified. The man whom
I first thought of for a partner was that young Arundel, now----'

'Who forged your name. Lucky you didn't have him.'

'Who ran away in a rage because certain circumstances seemed to connect
him with the crime.'

'Seemed? Did connect him.'

'Then the symptoms disappeared. Now they have returned, as I told you. I
have always regretted the loss of young Arundel. He was clever and a
quick worker.'

'He was a forger,' said the clerk stoutly.--'Is there anything more I
can do for you?'

'Nothing; thank you.'

'Then I'll go. On Saturday afternoon I collect my little rents. Not
much--in your way of thinking. A good deal to me. I hope you'll like
your partner when you do get him. I hope I shan't live to see him the
master here and you knuckling under. I hope I shan't see him driving
away the clients.'

'I hope you will not see any of these distressing consequences,
Checkley.--Good-day.'

The old clerk went away, shutting the outer door after him. Then the
lawyer was the sole occupant of the rooms. He was also the sole occupant
of the whole house and perhaps of the whole Square. It was three
o'clock.

He sat leaning back in his chair, looking through the open window upon
the trees in the Square garden. Presently there fell upon his face a
curious change. It was as if the whole of the intelligence was taken out
of it: his eyes gazed steadily into space with no expression whatever in
them; the lips slightly parted, his head fell back; the soul and spirit
of the man had gone out of him, leaving a machine which breathed.

The watch in his pocket ticked audibly: there was no other sound in the
room--the old man sat quite motionless.

Four o'clock struck from the Clock Tower in the High Court of Justice,
from St. Clement's Church, from Westminster, from half-a-dozen clocks
which could be heard in the quiet of the Saturday afternoon. But Mr.
Dering heard nothing.

Still he sat in his place with idle hands, and a face like a mask for
lack of thought.

The clocks struck five.

He neither moved nor spoke.

The clocks struck six--seven--eight.

The shades of evening began to gather in the corners of the room as the
sun sank lower towards his setting. At twilight in the summer there is
never anybody to fear--man, woman, or cat--in the chambers, and at that
hour the mice come out. They do not eat parchment or foolscap or red
tape, but they eat the luncheon crumbs. Mr. Checkley, for instance,
always brought his dinner in a paper parcel in his coat-tail pocket, and
ate it when so disposed, sprinkling crumbs lavishly--the only lavishment
of which he was ever guilty--on the floor. Junior clerks brought buns
and biscuits, or even apples, which they devoured furtively. Mr. Dering
himself took his luncheon in his own room, leaving crumbs. There was
plenty for a small colony of mice. They came out, therefore, as usual;
they stopped at sight of a man, an unwonted man, in a chair. But he
moved not: he was asleep: he was dead: they ran without fear all about
the rooms.

It was past nine, when the chambers were as dark as at this season of
the year they ever are, that Mr. Dering returned to consciousness.

He sat up, staring about him. The room was dark. He looked at his watch.
Half-past nine. 'What is this?' he asked. 'Have I been asleep for seven
hours? Seven hours? I was not asleep when Checkley went away. Why did I
fall asleep? I feel as if I had been somewhere--doing something. What? I
cannot remember. This strange sensation comes oftener. It is time that I
should take a partner before something worse happens. I am old--I am
old.' He rose and walked across the room erect and with firm step. 'I am
old and worn out and spent. Time to give up the keys--old and spent.'




CHAPTER III

THE SELECT CIRCLE


At half-past nine on this Saturday evening, the parlour of the
_Salutation Inn_, High Holborn, contained most of its customary
visitors. They came every evening at eight: and they sat till eleven,
drinking and talking. In former days every tavern of repute kept such a
room for its own select circle, a club, or society, of _habitues_, who
met every evening, for a pipe and a cheerful glass. In this way all
respectable burgesses, down to fifty years ago, spent their evenings.
Strangers might enter the room, but they were made to feel that they
were there on sufferance: they were received with distance and
suspicion. Most of the regular visitors knew each other: when thy did
not, it was tavern politeness not to ask; a case is on record of four
cronies, who used the _Cock_ in Meet Street for thirty years, not one
knowing either the name or the trade of the other three. Yet when one
died, the other three pined away. This good old custom is now decayed.
The respectable burgess stays at home, which is much more monotonous.
Yet there may still be found a parlour here and there with a society
meeting every evening all the year round.

The parlour of the _Salutation_ was a good-sized room wainscoted and
provided with a sanded floor. It was furnished with a dozen wooden
chairs, and three small round tables, the chairs disposed in a circle so
as to prevent corners or cliques in conversation. Sacred is the
fraternity, liberty, and equality of the parlour. The room was low, and,
in the evenings, always hot with its two flaming unprotected gas jets;
the window was never opened except in the morning, and there was always
present a rich perfume of tobacco, beer, and spirits, both that
anciently generated and that of the day's creation.

Among the frequenters,--who were, it must be confessed, a somewhat faded
or decayed company--was, to put him first because he was the richest the
great Mr. Robert Hellyer, of Barnard's Inn, usurer or money-lender.
Nobody quite likes the profession--one knows not why. Great fortunes
have been made in it; the same fortunes have been dissipated by the
money-lenders' heirs. Such fortunes do not stick, somehow. Mr. Hellyer,
for instance, was reputed wealthy beyond the dreams of the wildest
desire. It was also said of him, under breath and in whispers and
envious murmurs, that should a man borrow a five-pound note of him, that
borrower would count himself lucky if he escaped with the loss of
seventy-five pounds; and might generally expect to lose the whole of his
household furniture, and the half of his income, for the rest of his
natural life. To be sure, he sometimes had losses, as he said himself,
with a groan; as when an unscrupulous client jumped off the Embankment,
when he had not paid more than fifty pounds on the original five; or
when a wicked man sold off his furniture secretly, in contempt of the
bill of sale, and got clean out of the country with his wife and
children. But on the whole he did pretty well. It was further said, by
old clients, that his heart was a simple piece of round granite, for
which he had no use, and that he made money out of it by letting it out
at so much an hour for a paving mallet.

Mr. Robert Hellyer was not a genial man, or a cheerful or a pleasant man
to look upon; he neither loved nor comprehended a jest; he never smiled;
he kept his mind always employed on the conduct of his business. Every
night--forgive the solitary weakness--he drank as much as he could
carry. In appearance, he was red-faced, thick-necked, and stout; his
voice was thick even in the morning, when he was under no compulsion to
thickness; it was believed by his friends that his education had been
imperfect; perhaps because he never gave anybody reason to suppose that
he had ever received any education at all. To such men as Mr. Hellyer,
who every night take much strong drink, and on no occasion whatever take
any exercise, sixty is the grand climacteric. He was, a year ago, just
fifty-nine. Alas! he has not even reached his grand climacteric. Already
he is gone. He was cut off by pneumonia, or apoplexy, last Christmas.
Those who saw the melancholy _cortege_ filing out of the narrow gates of
Barnard's Inn, mournfully remarked that none of his money was taken with
him, and asked what happiness he could possibly find in the next world,
which he would begin with nothing--nothing at all--not even credit--an
absolute pauper.

Mr. Robert Hellyer sat on one side of the empty fireplace. On the
opposite side, a great contrast to his coarse and vulgar race, sat an
elderly man, tall, thin, dressed in a coat whose sleeves were worn to
shininess. His face was dejected: his features were still fine: he was
evidently a gentleman. This person was a barrister, decayed and
unsuccessful; he lived in a garret in Gray's Inn. There are a good many
wrecks at the Bar, but few quite so forlorn as this poor old man. He
still professed to practise, and picked up a guinea now and then by
defending criminals. On these casual fees he managed to live. His
clothes were threadbare; it was many years since he had had a greatcoat;
on rainy and cold days he had a thin cape which he wore over his
shoulders. Heaven knows how he dined and breakfasted; every evening,
except in the hot days of summer, he came to this place for light and
warmth. Unless he was very poor indeed, he called for a pint of old and
mild and read the day's paper. Sometimes he talked, but not often;
sometimes one or other of the company would offer him a more costly
drink, which he always accepted with all that was left to him of
courtesy. Outside, he had no friends; they had all forgotten him or
died--it is very easy for a poor man to be forgotten; he had no
relations; they had all died, emigrated, and dispersed; the relations of
the unsuccessful are easily lost. When he talked, he sometimes became
animated, and would tell anecdotes of the Bar and of the time when he
was called, nearly fifty years agone, by the Benchers of Gray's Inn.
What had become of the hopes and ambitions with which that young man
entered upon the profession, which was to lead him to the parlour of the
_Salutation_ and the company that gathered there--and to the bare and
miserable garret of Gray's Inn, forgotten and alone?

Another man, also elderly, who sat next to the barrister, was a
gentleman who sold an excellent business and retired, in order to betake
himself more completely to toping. He drank in three taverns during the
day. One was in Fleet Street, where he took his chop at three; one was
near Drury Lane Theatre, where he dallied with a little whisky from five
to nine; and this was the third. He was a quiet, happy, self-respecting,
dignified old man. In the evening, he spoke not at all--for sufficient
reasons; but he benevolently inclined his head if he was addressed.

Next to him sat a younger man, a solicitor, whose practice consisted in
defending prisoners in the Police Courts. He had with him two friends,
and he had a confident swagger, which passed for ability. Next to him
and his friends was a house agent, who had been a member for an Irish
borough: and there was a gentleman, whose wife sang in music halls, so
that this fortunate person could--and did--sit about in taverns all day
long. His appearance was that of a deboshed City clerk, as he was. Not
to mention other members of the company, Checkley was there, occupying a
chair next to the money-lender.

Here he was called Mr. Checkley. He came every evening at nine o'clock,
Sundays included. Like the money-lender, he wanted his little
distractions, and took them in this way. Here, too, he was among those
who respected him, not so much on account of his public and private
virtues, or for his eminence in the law, as his money. It is not often
that a solicitor's clerk becomes a 'warm' man, but then it is not often
that one of the calling deliberately proposes to himself early in life
to save money, and lives till seventy-five steadily carrying out his
object. If you are good at figures, you will understand how Mr. Checkley
succeeded. Between the ages of eighteen and twenty-five he had an income
which averaged about seventy-five pounds. He lived upon fifty pounds a
year. From twenty-five to thirty-five he made an average of one hundred
and fifty pounds: he still lived upon fifty pounds a year. At
thirty-five he was induced by prudential considerations to marry: the
lady, considerably his senior, had a thousand pounds. She was even more
miserly than himself, and in a year or so after marriage, she fell into
a decline, owing to insufficient nourishment, and presently expired. On
the whole he calculated that he was the better man for the marriage by a
thousand pounds. From thirty-five to forty-five his income rose to two
hundred pounds: it then for twenty-five years stood at three hundred
pounds a year; at the age of seventy Mr. Dering gave him four hundred
pounds. Therefore, to sum up, he had put by out of his pay the sum of
11,675_l_.--and this without counting the compound interest always
mounting up from his investments, which were all of a careful kind such
as he understood: tenement houses, of which he had a good number: shares
in building societies: money lent on bills of sale or on mortgage. At
home--Mr. Checkley lived on the ground floor of one of his own
houses--he grew more miserly as he grew older. The standard of luxury is
not high when fifty pounds a year covers all; but of late he had been
trying to keep below even that humble amount. He conducted his affairs
in the evening between his office hours and nine at his own house, or
among the people where his property lay. It was in the district, visited
by few, lying east of Gray's Inn Road: his own house was in a certain
small square, a good half of the houses in which belonged to him.

At nine o'clock he arrived at the tavern. Here his drinks cost him
nothing. A custom had grown up in the course of years for the
money-lender to consult him on the many difficult points which arise in
the practice of his profession. He was one of those who like to have one
foot over the wall erected by the law, but not both. In other words, he
was always trying to find out how far the law would allow him to go, and
where it called upon him to stop. With this view he schemed perpetually
to make his clients sign bonds under the delusion that they meant a
hundredth part of what they really did mean. And as, like all ignorant
men, he had the most profound belief in the power and the knowledge and
the chicanery of lawyers, he was pleased to obtain Checkley's advice in
return for Checkley's drinks.

It was a full gathering. The old clerk arrived late: he was gratified at
hearing the ex-M.P. whispering to his friends that the new arrival was
worth his twenty thousand pounds if a penny. He swelled with honourable
pride. Yes. Twenty thousand pounds! And more--more. Who would have
thought, when he began as an office boy, that he could ever achieve so
much?

The money-lender, bursting with a new case, real or supposed, took his
pipe out of his mouth and communicated it in a hoarse whisper.

'Suppose----' it began.

'Then'--Checkley replied when the case was finished--'you would lay
yourself open to a criminal prosecution. Don't you go so much as to
think of it. There was a case twenty-five years ago exactly like it. The
remarks of the judge were most severe, and the sentence was heavy.'

'Ah!' The usurer's red face grew redder. 'Then it can't be thought of.
Pity, too. There's a houseful of furniture and a shopful of stuff. And
a young man as it would do good to him just to start fair again.
Pity.--Put a name to it, Mr. Checkley.'

'Rum. Hot. With lemon,' replied the sage. 'You get more taste in your
mouth, more upliftin' for your heart, as they say, more strengthenin'
for the stomach, better value all round for your money out of rum than
any other drink that I know.'

At this point, and before the waiter could execute the order, voices and
steps were heard outside the room. The voices of two men. That of one
loud, eager, noisy. That of the other quiet, measured, and calm.

Checkley sat upright suddenly and listened.

'That is young Cambridge,' said the old barrister. 'I thought he would
be here--Saturday night and all.' He smiled, as if expectant of
something, and drank off the rest of his beer at a draught.

'Most distinguished Cambridge man,' whispered the ex-M.P. to his
friends. 'Wanst a Fellow of Cambridge College. Great scholar. Ornament
to any circle. Dhrinks likes an oyster. Son of a Bishop too--Son of an
Irish Bishop--Talks Greek like English. He'll come in directly. He's
taking something outside. He's always half dhrunk to begin, and quite
dhrunk to finish. But he only talks the better--being Oirish. Most
remarkable man.'

The voice of this distinguished person Checkley knew. But the other
voice? That he knew as well. And he could not remember whose voice it
was. Very well indeed he remembered the sound of it. Some men never
forget a face: some men never forget a shape or figure: some men never
forget a voice: some men never forget a handwriting. A voice is the
simplest thing, after all, to remember, and the most unchanging. From
eighteen till eighty a man's voice changes not, save that in volume it
decreases during the last decade: the distinguishing quality of the
voice remains the same to the end.

'Have a drink, my dear fellow.' That was the voice of the Pride of
Cambridge.

'Thanks. I don't want a drink.'

Whose voice was it? Checkley sat up eager for the door to be opened, and
that doubt to be resolved.

It was opened. The two men came in first, the Cambridge man leading the
way. He was a good-looking, smooth-faced man of thirty-two or so, with
bright blue eyes--too bright--a fine face, full of delicacy and
mobility, a high, narrow forehead, and quick sensitive lips; a man who
was obviously in want of some one to take him in hand and control him:
one of those men who have no will of their own, and fall naturally
before any temptation which assails them. The chief temptation which
assailed Freddy Carstone--it seems to stamp the man that his friends all
called him Freddy--a Freddy is amiable, weak, beloved, and given to err,
slip, fall, and give way--was the temptation to drink. He was really, as
the ex-M.P. told his friends, a very fine scholar: he had been a Fellow
of his college, but never received any appointment or office of Lecturer
there on account of this weakness of his, which was notorious. When his
Fellowship expired, he came to London, lived in Gray's Inn, and took
pupils. He had the reputation of being an excellent coach if he could be
caught sober. He was generally sober in the morning; often a little
elevated in the afternoon; and always cheerfully--not stupidly--drunk at
night.

'You must have a drink,' Freddy repeated. 'Not want a drink? Hang it,
old man, it isn't what you want, it's what you like. If I only took what
I wanted, I should be--what should I be? Fellow and Tutor of the
college--very likely Master--most probably Archdeacon--certainly Bishop.
Wasn't my father a Bishop? Now, if you take what you like, as well as
what you want--what happens? You go easily and comfortably down
hill--down--down--down--like me. Tobogganing isn't easier: the
switchback railway isn't more pleasant. Always take what you like.'

'No--no, Freddy; thanks.'

'What? You've got ambitions still? You want to be climbing? Man alive!
it's too late. You've stayed away from your friends too long. You can't
get up. Better join us at the _Salutation_ Club. Come in with me. I'll
introduce you. They'll be glad to have you. Intellectual conversation
carried on nightly. Romantic scenery from the back window. Finest
parlour in London. Come in and sample the Scotch.--Not want a drink? Who
ever saw a man who didn't want a drink?'

The other man followed, reluctantly--and at sight of him Checkley jumped
in his chair. Then he snatched the paper from the hands of the ancient
barrister, and buried his head in it. The action was most remarkable and
unmistakable. He hid himself behind the paper; for the man whom the
Cambridge scholar was dragging into the room was none other than
Athelstan Arundel--the very man of whom Mr. Dering had been speaking
that very afternoon: the very man whose loss he had been regretting: the
man accused by himself of forgery. So great was his terror at the sight
of this man that he was fain to hide behind the paper.

Yes: the same man: well dressed, apparently, and prosperous--in a velvet
jacket and a white waistcoat, with a big brown beard--still carrying
himself with that old insolent pride, as if he had never forged
anything: looking not a day older, in spite of the eight years that had
elapsed. What was he doing here?

'Come in, man,' said Freddy again. 'You shall have one drink at least,
and as many more as you like.--Robert, two Scotch and soda. We haven't
met for eight long years. Let us sit down and confess our sins for eight
years. Where have you been?'

'For the most part--abroad.'

'You don't look it. He who goes abroad to make his fortune always comes
home in rags, with a pistol in his coat-tail, and a bowie-knife in his
belt. At least we are taught so. You wear velvet and fine linen. You
haven't been abroad. I don't believe you've been farther than
Camberwell. In fact, Camberwell has been your headquarters. You've been
living in Camberwell--on Camberwell Green, which is a slice of Eden,
with--perhaps--didn't pretty Polly Perkins live on Camberwell
Green?--for eight long years.'

'Let me call upon you in your lodgings, where we can talk.

'I haven't got any lodgings. I am in Chambers--I live all by myself in
Gray's Inn. Come and see me. I am always at home in the mornings--to
pupils only--and generally at home in the afternoon to pupils and topers
and Lushingtons. Here's your whisky. Sit down. Let me introduce you to
the company. This is a highly intellectual society--not what you would
expect of a Holborn Parlour. It is a club which meets here every
evening--a first-class club. Subscription, nothing. Entrance fee,
nothing. Order what you like. Don't pretend not to know your
brother-members.--Gentlemen, this is my old friend, Mr. Athelstan
Arundel, who has been abroad--on Camberwell Green--for the sake of Polly
Perkins--for eight years, and has now returned.'

The ex-M.P. nudged his friends to call their attention to something
good. The rest received the introduction and the remarks which followed
in silence.

'Arundel, the gentleman by the fireplace, he with the pipe--is our
Shylock, sometimes called the Lord Shylock.' The money-lender looked up
with a dull and unintelligent eye: I believe the allusion was entirely
above his comprehension.--'Beside him is Mr. Vulpes--he with his head
buried in the paper--you'll see him presently. Mr. Vulpes is advanced in
years, but well preserved, and knows every letter of the law: he is,
indeed, an ornament of the lower branch. Vulpes will let you a house--he
has many most charming residences--or will advance you money on
mortgage. He knows the law of landlord and tenant, and the law regarding
Bills of Sale. I recommend Vulpes to your friendly consideration.--Here
is Senex Bibulus Benevolens.'--The old gentleman kindly inclined his
head, being too far gone for speech.--'Here is a most learned counsel,
who ought, had merit prevailed, to have been by this time Lord
Chancellor, Chief Justice, Judge or Master of the Rolls, or Queen's
Counsel at least. So far he is still a Junior, but we hope for his
speedy advancement.--Sir, I entreat the honour of offering you a goblet
of more generous drink.--Robert, Irish whisky and a lemon for this
gentleman.--There'--he pointed to the ex-M.P., who again nudged his
friends and grinned--'is our legislator and statesman, the pride of his
constituents, the darling of Ballynacuddery till they turned him
out.--There'--he pointed to the deboshed clerk--'is a member of a great
modern profession, a gentleman with whom it is indeed a pride to sit
down. He is Monsieur le Mari: Monsieur le Mari complaisant et content.'

'I don't know what you mean,' said the gentleman indicated. 'If you want
to talk Greek, talk it outside.'

'I cannot stay,' said Athelstan, looking about the room with scant
respect. 'I will call upon you at your Chambers.'

'Do--do, my dear fellow.' Athelstan shook hands and walked away. 'Now,
there's a man, gentlemen, who might have done anything--anything he
might have done. Rowed stroke to his boat. Threw up everything eight
years ago and went away--nobody knew why. Sad to see so much promise
wasted. Sad--sad. He hasn't even touched his drink. Then I
must--myself.' And he did.

Observe that there is no such lamentation over the failure of a
promising young man as from one who has also failed. For, by a merciful
arrangement, the failure seldom suspects himself of having failed.

'Now, Mr. Checkley,' said the barrister, 'he's gone away and you needn't
hide yourself any longer--and you can let me have my paper again.'

Mr. Checkley spoke no more that evening. He drank up his rum-and-water,
and he went away mightily perturbed. That Athelstan Arundel had come
back portended that something would happen. And like King Cole's
prophet, he could not foretell the nature of the event.




CHAPTER IV

A REBELLIOUS CHILD


Elsie left her lover at the door. Most accepted suitors accompany their
sweethearts into the very bosom of the family--the gynaeceum--the
parlour, as it used to be called. Not so George Austin. Since the
engagement--the deplorable engagement--it was understood that he was not
to presume upon entering the house. Romeo might as well have sent in his
card to Juliet's mamma. In fact, that lady could not possibly regard the
pretensions of Romeo more unfavourably than Mrs. Arundel did those of
George Austin. This not on account of any family inequality, for his
people were no more decidedly of the middle class than her own. That is
to say, they numbered as many members who were presentable and quite as
many who were not. Our great middle class is pretty well alike in this
respect. In every household there are things which may be paraded and
things _tacenda_: members unsuccessful, members disgraceful. All the
world knows all the things which must be concealed: we all know that all
the world knows them; but still we pretend that there are no such
things, and so we maintain the family dignity. Nor could the widow
object to George on account of his religious opinions, in which he
dutifully followed his forefathers; or of his abilities, manners,
morals, culture, accomplishments, or outward appearance, in all of which
he was everything that could be expected of a young man who had his own
fortune to make. A rich young man has no need of manners, morals,
abilities, or accomplishments: a thing too often forgotten by satirists
when they depict the children of Sir Midas Georgias and his tribe. The
lady's objection was simply and most naturally that the young man had
nothing and would probably never have anything: that he was a managing
clerk without money to buy a partnership in a highly congested
profession. To aggravate this objection, he stood in the way of two most
desirable suitors who were supposed to be ready should Elsie give them
any encouragement. They were a rich old man whose morals could no longer
be questioned; and a rich young man whose morals would doubtless improve
with marriage--if, that is, they wanted improvement, for on this
delicate subject ladies find it difficult to get reliable information.
And, again, the exalted position of the elder sister should have been an
example and a beacon. Which of you, Mesdames, would look on with
patience at such a sacrifice--a young and lovely daughter thrown away,
with all her charms and all her chances, upon a man with two hundred
pounds a year and no chance of anything much better? Think of it--two
hundred pounds a year--for a gentlewoman!

There are some families--many families--with whom the worship of wealth
is hereditary. The Arundels have been City people, married with other
City people--in trade--for two hundred years and more: they are all
members of City Companies: there have been Lord Mayors and Sheriffs
among them: some of them--for they are now a clan--are rich: some are
very rich; one or two are very, very rich: those who fail and go
bankrupt quickly drop out of sight. All their traditions are of
money-getting: they estimate success and worth and respect by the amount
a man leaves behind--it is the good old tradition: they talk of money:
they are not vulgar or loud or noisy or disagreeable in any way: but
they openly and without disguise worship the great god Plutus and
believe that he, and none other, is the God of the Christians. They have
as much culture as other people, at least to outward show: they furnish
their houses as artistically as other people: they buy pictures and
books: but ideas do not touch them: if they read new ideas, they are not
affected by them, however skilfully they may be put: they go to Church
and hear the parable about Dives and they wonder how Dives could have
been so hard-hearted. Then they go home and talk about money.

Elsie's father, a younger son of the richest branch of this family,
started with a comfortable little fortune and a junior partnership. He
was getting on very well indeed: he had begun to show the stuff of which
he was made, a good, stout, tenacious kind of stuff, likely to last and
to hold out; he was beginning to increase his fortune: he looked forward
to a successful career: and he hoped to leave behind him, after many,
many years, perhaps three-quarters of a million. He was only thirty-five
years of age, yet he was struck down and had to go. His widow received
little more than her husband's original fortune: it was small compared
with what she might fairly have expected when she married, but it was
large enough for her to live with her three children in Pembridge
Gardens. What happened to the son, you know. He went away in a royal
rage and had never been heard of since. The elder daughter, Hilda, when
about two-and-twenty, as you also know, had the good fortune to attract
the admiration of a widower of very considerable wealth, the brother of
her guardian. He was forty years older than herself, but he was
rich--nay, very rich indeed. Jute, I believe, on an extensive scale, was
the cause of his great fortune. He was knighted on a certain great
occasion when Warden of his Company, so that he offered his bride a
title and precedence, as well as a great income, a mansion in Palace
Gardens, a handsome settlement, carriages and horses, and everything
else that the feminine heart can desire.

The widow, soon after her husband died, found the time extremely dull
without the daily excitement of the City talk to which she had been
accustomed. There was no one with whom she could discuss the money
market. Now, all her life, she had been accustomed to talk of shares and
stocks and investments and fluctuations and operations and buying in and
selling out. She began, therefore, to watch the market on her own
account. Then she began to operate: then she gave her whole time and all
her thoughts to the business of studying, watching, reading, and
forecasting. Of course, then, she lost her money and fell into
difficulties. Nothing of the kind: she made money. There is always
plenty of virtuous indignation ready for those foolish persons who
dabble in stocks. They are gamblers; they always lose in the long run:
we all know that; the copy-books tell us so. If two persons play heads
and tails for sovereigns, do they both lose in the long run? If so, who
wins? Where does the money go? Even a gambler need not always lose in
the long run, as all gamblers know. _La veuve_ Arundel was not in any
sense a gambler. Nor was she a dabbler. She was a serious and
calculating operator. She took up one branch of the great money market
and confined her attentions to that branch, which she studied with so
much care and assiduity that she became a professional; that is to say,
she threw into the study all her energies, all her thoughts, and all her
intellect. When a young man does this on the Stock Exchange he may
expect to win. Mrs. Arundel was not an ordinary young man; she was a
sharp and clever woman: by hard work she had learned all that can be
learned, and had acquired some of that prescience which comes of
knowledge--the prophet of the future is, after all, he who knows and can
discuss the forces and the facts of the present: the Sibyl at the
present day would be a journalist. She was clear-headed, quick to see
and ready to act: she was of a quick temper as well as a quick
perception: and she was resolute. Such qualities in most women make them
absolute sovereigns in the household. Mrs. Arundel was not an absolute
sovereign--partly because she thought little of her household, and
partly because her children were distinguished by much the same
qualities, and their subjection would have proved difficult if not
impossible.

This was the last house in London where one might have expected to find
a girl who was ready to despise wealth and to find her happiness in a
condition of poverty. Elsie was completely out of harmony with all her
own people. There is a good deal of opinion going about in favour of the
simple life: many girls have become socialists in so far as they think
the amassing of wealth neither desirable nor worthy of respect: many
would rather marry a man of limited means who has a profession than a
rich man who has a business: many girls hold that Art is a much finer
thing than wealth. Elsie learned these pernicious sentiments at school:
they attracted her at first because they were so fresh: she found all
the best literature full of these sentiments: she developed in due
course a certain natural ability for art: she attended an art school:
she set up an easel: she painted in pastel: she called her room a
studio. She gave her friends the greatest uneasiness by her opinions:
she ended, as you have seen, by becoming engaged to a young man with
nothing. How could such a girl be born of such parents?

When she got home on Saturday evening she found her mother playing a
game of double _vingt un_ with a certain cousin, one Sydney Arundel. The
game is very good for the rapid interchange of coins: you should make it
a time game, to end in half an hour--one hour--two hours, and at the end
you will find that you have had a very pretty little gamble. Mrs.
Arundel liked nothing better than a game of cards--provided the stakes
were high enough to give it excitement. To play cards for love is indeed
insipid: it is like a dinner of cold boiled mutton or like sandwiches of
veal. The lady would play anything, piquet, ecarte, double dummy--and
her daughter Elsie hated the sight of cards. As for the cousin, he was
on the Stock Exchange: he came often to dinner and to talk business
after dinner. He was a kind of musical box or barrel organ in
conversation, because he could only play one tune. His business as well
as his pleasure was in the money market.

'So you have come home, Elsie?' said Mrs. Arundel coldly.

'Yes, I have come home.' Elsie seated herself at the window and waited.

'Now, Sydney'--her mother took up the cards. 'My deal--will you take any
more?'

She was a good-looking woman still, though past fifty: her abundant hair
had gone pleasantly gray, her features were fine, her brown eyes were
quick and bright: her lips were firm, and her chin straight. She was
tall and of good figure: she was clad in black silk, with a large gold
chain about her neck and good lace upon her shoulders. She wore many
rings and a bracelet. She liked, in fact, the appearance of wealth as
well as the possession of it: she therefore always appeared in costly
raiment: her house was furnished with a costly solidity: everything,
even the bindings of her books, was good to look at: her one man-servant
looked like the responsible butler of a millionaire, and her one-horse
carriage looked as if it belonged to a dozen.

The game went on. Presently, the clock struck ten. 'Time,' said the
lady. 'We must stop. Now then. Let us see--I make it seventy-three
shillings.--Thank you. Three pounds thirteen--an evening not altogether
wasted.--And now, Sydney, light your cigar. You know I like it. You
shall have your whisky and soda--and we will talk business. There are
half-a-dozen things that I want to consult you about. Heavens! why
cannot I be admitted to the Exchange? A few women among you--clever
women, like myself, Sydney--would wake you up.'

They talked business for an hour, the lady making notes in a little
book, asking questions and making suggestions. At last the cousin got
up--it was eleven o'clock--and went away. Then her mother turned to
Elsie.

'It is a great pity,' she said, 'that you take no interest in these
things.'

'I dislike them very much, as you know,' said Elsie.

'Yes--you dislike them because they are of real importance. Well--never
mind.--You have been out with the young man, I suppose?'

'Yes--we have been on the river together.'

'I supposed it was something of the kind. So the housemaid keeps company
with the potboy without consulting her own people.'

'It is nothing unusual for me to spend an evening with George. Why not?
You will not suffer me to bring him here.'

'No,' said her mother with firmness. 'That young man shall never, under
any circumstances, enter this house with my knowledge! For the rest,'
she added, 'do as you please.'

This was the kind of amiable conversation that had been going on day
after day since Elsie's engagement--protestations of ceasing to
interfere, and continual interference.

There are many ways of considering the subject of injudicious and
unequal marriages. You may ridicule: you may cajole: you may argue: you
may scold: you may coax: you may represent the naked truth as it is, or
you may clothe its limbs with lies--the lies are of woven stuff, strong,
and home-made. When you have an obdurate, obstinate, contumacious,
headstrong, wilful, self-contained maiden to deal with, you will waste
your breath whatever you do. The mother treated Elsie with scorn, and
scorn alone. It was her only weapon. Her elder sister tried other
weapons: she laughed at the makeshifts of poverty: she cajoled with
soft flattery and golden promises: she argued with logic pitiless: she
scolded like a fishwife: she coaxed with tears and kisses: she painted
the loveliness of men who are rich, and the power of women who are
beautiful. And all in vain. Nothing moved this obdurate, obstinate,
contumacious, headstrong, wilful Elsie. She would stick to her promise:
she would wed her lover even if she had to entertain Poverty as well all
her life.

'Are you so infatuated,' the mother went on, 'that you cannot see that
he cares nothing for your happiness? He thinks about nobody but himself.
If he thought of you, he would see that he was too poor to make you
happy, and he would break it off. As it is, all he wants is to marry
you.'

'That is indeed all. He has never disguised the fact.'

'He offers you the half of a bare crust.'

'By halving the crust we shall double it.'

'Oh! I have no patience. But there is an end. You know my opinion, and
you disregard it. I cannot lock you up, or beat you, for your
foolishness. I almost wish I could. I will neither reason with you any
more nor try to dissuade you. Go your own way.'

'If you would only understand. We are going to live very simply. We
shall put all unhappiness outside the luxuries of life. And we shall get
on if we never get rich. I wish I could make you understand our point of
view. It makes me very unhappy that you will take such a distorted
view.'

'I am glad that you can still feel unhappiness at such a cause as my
displeasure.'

'Well, mother, to-night we have come to a final decision.'

'Am I to learn it?'

'Yes; I wish to tell you at once. We have been engaged for two years.
The engagement has brought me nothing but wretchedness at home. But I
should be still more wretched--I should be wretched all my life--if I
were to break it off. I shall be of age in a day or two and free to act
on my own judgment.'

'You are acting on your own judgment already.'

'I have promised George that I will marry him when he pleases--that is,
about the middle of August, when he gets his holiday.'

'Oh! The misery of poverty will begin so soon? I am sorry to hear it. As
I said above, I have nothing to say against it--no persuasion or
dissuasion--you will do as you please.'

'George has his profession, and he has a good name already. He will get
on. Meantime, a little plain living will hurt neither of us. Can't you
think that we may begin in a humble way and yet get on?
Money--money--money. Oh! Must we think of nothing else?'

'What is there to think of but money? Look round you, silly child. What
gives me this house--this furniture--everything? Money. What feeds you
and clothes you? Money. What gives position, consideration, power,
dignity? Money. Rank without money is contemptible. Life without money
is miserable, wretched, intolerable. Who would care to live when the
smallest luxury--the least comfort--has to be denied for want of money.
Even the Art of which you talk so much only becomes respectable when it
commands money. You cannot keep off disease without money; you cannot
educate your children without money: it will be your worst punishment in
the future that your children will sink and become servants. Child!' she
cried passionately, 'we must be masters or servants--nay--lords or
slaves. You leave the rank of lord and marry the rank of slave. It is
money that makes the difference--money--money--money--that you pretend
to despise. It is money that has done everything for you. Your
grandfather made it--your father made it--I am making it. Go on in your
madness and your folly. In the end, when it is too late, you will long
for money, pray for money, be ready to do anything for money--for your
husband and your children.'

'We shall have, I hope, enough. We shall work for enough--no more.'

'Well, child,' her mother returned quietly, 'I said that I would say
nothing. I have been carried away. Let there be no more said. Do as you
please. You know my mind--your sister's mind--your cousins'----'

'I do not wish to be guided by my cousins.'

'Very well. You will stay here until your wedding day. When you marry
you will leave this house--and me and your sister and all your people.
Do not expect any help from me. Do not look forward to any inheritance
from me. My money is all my own to deal with as I please. If you wish
to be poor you shall be poor. Hilda tells me that you are to see your
guardian on Monday. Perhaps he may bring you to your senses. As for
me--I shall say no more.'

With these final words the lady left the room and went to bed. How many
times had she declared that she would say no more?

The next day being Sunday, the bells began to ring in the morning, and
the two ladies sallied forth to attend Divine service as usual. They
walked side by side, in silence. That sweet and gracious nymph, the Lady
Charity, was not with them in their pew. The elder lady, externally
cold, was full of resentment and bitterness: the younger was more than
usually troubled by the outbreak of the evening. Yet, she was no nearer
surrender. The sermon, by a curious coincidence, turned upon the
perishable nature of earthly treasures, and the vanity of the objects
desired by that unreasoning person whom they used to call the Worldling.
The name has perished, but the creature still exists, and is found in
countless herds in every great town. The parsons are always trying to
shoot him down; but they never succeed. There was just a fiery passage
or two directed against the species. Elsie hoped that the words would go
home. Not at all. They fell upon her mother's heart like seed upon the
rock. She heard them, but heard them not. The Worldling, you see, never
understands that he is a Worldling. Nor does Dives believe himself to be
anything more than Lazarus, such is his modesty.

The service over, they went home in silence. They took their early
dinner in silence, waited on by the solemn man-servant. After dinner,
Elsie sought the solitude of her studio. And here--nobody looking
on--she obeyed the first law of her sex, and had a good cry. Even the
most resolute of maidens cannot carry through a great scheme against
great opposition without the consolation of a cry.

On the table lay a note from Mr. Dering:

     'MY DEAR WARD--I am reminded that you come of age on Monday.
     I am also reminded by Hilda that you propose to take a very
     important step against the wish of your mother. Will you
     come and see me at ten o'clock to talk this over?--Your
     affectionate Guardian.'

Not much hope to be got out of that letter. A dry note from a dry man.
Very little doubt as to the line which he would take. Yet, not an unkind
letter. She put it back in her desk and sighed. Another long discussion.
No: she would not discuss--she would listen, and then state her
intention. She would listen again, and once more state her intention.

On the easel stood an almost finished portrait in pastel, executed from
a photograph. It was the portrait of her guardian. She had caught--it
was not difficult with a face so marked--the set expression, the closed
lips, the keen eyes, and the habitual look of caution and watchfulness
which become the characteristics of a solicitor in good practice. So far
it was a good likeness. But it was an austere face. Elsie, with a few
touches of her thumb and the chalk which formed her material, softened
the lines of the mouth, communicated to the eyes a more genial light,
and to the face an expression of benevolence which certainly had never
before been seen upon it.

'There!' she said. 'If you would only look like that to-morrow, instead
of like your photograph, I should have no fear at all of what you would
say. I would flatter you, and coax you, and cajole you, till you had
doubled George's salary and promised to get round my mother. You dear
old man! You kind old man! You sweet old man! I could kiss you for your
kindness.'




CHAPTER V

SOMETHING HAPPENS


So far a truly enjoyable Sunday. To sit in church beside her angry
mother, both going through the forms of repentance, charity, and
forgiveness: and to dine together, going through the ordinary forms of
kindliness while one at least was devoured with wrath. Waste of good
roast lamb and gooseberry tart!

Elsie spent the afternoon in her studio, where she sat undisturbed.
People called, but her mother received them. Now that the last
resolution had been taken: now that she had promised her lover to brave
everything and to live the simplest possible life for love's sweet sake,
she felt that sinking which falls upon the most courageous when the
boats are burned. Thus Love makes loving hearts to suffer.

The evening, however, made amends. For then, like the housemaid, who
mounted the area stair as Elsie went down the front-door steps, she went
forth to meet her lover, and in his company forgot all her fears. They
went to church together. There they sat side by side, this church not
having adopted the barbarous custom of separating the sexes--a custom
which belongs to the time when women were monkishly considered unclean
creatures, and the cause, to most men, of everlasting suffering, which
they themselves would most justly share. This couple sat hand in hand;
the service was full of praise and hope and trust: the Psalms were
exultant, triumphant, jubilant: the sermon was a ten minutes'
ejaculation of joy and thanks: there was a Procession with banners, to
cheer up the hearts of the faithful--what is Faith without a Procession?
Comfort stole back to Elsie's troubled heart: she felt less like an
outcast: she came out of the church with renewed confidence.

It was still daylight. They walked round and round the nearest square.
Jane the housemaid and her young man were doing the same thing. They
talked with confidence and joy of the future before them. Presently the
rain began to fall, and Elsie's spirits fell too.

'George,' she said, 'are we selfish, each of us? Is it right for me to
drag and keep you down?'

'You will not. You will raise me and keep me up. Never doubt that,
Elsie. I am the selfish one because I make you sacrifice so much.'

'Oh! no--no. It is no sacrifice for me. You must make me brave, George,
because I am told every day by Hilda and my mother the most terrible
things. I have been miserable all day long. I suppose it is the battle I
had with my mother yesterday.'

'Your mother will be all right again as soon as the thing is done. And
Hilda will come round too. She will want to show you her new carriage
and her newest dress. Nobody admires and envies the rich relation so
much as the poor relation. That is the reason why the poor relation is
so much courted and petted in every rich family. We shall be the poor
relations, you know, Elsie.'

'I suppose so. We must accept the part and play it properly.' She spoke
gaily, but with an effort.

'She will give you some of her old dresses. And she will ask us to some
of her crushes; but we won't go. Oh! Hilda will come round. As for your
mother----' He repressed what he was about to say. 'As for your mother,
Elsie, there is no obstinacy so desperate that it cannot be softened by
something or other. The constant dropping, you know. Give her time. If
she refuses to change--why--then'--again he changed the words in
time--'dear child, we must make our own happiness for ourselves without
our own folk to help us.'

'Yes; we will. At the same time, George, though I am so valiant in talk,
I confess that I feel as low as a schoolboy who is going to be
punished.'

'My dear Elsie,' said George, with a little exasperation, 'if they will
not come round, let them stay flat or square, or sulky, or anything. I
can hardly be expected to feel very anxious for a change of temper in
people who have said so many hard things of me. To-morrow, dear, you
shall get through your talk with Mr. Dering. He's as hard as nails; but
he's a just man, and he is sensible. In the evening, I will call for you
at nine, and you shall tell me what he said. In six weeks we can be
married. I will see about the banns. We will find a lodging somewhere,
pack up our things, get married, and move in. We can't afford a
honeymoon, I am afraid. That shall come afterwards when the ship comes
home.'

'Yes. When I am with you I fear nothing. It is when you are gone: when I
sit by myself in my own room, and know that in the next room my mother
is brooding over her wrath and keeping it warm--that I feel so guilty.
To-night, it is not that I feel guilty at all: it is quite the contrary;
but I feel as if something was going to happen.'

'Something is going to happen, dear. I am going to put a wedding ring
round this pretty finger.'

'When one says something in the language of superstition one means
something bad, something dreadful, something that shall stand between us
and force us apart. Something unexpected.'

'My child,' said her lover, 'all the powers of all the devils shall not
force us apart.' A daring and comprehensive boast.

She laughed a little, lightened by words so brave. 'Here we are, dear,'
she said, as they arrived at the house. 'I think the rain means to come
down in earnest. You had better make haste home. To-morrow evening at
nine, I will expect you.'

She ran lightly up the steps and rang the bell: the door was opened: she
turned her head, laughed, waved her hand to her lover, and ran in.

There was standing on the kerb beneath the street lamp a man apparently
engaged in lighting a cigar. When the girl turned, the light of the lamp
fell full upon her face. The man stared at her, forgetting his
cigar-light, which fell burning from his hand into the gutter. When the
door shut upon her, he stared at George, who, for his part, his mistress
having vanished, stared at the door.

All this staring occupied a period of at least half a minute. Then
George turned and walked away: the man struck another light, lit his
cigar, and strode away too, but in the same direction. Presently he
caught up George and laid a hand upon his shoulder.

'Here, you sir,' he said gruffly; 'I want a word with you before we go
any further.'

George turned upon him savagely. Nobody likes a heavy hand laid upon the
shoulder. In the old days it generally meant a writ and Whitecross
Street and other unpleasant things.

'Who the devil are you?' he asked.

'That is the question I was going----' He stopped and laughed.--'No--I
see now. I don't want to ask it. You are George Austin, are you not?'

'That is my name. But who are you--and what do you want with me?'

The man was a stranger to him. He was dressed in a velvet coat and a
white waistcoat: he wore a soft felt hat; and with the velvet jacket,
the felt hat, and a full beard, he looked like an artist of some kind.
At the end of June it is still light at half-past nine. George saw that
the man was a gentleman: his features, strongly marked and clear cut,
reminded him of something--but vaguely; they gave him the common feeling
of having been seen or known at some remote period. The man looked about
thirty, the time when the physical man is at his best: he was of good
height, well set up, and robust. Something, no doubt, in the art world:
or something that desired to appear as if belonging to the art world.
Because, you see, the artists themselves are not so picturesque as those
who would be artists if they could. The unsuccessful artist, certainly,
is sometimes a most picturesque creature. So is the model. The rags and
duds and threadbarity too often enter largely into the picturesque. So
with the ploughboy's dinner under the hedge, or the cotter's Saturday
night. And the village beershop may make a very fine picture; but the
artist himself does not partake in those simple joys.

'Well, sir, who are you?' George repeated as the other man made no
reply.

'Do you not remember me? I am waiting to give you a chance.'

'No--certainly not.'

'Consider. That house into which you have just taken my--a young
lady--does it not connect itself with me?'

'No. Why should it?'

'Then I suppose that I am completely forgotten.'

'It is very strange. I seem to recall your voice.'

'I will tell you who I am by another question. George Austin, what in
thunder are you doing with my sister?'

'Your sister?' George jumped up and stared. 'Your sister? Are you--are
you Athelstan come home again? Really and truly--Athelstan?'

'I am really and truly Athelstan. I have been back in England about a
fortnight.'

'You are Athelstan?' George looked at him curiously. When the reputed
black-sheep comes home again, it is generally in rags with a long story
of fortune's persecutions. This man was not in the least ragged. On the
contrary, he looked prosperous. What had he been doing? For, although
Elsie continued passionate in her belief in her brother's innocence,
everybody else believed that he had run away to escape consequences, and
George among the number had accepted that belief.

'Your beard alters you greatly. I should not have known you. To be sure
it is eight years since I saw you last, and I was only just beginning my
articles when you--left us.' He was on the point of saying 'when you ran
away.'

'There is a good deal to talk about. Will you come with me to my rooms?
I am putting up in Half Moon Street.'

Athelstan hailed a passing hansom and they drove off.

'You have been a fortnight in London,' said George, 'and yet you have
not been to see your own people.'

'I have been eight years away, and yet I have not written a single
letter to my own people.'

George asked no more questions. Arrived at the lodging, they went in and
sat down. Athelstan produced soda and whisky and cigars.

'Why have I not called upon my own people?' Athelstan took up the
question again. 'Because, when I left home, I swore that I would never
return until they came to beg forgiveness. That is why. Every evening I
have been walking outside the house, in the hope of seeing some of them
without their seeing me. For, you see, I should like to go home again;
but I will not go as I went away, under a shameful cloud. That has got
to be lifted first. Presently I shall know whether it is lifted. Then I
shall know how to act. To-night, I was rewarded by the sight of my
sister Elsie, walking home with you. I knew her at once. She is taller
than I thought she would become when I went away. Her face hasn't
changed much, though. She always had the gift of sweet looks, which
isn't quite the same thing as beauty. My sister Hilda, for instance, was
always called a handsome girl, but she never had Elsie's sweet looks.'

'She has the sweetest looks in the world.'

'What are you doing with her, George Austin, I ask again?'

'We are engaged to be married.'

'Married? Elsie married? Why--she's--well--I suppose she must be grown
up by this time.'

'Elsie is very nearly one-and-twenty. She will be twenty-one to-morrow.'

'Elsie going to be married. It seems absurd. One-and-twenty to-morrow.
Ah!' He sat up eagerly. 'Tell me, is she any richer? Has she had any
legacies or things?'

'No. How should she? Her _dot_ is her sweet self, which is enough for
any man.'

'And you, Austin. I remember you were an articled clerk of eighteen or
nineteen when I went away--are you rich?'

Austin blushed. 'No,' he said; 'I am not. I am a managing clerk at your
old office. I get two hundred a year, and we are going to marry on
that.'

Athelstan nodded. 'A bold thing to do. However----Twenty-one
to-morrow--we shall see.'

'And I am sorry to say there is the greatest opposition--on the part of
your mother and your other sister. I am not allowed in the house, and
Elsie is treated as a rebel.'

'Oh! well. If you see your way, my boy, get married, and have a happy
life, and leave them to come round at their leisure. Elsie has a heart
of gold. She can believe in a man. She is the only one of my people who
stood up for me when they accused me without a shadow of proof of----
The only one--the only one. It is impossible for me to forget that--and
difficult,' he added, 'to forgive the other thing.--Is my sister Hilda
still at home?'

'No. She is married to Sir Samuel, brother of your Mr. Dering. He is a
great deal older than his wife; but he is very rich.'

'Oh!--and my mother?'

'I believe she continues in good health. I am not allowed the privilege
of calling upon her.'

'And my old chief?'

'He also continues well.'

'And now, since we have cleared the ground so far, let us come to
business. How about that robbery?'

'What robbery?' The old business had taken place when George was a lad
just entering upon his articles. He had ceased to think of it.

'What robbery? Man alive!'--Athelstan sprang to his feet--'there is only
one robbery to me in the whole history of the world since men and
robberies began. What robbery? Look here, Master George Austin, when a
man is murdered, there is for that man only one murder in the whole
history of the world. All the other murders, even that of Abel himself,
are of no concern at all--not one bit. He isn't interested in them. They
don't matter to him a red cent. That's my case. The robbery of eight
years ago, which took a few hundred pounds from a rich man, changed my
whole life; it drove me out into the world; it forced me for a time to
live among the prodigals and the swine and the husks. It handed me over
to a thousand devils; and you ask me what robbery?'

'I am very sorry. It is now a forgotten thing. Nobody remembers it any
more. I doubt whether Mr. Dering himself ever thinks of it.'

'Well, what was discovered after all? Who did it?'

'Nothing at all has been discovered. No one knows to this day who did
it.'

'Nothing at all?--I am disappointed. Hasn't old Checkley done time for
it? Nothing found out?'

'Nothing. The notes were stopped in time, and were never presented.
After five or six years the Bank of England gave Mr. Dering notes in the
place of those stolen. And that is all there is to tell.'

'Nothing discovered! And the notes never presented? What good did the
fellow get by it, then?'

'I don't know. But nothing was discovered.'

'Nothing discovered!' Athelstan repeated. 'Why, I took it for granted
that the truth had come out long since. I was making up my mind to call
upon old Dering. I don't think I shall go now.--And my sister Hilda will
not be coming here to express her contrition. I am disappointed.'

'You can see Elsie if you like.'

'Yes--I can see her,' he repeated.--'George'--he returned to the old
subject--'do you know the exact particulars of that robbery?'

'There was a forged cheque, and the Bank paid it across the counter.'

'The cheque,' Athelstan explained, 'was made payable to the order of a
certain unknown person named Edmund Gray. It was endorsed by that name.
To prove that forgery, they should have got the cheque and examined the
endorsement. That was the first thing, certainly. I wonder how they
began.'

'I do not know. It was while I was in my articles, and all we heard was
a vague report. You ought not to have gone away. You should have stayed
to fight it out.'

'I was right to give up my berth after what the chief said. How could I
remain drawing his pay and doing his work, when he had calmly given me
to understand that the forgery lay between two hands, and that he
strongly suspected mine?'

'Did Mr. Dering really say so? Did he go so far as that?'

'So I walked out of the place. I should have stayed at home and waited
for the clearing up of the thing, but for my own people--who--well--you
know---- So I went away in a rage.'

'And have you come back--as you went--in a rage?'

'Well--you see, that is the kind of fire that keeps alight of its own
accord.'

'I believe that some sort of a search was made for this Edmund Gray; but
I do not know how long it lasted or who was employed.'

'Detectives are no good. Perhaps the chief didn't care to press the
business. Perhaps he learned enough to be satisfied that Checkley was
the man. Perhaps he was unwilling to lose an old servant. Perhaps the
villain confessed the thing. It all comes back to me fresh and clear,
though for eight long years I have not talked with a soul about it.'

'Tell me,' said George, a little out of sympathy with this dead and
buried forgery--'tell me where you have been--what you have done--and
what you are doing now.'

'Presently--presently,' he replied with impatience. 'I am sure now that
I was wrong. I should not have left the country. I should have taken a
lodging openly, and waited and looked on. Yes; that would have been
better. Then I should have seen that old villain, Checkley, in the dock.
Perhaps it is not yet too late. Still--eight years. Who can expect a
commissionaire to remember a single message after eight years?'

'Well--and now tell me,' George asked again, 'what you have been doing.'

'The black-sheep always turns up, doesn't he? You learn at home that he
has got a berth in the Rocky Mountains; but he jacks it up and goes to
Melbourne, where he falls on his feet; but gets tired, and moves on to
New Zealand, and so home again. It's a regular round.'

'You are apparently the black-sheep whose wool is dyed white. There are
threads of gold in it. You look prosperous.'

'A few years ago I was actually in the possession of money. Then I
became poor again. After a good many adventures I became a journalist.
The profession is in America the refuge of the educated unsuccessful,
and the hope of the uneducated unsuccessful. I am doing as well as
journalists in America generally do: I am over here as the
representative of a Francisco paper. And I expect to stay for some
time--so long as I can be of service to my people. That's all.'

'Well--it might be a great deal worse. And won't you come to Pembridge
Crescent with me?'

'When the cloud is lifted: not before. And--George--not a word about me.
Don't tell--yet--even Elsie.'




CHAPTER VI

SOMETHING MORE HAPPENS


Checkley held the door of the office wide open, and invited Elsie to
enter. The aspect of the room, solid of furniture, severe in its
fittings, with its vast table covered with papers, struck her with a
kind of terror. At the table sat her guardian, austere of countenance.

All the way along she had been imagining a dialogue. He would begin with
certain words. She would reply, firmly but respectfully, with certain
other words. He would go on. She would again reply. And so on. Everybody
knows the consolations of imagination in framing dialogues at times of
trouble. They never come off. The beginning is never what is expected,
and the sequel, therefore, has to be changed on the spot. The conditions
of the interview had not been realised by Elsie. Also the beginning was
not what she expected. For her guardian, instead of frowning with a brow
of corrugated iron, and holding up a finger of warning, received her
more pleasantly than she had imagined it possible for him, bade her sit
down, and leaned back, looking at her kindly.

'And so,' he said, 'you are twenty-one--twenty-one--to-day. I am no
longer your guardian. You are twenty-one. Everything that is past seems
to have happened yesterday. So that it is needless to say that you were
a baby only yesterday.'

'Yes; I am really twenty-one.'

'I congratulate you. To be twenty-one is, I believe, for a young lady at
least, a pleasant time of life. For my own part, I have almost forgotten
the memory of youth. Perhaps I never had the time to be young. Certainly
I have never understood why some men regret their youth so
passionately. As for your sex, Elsie, I know very little of it except in
the way of business. In that way, which does not admit of romance, I
must say that I have sometimes found ladies importunate, tenacious,
exacting, persistent, and even revengeful.'

'Oh!' said Elsie, with a little winning smile of conciliation. This was
only a beginning--a prelude--before the unpleasantness.

'That, Elsie, is my unfortunate experience of women--always in the
way of business, which of course may bring out the worst qualities.
In society, of which I have little experience, they are
doubtless--charming--charming.' He repeated the word, as if he had found
an adjective of whose meaning he was not quite clear. 'An old bachelor
is not expected, at the age of seventy-five, to know much about such a
subject. The point before us is that you have this day arrived at the
mature age of twenty-one. That is the first thing, and I congratulate
you. The first thing.'

'I wonder,' thought Elsie timidly, 'when he will begin upon the next
thing--the real thing.'

There lay upon the table before him a paper with notes upon it. He took
it up, looked at it, and laid it down again. Then he turned to Elsie and
smiled--he actually smiled--he unmistakably smiled. 'At twenty-one,' he
said, 'some young ladies who are heiresses come into their property----'

'Those who are heiresses. Unhappily, I am not.'

'Come into their property--their property. It must be a beautiful thing
for a girl to come into property, unexpectedly, at twenty-one. For a
man, a temptation to do nothing and to make no more money. Bad! Bad! But
for a girl already engaged, a girl who wants money, a girl who is
engaged--eh--to a penniless young solicitor----'

Elsie turned crimson. This was the thing she expected.

'Under such circumstances, I say, such a stroke of fortune would be
providential and wonderful, would it not?'

She blushed and turned pale, and blushed again. She also felt a strong
disposition to cry--but repressed that disposition.

'In your case, for instance, such a windfall would be most welcome. Your
case is rather a singular case. You do not belong to a family which has
generally disregarded money--quite the reverse--you should inherit the
love of money--yet you propose to throw away what I believe are very
good prospects, and----'

'My only prospect is to marry George Austin.'

'So you think. I have heard from your mother, and I have seen your
sister Hilda. They object very strongly to the engagement.'

'I know, of course, what they would say.'

'Therefore, I need not repeat it,' replied Mr. Dering drily. 'I learn,
then, that you are not only engaged to this young gentleman, but that
you are also proposing to marry upon the small income which he now
possesses.'

'Yes--we are prepared to begin the world upon that income.'

'Your mother asked me what chance he had in his profession. In this
office he can never rise to a considerable salary as managing clerk. If
he had money, he might buy a partnership. But he has none, and his
friends have none. And the profession is congested. He may remain all
his life in a position not much better than he now occupies. The
prospect, Elsie, is not brilliant.'

'No--we are fully aware of that. And yet----'

'Allow me, my dear child. You are yourself--we will say for the
moment--without any means of your own.'

'I have nothing.'

'Or any expectations, except from your mother, who is not yet sixty.'

'I could not count upon my mother's death. Besides, she says that, if I
persist, she will not leave me anything at all.'

'So much I understand from herself. Her present intention is to remove
your name from her will, in case you go on with this proposed marriage.'

'My mother will do what she pleases with her property,' said Elsie. 'If
she thinks that I will give way to a threat of this kind, she does not
know me.'

'Do not let us speak of threats. I am laying before you facts. Here they
are plainly. Young Austin has a very small income: he has very little
prospect of getting a substantial income: you, so far as you know, have
nothing; and, also so far as you know, you have no prospect of anything.
These are the facts, are they not?'

'Yes--I suppose these are the facts. We shall be quite poor--very
likely, quite poor always.' The tears rose to her eyes. But this was not
a place for crying.

'I want you to understand these facts very clearly,' Mr. Dering
insisted. 'Believe me, I do not wish to give you pain.'

'All this,' said Elsie, with the beginnings of the family obstinacy in
her eyes, 'I clearly understand. I have had them put before me too
often.'

'I also learn from your sister, Lady Dering, that if you abandon this
marriage she is ready to do anything for you that she can. Her house,
her carriage, her servants--you can command them all, if you please.
This you know. Have you considered the meaning of what you propose? Can
you consider it calmly?'

'I believe we have.'

'On the one side poverty--not what is called a small income. Many people
live very well on what is called a small income--but grinding, hard
poverty, which exacts real privations and burdens you with unexpected
loads. My dear young lady, you have been brought up to a certain amount
of plenty and ease, if not to luxury. Do you think you can get along
without plenty and ease?'

'If George can, I can.'

'Can you become a servant--cook, housemaid, lady's-maid--as well as a
wife--a nurse as well as a mother?'

'If George is made happier by my becoming anything--anything, it will
only make me happier. Mr. Dering, I am sure you wish me well--you are my
father's old friend--you have always advised my mother in her
troubles--my brother was articled to you--but----' She paused,
remembering that he had not been her brother's best friend.

'I mean the best possible for you. Meantime, you are quite fixed in your
own mind: you are set upon this thing. That is clear. There is one other
way of looking at it. You yourself seem chiefly desirous, I think, to
make the man you love happy. So much the better for him.--Are you quite
satisfied that the other party to the agreement, your lover, will remain
happy while he sees you slaving for him, while he feels his own
helplessness, and while he gets no relief from the grinding poverty of
his household--while--lastly--he sees his sons taking their place on a
lower level, and his daughters taking a place below the rank of
gentlewoman?'

'I reply by another question.--You have had George in your office as
articled clerk and managing clerk for eight years. Is he, or is he not,
steadfast, clear-headed, one who knows his own mind, and one who can be
trusted in all things?'

'Perhaps,' said Mr. Dering, inclining his head. 'How does that advance
him?'

'Then, if you trust him, why should not I trust him? I trust George
altogether--altogether. If he does not get on, it will be through no
fault of his. We shall bear our burden bravely, believe me, Mr. Dering.
You will not hear him--or me--complain. Besides, I am full of hope. Oh!
it can never be in this country that a man who is a good workman should
not be able to get on. Then I can paint a little--not very well,
perhaps. But I have thought--you will not laugh at me--that I might
paint portraits and get a little money that way.'

'It is quite possible that he may succeed, and that you may increase the
family income. Everything is possible. But, remember, you are building
on possibilities, and I on facts. Plans very beautiful and easy at the
outset often prove most difficult in the carrying out. My experience of
marriages is learned by fifty years of work, not imaginative, but
practical. I have learned that without adequate means no marriage can be
happy. That is to say, I have never come across any case of wedded
poverty where the husband or the wife, or both, did not regret the day
when they faced poverty together instead of separately. That, I say, is
my experience of such marriages. It is so easy to say that hand in hand
evils may be met and endured which would be intolerable if one was
alone. It isn't only hand in hand, Elsie. The hands are wanted for the
baby, and the evils will fall on the children yet unborn.'

Elsie hung her head. Then she replied timidly: 'I have thought even of
that. It only means that we go lower down in the social scale.'

'Only? Yet that is everything. People who are well up the ladder too
often deride those who are fighting and struggling to get up higher. It
is great folly or great ignorance to laugh. Social position, in such a
country as ours, means independence, self-respect, dignity, all kinds of
valuable things. You will throw these all away--yet your grandfathers
won them for you by hard work. You are yourself a gentlewoman--why?
Because they made their way up in the world, and placed their sons also
in the way to climb. That is how families are made--by three generations
at least of steady work uphill.'

Elsie shook her head sadly. 'We can only hope,' she murmured.

'One more word, and I will say no more. Remember, that love or no love,
resignation or not, patience or not, physical comfort is the beginning
and the foundation of all happiness. If you and your husband can satisfy
the demands of physical comfort, you may be happy--or at least resigned.
If not---- Well, Elsie, that is all. I should not have said so much had
I not promised your mother and your sister. I am touched, I confess, by
your courage and your resolution.'

'We mean never to regret, never to look back, and always to work and
hope,' said Elsie. 'You will remain our friend, Mr. Dering?'

'Surely, surely.--And now----'

'Now'--Elsie rose--'I will not keep you any longer. You have said what
you wished to say very kindly, and I thank you.'

'No.--Sit down again; I haven't done with you yet, child. Sit down
again. No more about that young villain--George Austin.' He spoke so
good-humouredly, that Elsie complied wondering, but no longer afraid.
'Nothing more about your engagement. Now, listen carefully, because this
is most important. Three or four years ago a person wrote to me. That
person informed me that he--for convenience we will call the person a
man--wished to place a certain sum of money in my hands in trust--for
you.'

'For me? Do you mean--in trust? What is Trust?'

'He gave me this sum of money to be given to you on your twenty-first
birthday.'

'Oh!' Elsie sat up with open eyes. 'A sum of money?--and to me?'

'With a condition or two. The first condition was, that the interest
should be invested as it came in: the next, that I was on no
account--mind, on no account at all--to tell you or any one of the
existence of the gift or the name of the donor. You are now twenty-one.
I have been careful not to afford you the least suspicion of this happy
windfall until the time should arrive. Neither your mother, nor your
sister, nor your lover, knows or suspects anything about it.'

'Oh!' Elsie said once more. An interjection may be defined as a
prolonged monosyllable, generally a vowel, uttered when no words can do
justice to the subject.

'And here, my dear young lady'--Elsie cried 'Oh!' once more because--the
most curious thing in the world--Mr. Dering's grave face suddenly
relaxed and the lines assumed the very benevolence which she had the day
before imparted to his portrait, and wished to see upon his
face!--'Here, my dear young lady'--he laid his hand upon a paper--'is
the list of the investments which I have made of that money. You have,
in fact, money in Corporation bonds--Newcastle, Nottingham,
Wolverhampton. You have water shares--you have gas shares--all good
investments, yielding at the price of purchase an average of nearly
three and two-thirds per cent.'

'Investments? Why--how much money was it, then? I was thinking when you
spoke of a sum of money, of ten pounds, perhaps.'

'No, Elsie, not ten pounds. The money placed in my hands for your use
was over twelve thousand pounds. With accumulations, there is now a
little under thirteen thousand.'

'Oh!' cried Elsie for the third time and for the same reason. No words
could express her astonishment.

'Yes; it will produce about four hundred and eighty pounds a year.
Perhaps, as some of the stock has gone up, it might be sold out and
placed to better advantage. We may get it up to five hundred pounds.'

'Do you mean, Mr. Dering, that I have actually got five hundred pounds a
year--all my own?'

'That is certainly my meaning. You have nearly five hundred pounds a
year all your own--entirely your own, without any conditions
whatever--your own.'

'Oh!' She sat in silence, her hands locked. Then the tears came into her
eyes. 'Oh, George!' she murmured, 'you will not be so very poor after
all.'

'That is all I have to say to you at present, Elsie,' said Mr. Dering.
'Now you may run away and leave me. Come to dinner this evening. Your
mother and your sister are coming. I shall ask Austin as well. We may
perhaps remove some of those objections. Dinner at seven sharp,
Elsie.--And now you can leave me.'

'I said last night,' said Elsie, clasping her hands with feminine
superstition, 'that something was going to happen. But I thought it was
something horrid. Oh, Mr. Dering, if you only knew how happy you have
made me! I don't know what to say. I feel stunned. Five hundred pounds a
year! Oh! it is wonderful! What shall I say? What shall I say?'

'You will say nothing. Go away now. Come to dinner this evening.--Go
away, my young heiress. Go and make plans how to live on your enlarged
income. It will not prove too much.'

Elsie rose. Then she turned again. 'Oh, I had actually forgotten. Won't
you tell the man--or the woman--who gave you that money for me, that I
thank him from my very heart? It isn't that I think so much about money,
but oh! the dreadful trouble that there has been at home because George
has none--and this will do something to reconcile my mother. Don't you
think it will make all the difference?'

'I hope that before the evening you will find that all opposition has
been removed,' said her guardian cautiously.

She walked away in a dream. She found herself in Lincoln's Inn Fields:
she walked all round that great square, also in a dream. The spectre of
poverty had vanished. She was rich: she was rich: she had five hundred
pounds a year. Between them they would have seven hundred pounds a year.
It seemed enormous. Seven hundred pounds a year! Seven--seven--seven
hundred pounds a year!

She got out into the street called Holborn, and she took the modest
omnibus, this heiress of untold wealth. How much was it? Thirteen
millions? or thirteen thousand? One seemed as much as the other. Twelve
thousand: with accumulations: with accumulations--ations--ations. The
wheels of the vehicle groaned out these musical words all the way. It
was in the morning when the Bayswater omnibus is full of girls going
home to lunch after shopping or looking at the shops. Elsie looked at
these girls as they sat along the narrow benches. 'My dears,' she longed
to say, but did not, 'I hope you have every one got a brave lover, and
that you have all got twelve thousand pounds apiece--with accumulations--
twelve thousand pounds--with accumulations--ations--ations--realising
four hundred and eighty pounds a year, and perhaps a little more. With
accumulations--ations--ations--accumulations.'

She ran into the house and up the stairs singing. At the sound of her
voice her mother, engaged in calculations of the greatest difficulty,
paused wondering. When she understood that it was the voice of her child
and not an organ-grinder, she became angry. What right had the girl to
run about singing? Was it insolent bravado?

Elsie opened the door of the drawing-room and ran in. Her mother's cold
face repelled her. She was going to tell the joyful news--but she
stopped.

'You have seen Mr. Dering?' asked her mother.

'Yes; I have seen him.'

'If he has brought you to reason----'

'Oh! He has--he has. I am entirely reasonable.'

Mrs. Arundel was astonished. The girl was flushed of face and bright of
eye; her breath was thick; her lips were parted. She looked entirely
happy.

'My dear mother,' she went on, 'I am to dine with him to-night. Hilda is
to dine with him to-night. You are to dine with him to-night. It is to
be a family party. He will bring us all to reason--to a bag full of
reasons.'

'Elsie, this seems to me to be mirth misplaced.'

'No--no--in its right place--reasons all in a row and on three shelves,
labelled and arranged and classified.'

'You talk in enigmas.'

'My dear mother'--yet that morning the dear mother would not speak to
the dear daughter--'I talk in enigmas and I sing in conundrums. I feel
like an oracle or a Delphic old woman for dark sayings.'

She ran away, slamming the door after her. Her mother heard her singing
in her studio all to herself. 'Can she be in her right mind?' she asked
anxiously. 'To marry a Pauper--to receive the admonition of her
guardian--and such a guardian--and to come home singing. 'Twould be
better to lock her up than let her marry.'




CHAPTER VII

SOMETHING ELSE HAPPENS


Mr. Dering lay back in his chair, gazing at the door--the unromantic
office door--through which Elsie had just passed. I suppose that even
the driest of old bachelors and lawyers may be touched by the sight of a
young girl made suddenly and unexpectedly happy. Perhaps the mere
apparition of a lovely girl, dainty and delicate and sweet, daintily and
delicately apparelled, so as to look like a goddess or a wood-nymph
rather than a creature of clay, may have awakened old and long-forgotten
thoughts before the instincts of youth were stifled by piles of
parchment. It is the peculiar and undisputed privilege of the historian
to read thoughts, but it is not always necessary to write them down.

He sat up and sighed. 'I have not told her all,' he murmured. 'She shall
be happier still.' He touched his hand-bell. 'Checkley,' he said, 'ask
Mr. Austin kindly to step this way.--A day of surprise--of joyful
surprise--for both.'

It was indeed to be a day of good fortune, as you shall see.

He opened a drawer and took out a document rolled and tied, which he
laid upon the table before him.

George obeyed the summons, not without misgiving, for Elsie, he knew,
must by this time have had the dreaded interview, and the call might
have some reference to his own share in the great contumacy. To incur
the displeasure of his employer in connection with that event might lead
to serious consequences.

Astonishing thing! Mr. Dering received him with a countenance that
seemed transformed. He smiled benevolently upon him. He even laughed. He
smiled when George opened the door: he laughed when, in obedience to a
gesture of invitation, George took a chair. He actually laughed: not
weakly or foolishly, but as a strong man laughs.

'I want ten minutes with you, George Austin'--he actually used the
Christian name--'ten minutes or a quarter of an hour, or perhaps half an
hour.' He laughed again. 'Now, then'--his face assumed its usual
judicial expression, but his lips broke into unaccustomed smiles--'Now
then, sir, I have just seen my ward--my former ward, for she is now of
age--and have heard--well--everything there was to hear.'

'I have no doubt, sir, that what you heard from Elsie was the exact
truth.'

'I believe so. The questions which I put to her I also put to you. How
do you propose to live? On your salary? You have been engaged to my late
ward without asking the permission of her guardians--that is, her mother
and myself.'

'That is not quite the case. We found that her mother opposed the
engagement, and therefore it was not necessary to ask your permission.
We agreed to let the matter rest until she should be of age. Meanwhile,
we openly corresponded and saw each other.'

'It is a distinction without a difference. Perhaps what you would call a
legal distinction. You now propose to marry. Elsie Arundel is no longer
my ward; but, as a friend, I venture to ask you how you propose to live?
A wife and a house cost money. Shall you keep house and wife on your
salary alone? Have you any other resources?'

There are several ways of putting these awkward questions. There is
especially the way of accusation, by which you charge the guilty young
man of being by his own fault one of a very huge family--of having no
money and no expectations--nothing at all, unless he can make it for
himself. It is the manner generally adopted by parents and guardians.
Mr. Dering, however, when he put the question smiled genially and rubbed
his hands--a thing so unusual as to be terrifying in itself--as if he
was uttering a joke--a thing he never had done in his life. The
question, however, even when put in this, the kindest way, is one most
awkward for any young man, and especially to a young man in either
branch of the law, and most especially to a young man beginning the
ascent of the lower branch.

Consider, of all the professions, crowded as they are, there is none so
crowded as this branch of the law. 'What,' asks anxious Quiverful Pere,
'shall I do with this boy of mine? I will spend a thousand pounds upon
him and make him a solicitor. Once he has passed, the way is clear for
him.' 'How,' asks the ambitious man of trade, 'shall I advance my son?
I will make him a lawyer; once passed he will open an office and get a
practice and become rich. He will be a gentleman. And his children will
be born gentlemen.' Very good; a most laudable custom it is in this
realm of Great Britain for the young men still to be pressing upwards,
though those who are already high up would fain forget the days of
climbing and sneer at those who are making their way. But, applied to
this profession, climbing seems no longer practicable. This way of
advance will have to be abandoned.

Consider, again. Every profession gets rich out of its own mine. There
is the mine Ecclesiastic, the mine Medical, the mine Artistic, the mine
Legal. The last-named contains leases, covenants, agreements, wills,
bonds, mortgages, actions, partnerships, transfers, conveyances, county
courts, and other treasures, all to be had for the digging. But--and
this is too often forgotten--there is only a limited quantity to be
taken out of the mine every year, and there is not enough to go round,
except in very minute portions. And since, until we become socialists at
heart, we shall all of us continue to desire for our share that which is
called the mess of Benjamin, and since all cannot get that mess--which
Mr. Dering had enjoyed for the whole of his life--or anything like that
desirable portion, most young solicitors go in great heaviness of
spirit--hang their heads, corrugate their foreheads, write despairing
letters to the girls they left behind them, and with grumbling gratitude
take the hundred or two hundred a year which is offered for their
services as managing clerks. Again, the Legal mine seems of late years
not to yield anything like so much as formerly. There has been a cruel
shrinkage all over the country, and especially in country towns: the
boom of building seems to have come to an end: the agricultural
depression has dragged down with it an immense number of people who
formerly flourished with the lawyers, and, by means of their savings,
investments, leases, and partnerships and quarrels, made many a
solicitor fat and happy. That is all gone. It used to be easy, if one
had a little money, to buy a partnership. Now it is no longer possible,
or, at least, no longer easy. Nobody has a business greater than he
himself can manage; everybody has got a son coming in.

These considerations show why the question was difficult to answer.

Said George in reply, but with some confusion: 'We are prepared to live
on little. We are not in the least extravagant: Elsie will rough it.
Besides, she has her Art----'

'Out of which she makes at present nothing a year.'

'But she will get on--and I may hope, may reasonably hope, some time to
make an income larger than my present one.'

'You may hope--you may hope. But the position is not hopeful. In fact,
George Austin, you must marry on ten times your present income, or not
at all.'

'But I assure you, sir, our ideas are truly modest, and we have made up
our minds how we can live and pay our way.'

'You think you have. That is to say, you have prepared a table of
expenses showing how, with twopence to spare, you can live very well on
two hundred pounds a year. Of course you put down nothing for the
thousand and one little unexpected things which everybody of your
education and habits pays for every day.'

'We have provided as far as we can see.'

'Well, it won't do. Of course, I can't forbid the girl to marry you. She
is of age. I can't forbid you--but I can make it impossible--impossible
for you, Master Austin--impossible.'

He rapped the table. The words were stern, but the voice was kindly, and
he smiled again as he spoke. 'You thought you would do without me, did
you? Well--you shall see--you shall see.'

George received this threat without words, but with a red face, and with
rising indignation. Still, when one is a servant, one must endure the
reproofs of the master. He said nothing therefore, but waited.

'I have considered for some time,' Mr. Dering continued, 'how to meet
this case in a satisfactory manner. At last, I made up my mind. And if
you will read this document, young gentleman, you will find that I have
made your foolish proposal to marry on love and nothing else quite
impossible--quite impossible, sir.' He slapped the table with the paper,
and tossed it over to George.

George took the paper, and began to read it. Suddenly he jumped out of
his chair. He sprang to his feet. '_What?_' he cried.

'Go on--go on,' said Mr. Dering benevolently.

'Partnership? Partnership?' George gasped. 'What does it mean?'

'It is, as you say, a Deed of Partnership between myself and yourself.
The conditions of the Partnership are duly set forth--I hope you will
see your way to accepting them.--A Deed of Partnership. I do not know
within a few hundreds what your share may be, but I believe you may
reckon on at least two thousand for the first year, and more--much
more--before long.'

'More than a thousand?'

'You have not read the deed through. Call yourself a lawyer? Sit down,
and read it word for word.'

George obeyed, reading it as if it was a paper submitted to him for
consideration, a paper belonging to some one else.

'Well? You have read it?'

'Yes; I have read it through.'

'Observe that the Partnership may be dissolved by Death, Bankruptcy, or
Mutual Consent. I receive two-thirds of the proceeds for life.
That--alas!--will not be for long.--Well, young man, do you accept this
offer?'

'Accept? Oh! Accept? What can I do? What can I say--but accept?' He
walked to the window, and looked out; I suppose he was admiring the
trees in the square, which were certainly very beautiful in early July.
Then he returned, his eyes humid.

'Aha!' Mr. Dering chuckled. 'I told you that I would make it impossible
for you to marry on two hundred pounds a year. I waited till Elsie's
birthday. Well? You will now be able to revise that little estimate of
living on two hundred a year. Eh?'

'Mr. Dering,' said George, with breaking voice, 'I cannot believe it; I
cannot understand it. I have not deserved it.'

'Shake hands, my Partner.'

The two men shook hands.

'Now sit down and let us talk a bit,' said Mr. Dering. 'I am old. I am
past seventy. I have tried to persuade myself that I am still as fit for
work as ever. But I have had warnings. I now perceive that they must be
taken as warnings. Sometimes it is a little confusion of memory--I am
not able to account for little things--I forget what I did yesterday
afternoon. I suppose all old men get these reminders of coming decay. It
means that I must reduce work and responsibility. I might give up
business altogether and retire: I have money enough and to spare: but
this is the third generation of a successful House, and I could not bear
to close the doors, and to think that the Firm would altogether vanish.
So I thought I would take a partner, and I began to look about me.
Well--in brief, I came to the conclusion that I should find no young man
better qualified than yourself for ability and for power of work and for
all the qualities necessary for the successful conduct of such a House
as this. Especially I considered the essential of good manners. I was
early taught by my father that the greatest aid to success is good
breeding. I trust that in this respect I have done justice to the
teaching of one who was the most courtly of his time. You belong to an
age of less ceremony and less respect to rank. But we are not always in
a barrack or in a club. We are not all comrades or equals. There are
those below to consider as well as those above. There are women: there
are old men: you, my partner, have shown me that you can give to each
the consideration, the deference, the recognition that he deserves. True
breeding is the recognition of the individual. You are careful of the
small things which smooth the asperities of business. In no profession,
not even that of medicine, is a good manner more useful than in ours.
And this you possess.--It also pleases me,' he added after a pause, 'to
think that in making you my partner I am also promoting the happiness of
a young lady I have known all her life.'

George murmured something. He looked more like a guilty schoolboy than a
man just raised to a position most enviable. His cheeks were flushed and
his hands trembled. Mr. Dering touched his bell.

'Checkley,' he said, when that faithful retainer appeared, 'I have
already told you of my intention to take a partner. This is my new
partner.'

Checkley changed colour. His old eyes--or was George wrong?--flashed
with a light of malignity as he raised them. It made him feel
uncomfortable--but only for a moment.

'My partner, Checkley,' repeated Mr. Dering.

'Oh!' His voice was dry and grating. 'Since we couldn't go on as
before---- Well, I hope you won't repent it.'

'You shall witness the signing of the deed, Checkley. Call in a clerk.
So--there we have it, drawn, signed, and witnessed. Once more, my
partner, shake hands.'



Elsie retired to her own room after the snub administered to her rising
spirits. She soon began to sing again, being much too happy to be
affected by anything so small. She went on with her portrait, preserving
some, but not all, of the softness and benevolence which she had put
into it, and thereby producing what is allowed to be an excellent
portrait, but somewhat flattering. She herself knows very well that it
is not flattering at all, but even lower than the truth, only the other
people have never seen the lawyer in an expansive moment.

Now while she was thus engaged, her mind going back every other minute
to her newly-acquired inheritance, a cab drove up to the house--the door
flew open, and her lover--her George--flew into her arms.

'You here--George? Actually in the house? Oh! but you know----'

'I know--I know. But I could not possibly wait till this evening. My
dear child, the most wonderful--the most wonderful thing--the most
extraordinary thing--in the whole world has happened--a thing we could
never hope and never ask----'

'Mr. Dering has told you, then?'

'What? Do you know?'

'Mr. Dering told me this morning.--Oh, George! isn't it wonderful?'

'Wonderful? It is like the last chapter of a novel!' This he said
speaking as a fool, because the only last chapter in life is that in
which Azrael crosses the threshold.

'Oh, George!--I have been walking in the air--I have been flying--I have
been singing and dancing. I feel as if I had never before known what it
was to be happy. Mr. Dering said something about having it
settled--mind--it's all yours, George--yours as well as mine.'

'Yes,' said George, a little puzzled. 'I suppose in the eyes of the law
it is mine, but then it is yours as well. All that is mine is yours.

'Oh! Mr. Dering said it was mine in the eyes of the law. What does it
matter, George, what the stupid old law says?'

'Nothing, my dear--nothing at all.'

'It will be worth five hundred pounds a year very nearly. That, with
your two hundred pounds a year, will make us actually comfortable after
all our anxieties.'

'Five hundred a year? It will be worth four times that, I hope.'

'Four times? Oh, no!--that is impossible. But Mr. Dering told me that he
could hardly get so much as four per cent., and I have made a sum and
worked it out. Rule for simple interest: multiply the principal by the
rate per cent., and again by the time, and divide by a hundred. It is
quite simple. And what makes the sum simpler, you need only take one
year.'

'What principal, Elsie, by what interest? You are running your little
head against rules of arithmetic. Here there is no principal and no
interest. It is a case of proceeds, and then division.'

'We will call it proceeds, if you like, George, but he called it
interest. Anyhow, it comes to five hundred a year, very nearly; and with
your two hundred----'

'I don't know what you mean by your five hundred a year. As for my two
hundred, unless I am very much mistaken, that will very soon be two
thousand.'

'Your two hundred will become----? George, we are talking across each
other.'

'Yes. What money of yours do you mean?'

'I mean the twelve thousand pounds that Mr. Dering holds for me--with
accumulations--accumulations'--she began to sing the rhyme of the
omnibus wheels--'accumulations--ations--ations.'

'Twelve thousand pounds? Is this fairyland? Twelve thousand----? I
reel--I faint--I sink--I melt away. Take my hands--both my hands,
Elsie--kiss me kindly--it's better than brandy--kindly kiss me. Twelve
thousand pounds! with accumulations----'

'--ations--ations--ations,' she sung. 'Never before, George, have I
understood the loveliness and the power of money. They were given to Mr.
Dering by an anonymous person to be held for me--secretly. No one
knows--not even, yet, my mother.'

'Oh! It is altogether too much--too much: once there was a poor but
loving couple, and Fortune turned her wheel, and---- You don't
know--you most unsuspecting ignorant Thing--you can't guess-- Oh, Elsie,
I am a partner--Mr. Dering's partner!

They caught hands again--then they let go--then they sat down, and gazed
upon each other.

'Elsie,' said George.

'George,' said Elsie.

'We can now marry like everybody else--but much better. We shall have
furniture now.'

'All the furniture we shall want, and a house where we please. No
contriving now--no pinching.'

'No self-denying for each other, my dear.'

'That's a pity, isn't it?--But, George, don't repine. The advantages may
counterbalance the drawbacks. I think I see the cottage where we were
going to live. It is in Islington: or near it--Barnsbury, perhaps: there
is a little garden in front, and one at the back. There is always
washing hung out to dry. I don't like the smell of suds. For dinner, one
has cold Australian tinned meat for economy, not for choice. The rooms
are very small, and the furniture is shabby, because it was cheap and
bad to begin with. And when you come home--oh, George!'--she stuck her
forefinger in her chalk, and drew two or three lines on his face--'you
look like that, so discontented, so grumpy, so gloomy. Oh, my dear, the
advantages--they do so greatly outbalance the drawbacks; and George--you
will love your wife all the more--I am sure you will--because she can
always dress properly and look nice, and give you a dinner that will
help to rest you from the work of the day.'

Once more this foolish couple fell into each other's arms and kissed
again with tears and smiles and laughter.

'Who,' asked Mrs. Arundel, ringing the bell up-stairs, 'who is with Miss
Elsie below?'

On hearing that it was Mr. George Austin, whose presence in the house
was forbidden, Mrs. Arundel rose solemnly and awfully, and walked down
the stairs. She had a clear duty before her. When she threw open the
door, the lovers were hand in hand dancing round the room laughing--but
the tears were running down Elsie's cheeks.

'Elsie,' said her mother, standing at the open door, 'perhaps you can
explain this.'

'Permit me to explain,' said George.

'This gentleman, Elsie, has been forbidden the house.'

'One moment,' he began.

'Go, sir.' She pointed majestically to the window.

'Oh!' cried Elsie. 'Tell her, George--tell her; I cannot.' She fell to
laughing and crying together, but still held her lover by the hand.

'I will have no communication whatever with one who robs me of a
daughter,' said this Roman matron. 'Will you once more leave the house,
sir?'

'Mother--you _must_ hear him.'

'Nothing,' said Mrs. Arundel, 'will ever induce me to speak to
him--nothing.'

'Mother, don't be silly,' Elsie cried; 'you don't know what has
happened. You _must_ not say such things. You will only be sorry for
them afterwards.'

'Never--never. One may forgive such a man, but one can never speak to
him, never--whatever happens--never.' The lady looked almost heroic as
she waved her right hand in the direction of the man.

'I will go,' said George, 'but not till you have heard me. I am
rich--Elsie is rich--we shall not marry into poverty. The whole
situation is entirely changed.'

'Changed,' Elsie repeated, taking George's arm.



'My dear George,' said Mrs. Arundel, when she had heard the whole
story--and by cross examination persuaded herself that it was true--'you
know on what a just basis my objections were founded. Otherwise, I
should have been delighted at the outset.--Kiss me, Elsie.--You have my
full consent, children. These remarkable events are Providential.--On
Mr. Dering's death or retirement, you will step into an enormous
practice. Follow his example. Take no partner till old age compels you.
Keep all the profits for yourself--all.--My dear George, you should be a
very happy man. Not so rich, perhaps, as my son-in-law, Sir Samuel, but
above the ordinary run of common happiness. As for the past---- We will
now go down to lunch.--There is the bell. These emotions are
fatiguing.'




CHAPTER VIII

IN HONOUR OF THE EVENT


May one dwell upon so simple a thing as a small family dinner-party? It
is generally undramatic and uneventful: it is not generally marked even
by a new dish or a bottle of rare wine. Yet there lingers in the mind of
every man the recollection of pleasant dinners. I should like to write a
Book of Dinners--not a book for the _gourmet_, but a book of memories.
It might be a most delightful volume. There would be in it the
school-boys' dinner. I remember a certain dinner at eighteenpence a
head, at Richmond, before we had the row in the boat, when we quarrelled
and broke the oars over each other's heads, and very nearly capsized: a
certain undergraduates' dinner, in which four men--three of whom are now
ghosts--joined: the Ramblers' dinner, of lamb chops and bottled ale and
mirth and merriment: the two-by-two dinner in the private room, a dainty
dinner of sweet lamb, sweet bread, sweet peas, sweet looks, sweet
Moselle, and sweet words. Is it really true that one never--never--gets
young again? Some people do, I am sure, but they are under promise to
say nothing about it. I shall--and then that dinner may perhaps--one
cannot say--one never knows--and I suppose--if one was young again--that
they would be found just as pretty as they ever were. There is the
official dinner, stately and cold: the city dinner, which generally
comes to a man when his digestion is no longer what it was: the family
dinner, in which the intellect plays so small a part, because no one
wastes his fine things on his brothers and sisters: the dinner at which
one has to make a speech. Indeed, this Book of Dinners promises to be a
most charming volume. I should attempt it, however, with trembling,
because, to do it really well, one should be, first of all, a scholar,
if only to appreciate things said and spoken, and in order to connect
the illustrious past with food and drink. Next, he ought to be still
young: he certainly must have a proper feeling for wine, and must
certainly understand when and why one should be grateful to good Master
Cook: he should be a past or present master in the Art of Love and a
squire of Dames: he should be good at conversation: he must, in the old
language, be a worshipper of Bacchus, Venus, Phoebus Apollo, the Muses
nine and the Graces three. He must be no poor weakling, unable to enjoy
the good creatures of flesh, fowl, fish, and wine: no boor: and no log
insensible to loveliness.

Dinner, which should be a science, has long been treated as one of the
Fine Arts. Now every Fine Art, as we all know, has its fashions and its
caprices. Those who are old enough to remember the dinners of twenty,
thirty, or forty years ago can remember many of their fashions and
caprices. In the Thirties, for instance, everything was carved upon the
table. It required a man with a strong wrist to give a dinner-party.
Fortunately, a dinner then consisted of few dishes. They drank sherry
with dinner, and port afterwards. The champagne, if there was any, was
sweet. The guests were bidden for half-past six: they sat down to dinner
before seven. At eight the ladies went up-stairs: at half-past ten the
men joined them. Their faces were flushed, their shoulders were inclined
to lurch, and their speech was the least bit thick. Wonderful to relate,
brandy-and-water used to be served to these topers in the drawing-room
itself.

Mr. Dering had altered little in his dinner customs. They mostly
belonged to the Sixties, with a survival of some belonging to the
Thirties. Things were carved upon the sideboard: this was in deference
to modern custom: champagne formed an integral part of the meal: but the
dinner itself was solid: the cloth after dinner was removed, leaving the
dark polished mahogany after the old fashion: the furniture of the room
was also in the old style: the chairs were heavy and solid: the walls
were hung with a dark crimson paper of velvety texture: the curtains and
the carpets were red: there were pictures of game and fruit: the
sideboard was as solid as the table.

Checkley the clerk, who was invited as a faithful servant of the House,
to the celebration of the new partnership, was the first to arrive.
Dressed in a hired suit, he looked like an undertaker's assistant: the
gloom upon his face heightened the resemblance. Why the partnership
caused this appearance of gloom, I know not. Certainly, he could never
expect to be made a partner himself. It was perhaps a species of
jealousy which filled his soul. He would no longer know so much of the
business.

George came with the Mother-in-law Elect and the _fiancee_. Forgiveness,
Peace, Amnesty, and Charity sat all together upon the brow of the elder
lady. She was magnificent in a dark crimson velvet, and she had a good
deal of gold about her arms and neck. Jewish ladies are said to show, by
the magnificence of their attire, the prosperity of the business. Why
not? It is a form of enjoying success. There are many forms: one man
buys books: let him buy books. Another collects pictures. Why not? One
woman wears crimson velvet. Why not? In this way she enjoys her wealth
and proclaims it. Again, why not? It seems to the philosopher a fond and
vain thing to deck the person at all times, and especially fond when the
person is middle-aged and no longer beautiful. We are not all
philosophers. There are many middle-aged men who are extremely happy to
put on their uniform and their medals and their glittering helmets. Mrs.
Arundel wore her velvet as if she enjoyed the colour of it, the richness
of it, the light and shade that lay in its folds, and the soft feel of
it. She wore it, too, as an outward sign that this was a great occasion.
Her daughter, Lady Dering, came also arrayed in a queenly dress of amber
silk with an aigrette of feathers in her hair. To be sure, she was going
on somewhere after the dinner. Elsie, for her part, came in a creamy
white almost like a bride: but she looked much happier than most brides.
Hilda's husband, Sir Samuel, who was some six or seven years younger
than his brother, was in appearance a typical man of wealth. The rich
man can no longer, as in the days of good old Sir Thomas Gresham,
illustrate his riches by costly furs, embroidered doublets, and heavy
chains. He has to wear broadcloth and black. Yet there is an air, a
carriage, which belongs to the rich man. In appearance, Sir Samuel was
tall, like his brother, but not thin like him: he was corpulent: his
face was red: he was bald, and he wore large whiskers, dyed black.
The late dissensions were completely forgotten. Hilda embraced her
sister fondly. 'My dear,' she whispered, 'we have heard all.
Everything--everything is changed by these fortunate events. They do you
the greatest credit.--George'--she took his hand and held it
tenderly--'I cannot tell you how happy this news has made us all. You
will be rich in the course of years. Sir Samuel was only saying, as we
came along----'

'I was saying, young gentleman,' the Knight interrupted, 'that the most
beautiful thing about money is the way it develops character. We do not
ask for many virtues--only honesty and diligence--from the poor. When a
man acquires wealth we look for his better qualities.'

'Yes, indeed,' Hilda murmured. 'His better qualities begin to
show.--Elsie, dear, that is a very pretty frock. I don't think I have
seen it before. How do you like my dress?'

George accepted this sudden turn in opinion with smiles. He laughed at
it afterwards. For the moment it made him feel almost as if he was being
rewarded for some virtuous action.

Dinner was announced at seven--such were the old-fashioned manners of
this old gentleman. He led in Mrs. Arundel, and placed Elsie on his
left. At first, the dinner promised to be a silent feast. The two lovers
were not disposed to talk much--they had not yet recovered from the
overwhelming and astonishing events of the day. Sir Samuel never talked
at the beginning of dinner--besides, there was turtle soup and red
mullet and whitebait--it is sinful to divert your attention from these
good creatures. His wife never talked at dinner or at any other time
more than she could help. Your statuesque beauty seldom does. Talking
much involves smiling and even laughing, which distorts the face. A
woman must encourage men to talk: this she can do without saying much
herself.

Presently Mr. Dering roused himself and began to talk, with a visible
effort, first to Mrs. Arundel of things casual: then to Elsie: and then
to his brother, but always with an effort, as if he was thinking of
other things. And a constraint fell upon the party.

When the cloth was removed and the wine and fruit placed upon the dark
and lustrous board, he filled a glass and made a kind little speech.

'My Partner,'he said, 'I drink to you. May your connection with the
House be prosperous! It is a very great good fortune for me to have
found such a Partner.--Elsie, I join you with my Partner. I wish you
both every happiness.'

He drained the bumper and sent round the decanters.

Then he began to talk, and his discourse was most strange. 'Had it
been,' said his brother afterwards, 'the idle fancies of some
crackbrained writing fellow, I could have understood it; but from
him--from a steady old solicitor--a man who has never countenanced any
kind of nonsense--to be sure he said it was only an illusion. I hope it
isn't a softening. Who ever heard of such a man as that having dreams
and illusions?'

Certainly no one had ever before heard Mr. Dering talk in this new
manner. As a rule, he was silent and grave even at the head of his own
table. He spoke little and then gravely. To-night his talk as well as
his face was changed. Who would have thought that Mr. Dering should
confess to illusions, and should relate dreams, and should be visited by
such dreams? Remember that the speaker was seventy-five years of age,
and that he had never before been known so much as to speak of
benevolence. Then you will understand something of the bewilderment
which fell upon the whole company.

He began by raising his head and smiling with a strange and new
benignity--but Elsie thought of her portrait. 'We are all one family
here,' he said; 'and I may talk. I want to tell you of a very remarkable
thing that has recently happened to me. It has been growing, I now
perceive, for some years. But it now holds me strongly, and it is one
reason why I am anxious to have the affairs of the House in the hands of
a younger man. For it may be a sign of the end. At seventy-five anything
uncommon may be a sign.'

'You look well, Mr. Dering, and as strong as most men of sixty,' said
Mrs. Arundel.

'Perhaps. I feel well and strong. The fact is that I am troubled--or
pleased--or possessed--by an Illusion.'

'You with an Illusion?' said his brother.

'I myself. An Illusion possesses me. It whispers me from time to time
that my life is wholly spent in promoting the happiness of other
people.'

'Well,' said his brother, 'since you are a first-class solicitor, and
manage the affairs of many people very much to their advantage, you
certainly do promote their happiness.'

'Yes, yes--I suppose so. My Illusion further is that it is done outside
my business--without any bill afterwards'--Checkley looked up with eyes
wide open--'I am made to believe that I am working and living for the
good of others. A curious Illusion, is it not?'

The City man shook his head. 'That any man can possibly live for the
good of others is, I take it, always and under all circumstances an
Illusion. In the present state of society--and a very admirable state it
is'--he rolled his bald head as he spoke and his voice had a rich roll
in it--'a man's first duty--his second duty--his third duty--his
hundredth duty--is to himself. In the City it is his business to amass
wealth--to roll it up--roll it up'--he expressed the words with
feeling--'to invest it profitably--to watch it, and to nurse it as it
fructifies--fructifies. Afterwards, when he is rich enough, if ever a
man can be rich enough, he may exercise as much charity as he
pleases--as he pleases. Charity seems to please some people as a glass
of fine wine'--he illustrated the comparison--'pleases the
palate--pleases the palate.'

The lawyer listened politely and inclined his head.

'There is at least some method in my Illusion,' he went on. 'You
mentioned it. The solicitor is always occupied with the conduct of other
people's affairs. That must be admitted. He is always engaged in
considering how best to guide his fellow-man through the labyrinthine
world. He receives his fellow-man at his entrance into the world, as a
ward: he receives him grown up, as a client: he advises him all his life
at every step and in every emergency. If the client goes into
partnership, or marries, or buys a house, or builds one, or gets into
trouble, the solicitor assists and advises him. When the client grows
old, the solicitor makes his will. When the client dies, the solicitor
becomes his executor and his trustee, and administers his estate for
him. It is thus a life, as I said, entirely spent for other people. I
know not of any other, unless it be of medicine, that so much can be
said. And think what terrors, what anxieties, what disappointments, the
solicitor witnesses and alleviates! Think of the family scandals he
hushes up and keeps secret! Good heavens! if a solicitor in large
practice were to tell what he knows, think of the terrible disclosures!
He knows every thing. He knows more than a Roman Catholic priest,
because his penitents not only reveal their own sins but also those of
their wives and sons and friends and partners. And anxiety, I may tell
you, makes a man better at confessing than penitence. Sometimes we bring
actions at law and issue writs and so forth. Well now: this part of our
business, which is disagreeable to us, is actually the most beneficent
of any. Because, by means of the cases brought before the High Court of
Justice, we remind the world that it must be law abiding as well as law
worthy. The Law, in order to win respect, must first win fear. Force
comes before order. The memory of force must be kept up. The presence
of force must be felt. For instance, I have a libel case just begun. It
is rather a bad libel. My libeller will suffer: he will bleed: but he
will bleed for the public good, because thousands who are only anxious
to libel and slander, to calumniate and defame their neighbours, will be
deterred. Oh! it will be a most beneficent case--far reaching--striking
terror into the hearts of ill-doers.--Well--this, my friends, is my
Illusion. It is, I suppose, one of the many Illusions with which we
cheat old age and rob it of its terrors. To everybody else I am a
hard-fisted lawyer, exacting his pound of flesh from the unfortunate
debtor, and making myself rich at the expense of the creditor.'

'Nonsense about how a man gets rich,' said the man of business. 'He can
only get rich if he is capable. Quite right. Let the weak go under. Let
the careless and the lazy starve.'

'At the same time,' said Elsie softly, 'it is not all illusion. There
are others besides the careless and the lazy----'

'Sometimes,' the old lawyer went on, 'this Illusion of mine--oh! I know
it is only Illusion--takes the form of a dream--so vivid that it comes
back to me afterwards as a reality. In this dream, which is always the
same, I seem to have been engaged in some great scheme of practical
benevolence.'

'Practical---- What? You engaged in Practical Benevolence?' the City man
asked in profound astonishment. The Illusion was astonishing enough; but
to have his brother talk of practical benevolence was amazing indeed.

'Practical benevolence,' repeated Mr. Dering. His voice dropped. His
eyes looked out into space: he seemed as one who narrates a story. 'It
is a curiously persistent dream. It comes at irregular intervals; it
pleases me while it lasts.--Oh! in the evening after dinner, while one
takes a nap in the easy chair, perhaps--it is, as I said, quite vivid.
The action of this dream always takes place in the same room--a large
room, plainly furnished, and looking out upon an open space--I should
know it if I saw it--and it fills me with pleasure--in my dream--just to
feel that I am--there is no other word for it--diffusing happiness. How
I manage this diffusion, I can never remember; but there it is--good
solid happiness, such as, in waking moments, one feels to be
impossible.'

'Diffusing happiness--you!' said his brother.

'A very beautiful dream,' said Elsie. But no one dared to look in each
other's face.

'This strange dream of mine,' continued Mr. Dering, 'does not form part
of that little Illusion, though it seems connected with it. And as I
said, mostly it comes in the evening. The other day, however, I had it
in the afternoon--went to sleep in my office, I suppose.--Did you find
me asleep, Checkley? It was on Friday.'

'No. On Friday afternoon you went out.'

'Ah! When I came back, then-- I had forgotten that I went out. Did I go
out? Strange! Never mind. This continuous dream opens up a world of new
ideas and things which are, I perceive, when I am awake, quite unreal
and illusory. Yet they please. I see myself, as I said, diffusing
happiness with open hands. The world which is thus made happier consists
entirely of poor people. I move among them unseen: I listen to them: I
see what they do, and I hear what they say. Mind--all this is as real
and true to me as if it actually happened. And it fills me with
admiration of the blessed state of poverty. In my dream I pity the rich,
with all my heart. To get rich, I think--in this dream--they must have
practised so many deceptions----'

'Brother! brother!' Sir Samuel held up both hands.

'In my dream--only in my dream. Those who inherit riches are burdened
with the weight of their wealth, which will not suffer them to enter
into the arena; will not allow them to develop and to exercise their
talents, and afflicts them with the mental and bodily diseases that
belong to indolence. The poor, on the other hand, who live from day to
day, sometimes out of work for weeks together, practise easily the
simple virtues of brotherly love, charity, and mutual helpfulness. They
have learned to combine for the good of all rather than to fight, one
against another, for selfish gain. It is the only world where all are
borrowing and lending, giving and helping.'

'Brother, this dream of yours is like a socialistic tract.'

'It may be. Yet you see how strongly it takes hold of me, that while I
see the absurdity of the whole thing, it is not unpleasing to recall the
recollection of it. Well--I do not know what set me talking about this
dream.'

The smiles left his face: he became grave again: he ceased to talk: for
the rest of the evening he was once more the old solicitor, weighed down
with the affairs of other people.

'Checkley'--it was on the doorstep, and Sir Samuel waited while his wife
said a few fond things to her sister--'what the devil came over my
brother to-night?'

'I don't know indeed, Sir Samuel. I never heard him talk like that
before. Doin' good to 'em? Servin' a writ upon 'em is more our line. I
think he must be upset somewhere in his inside, and it's gone to his
head.'

'Practical benevolence! Living for other people! Have you heard him
complain of anything?'

'No, Sir Samuel. He never complains. Eats hearty, walks upright and
strong, works like he always has worked.--Doin' good! And the
blessedness of being pore! Seems most wonderful. Blessedness of being
pore! Well, Sir Samuel, I've enjoyed that blessedness myself, and I know
what it's like. Any or'nary preachin' chap might talk that nonsense; but
for your eminent brother, Sir Samuel, such a lawyer as him--to be
talking such stuff--if I may humbly so speak of my learned master's
words--it is--Sir Samuel--it really is amazing!'

'He said it was a dream, remember. But I agree with you, Checkley.--It
is amazing.'

'Humph! The blessedness of being pore! And over such a glass of port,
too! I thought I should ha' rolled off my chair--I did, indeed.--Here's
your good lady, Sir Samuel.'



'Elsie,' said Mrs. Arundel in the carriage, 'I think it was high time
that Mr. Dering should take a partner. He to dream of practical
benevolence! He to be diffusing happiness with open hands! Oh! most
lamentable--I call it. However, the deeds are signed, and we are all
right. In case of anything happening, it is a comfort to think that
George's position would be only improved.'




CHAPTER IX

AT THE GATES OF PARADISE


Many women have advanced the doctrine that the happiest time of life is
that of their engagement. Of course no man can possibly understand this
theory; but from a woman's point of view it can be defended, because it
is for some girls the most delightful thing in the world to be wooed;
and until the church service is actually said and the ring is on the
finger, the bride is Queen and Mistress; afterwards--not always. But the
happiness of it depends upon its being a courtship without obstacles.
Now, in the case of the young couple whose fortunes we are following,
there was plenty of love with excellent wooing; but the engagement had
been opposed by the whole tribe of Arundels, so that every time she met
her lover it was in open rebellion against her mother. To go home from a
walk with him only to find the silence of resentment at home was not
pleasant. Again, we have seen how they were looking forward to a life of
poverty--even of privation. Dame Penury with her pinching ways and
shrewish tongue was going to be their constant lodger. Then the young
man could not choose but ask himself whether he was not a selfish beast
to take a girl out of plenty into privation. And the girl could not
choose but ask herself whether she was not selfish in laying this great
burden upon the back of her lover. No one can be indifferent to such a
prospect: no one can contemplate with pleasure the cheeseparings, the
savings, the management of such a life: no one can like having to make a
penny do the work of sixpence: no one can rejoice as one steps down,
down, down the social ladder: no one can anticipate with satisfaction
the loss of gentlehood for the daughters, and the loss of an adequate
education for the sons.

'You will make me happy,' said the lover, 'at the cost of everything
that makes life happy for yourself.'

'If I make you happy,' said the girl, 'I ask for nothing more. But oh! I
am laying a heavy burden upon you. Can you bear it? Will you never blame
me if the burden is greater than you can bear?'

And now all the trouble vanished like a cloud from the morning
sky--vanished so completely that there was not a trace of it left
anywhere. The accusing figure of her mother was changed into a smiling
face of pleased and satisfied maternity: reproaches were turned into
words of endearment, angry looks to presents and caresses. And as for
her sister, you might have thought that all this good fortune was
actually achieved and conquered by Elsie--otherwise, how could one
justify the praise and flattery that Hilda now lavished upon her? She
gave a great dinner as a kind of official reception of the bridegroom
into the family; she also gave a dance, at which she herself was the
most beautiful woman--she stood in a conspicuous place all the evening,
magnificently dressed, statuesque, wonderful: and Elsie was the
prettiest girl at the party; but between the most beautiful woman and
the prettiest girl was a difference! There is nothing like good fortune
to bring out a girl's good qualities: Elsie had always had friends, now
she might have numbered them by hundreds. Good fortune breeds friends as
the sunshine creates the flowers. She was congratulated, caressed, and
flattered enough to turn her head. Now, girls are so constituted that
they love admiration, which is a kind of affection, even when it takes
the form of flattery: and their heads may be easily turned; but they are
as easily turned back again. And the house--the widow's house--which for
so many years had been so dull and quiet a place, was transformed into a
place of entertainment. It only wanted coloured lamps to make it another
Vauxhall: it was crowded every night with the younger friends of bride
and bridegroom. George had many friends. He was gregarious by nature: he
was a rowing man on the athletic side: he had a healthy love and a light
hand for things like billiards, shooting, and fishing: they are tastes
which assist in the creation of friendships.

These friends--young fellows of like mind--came to the house in
multitudes to rally round the man about to desert their ranks. Young men
are forgiving: George would row no more among them: he would be lost to
the billiard table, and to the club itself: yet they forgave him, and
accepted his invitation and went to see the bride. They found her with
the friends of her own age. Heavens! how the daring of one man in taking
away a maiden from the band encourages others! There are six love
stories at least, all rising out of these evenings, and all of
surpassing interest, had one the time to write them. They are both grave
and gay: there are tears in every one: the course of true love in no
case ran smooth except in the Story of the Two Stupids. Love's enemies
can never effect aught against a Stupid, and so these two Stupids became
engaged without opposition, and were married with acclamations; but they
are too Stupid--perhaps--to know their own happiness.

All this went on for three weeks. It was arranged that the happy pair
should be married in the middle of August: they had resolved to spend
their honeymoon in France, staying a few days in Paris, and then going
on to see the towns and the country along the Loire, with the old city
of Tours for their centre. They proposed to live entirely upon fruit and
wine and kisses. No place in the world like Touraine for those who are
so young, and so much in love, and so perfectly satisfied with so simple
a diet. Even for those who take a cutlet with the fruit and the wine,
there is no place equal to Touraine. Meantime, against the home-coming,
a desirable flat was secured, not one of your little economical flats,
all drawing-room with two or three rabbit-hutches for bedrooms, but a
large and highly decorated flat with all the newest appliances, large
rooms, and a lift and plenty of space for the dinner-parties and
receptions which Elsie would have to give. The servants were engaged.
The furniture was ordered, all in the advanced taste of the
day--carpets, curtains, pictures, over-mantels, cabinets, screens. Elsie
went every day to her new home and found something omitted, and sat down
in it to wonder what it would be like--this new life she was entering
upon. Oh! it was a busy time.--Then there was her trousseau--everybody
knows the amount of thought and care required for a trousseau: this was
approaching completion--everybody knows the happiness, peculiar, and
unlike any other kind of happiness, with which a girl contemplates a
heap of 'things,' all her own. I suppose that it is only at her wedding
that she can enjoy this happiness, for afterwards, the 'things' are not
her own, but the things of the family. The bride's dress, another thing
of supreme importance, had been tried on, though as yet it was very,
very far from being finished. The bridesmaids, two of George's sisters,
had also already tried on their dresses. They came every day, two very
sweet girls, who have both to do with those six love stories which will
never, I fear, be told, to talk over the events and to see the presents.
These came in daily, and were laid out in a room by themselves, looking
very splendid: their splendour proved the wealth and the position of the
pair, because rich presents are only given to rich people.

In a word, everybody was heartily, loyally sympathetic, as if to make up
for the previous harshness and coldness. For four weeks this happiness
lasted! It was on Monday, June 29, that the golden shower descended upon
them: it was on Monday, July 20, that the rain of gold ceased, and
another kind of cloud came up which speedily changed into a driving
storm of rain and sleet and hail and ice and snow.

Look at them on Sunday. Before the storm there is generally a brief time
of sunshine, warm and fine: after the storm, the calm that follows is a
time of dismay, speechless and tearless. Sunday was the day before the
storm: it was a day of sunshine without and within. The lovers spent the
whole day together, hand in hand. They went to church together: they sat
side by side, they warbled off the same hymn book. The service proved,
as the preacher used to say, a season of refreshment, for never doth
religion so uplift the soul as when it is entirely happy: the voices of
the choir chanting the psalms filled them with joy, and would have done
so even if they had been penitential minors, and the lamentation of a
sinner. Their hearts rose higher and higher as the preacher exhorted,
and would have flown upwards just as much whether he had brandished the
terrors of the law or held out the gracious promise of the Gospel. For
you see, at such a time as this, whatever was said or done only led this
faithful pair farther and deeper into the shady glades and fragrant
lawns and flowery dells of Love's Paradise.

Every church, at every service, and especially in the evening, contains
many such lovers. You may know them by certain infallible signs. They
sit very close together: they sing off the same book: their faces betray
by the rigidity of their attitude, which is that of pretended attention,
the far-away expression of their eyes, and the absence of any external
sign of emotion or sympathy with the preacher, that their hands, beneath
some folds of the feminine gabardine, are closely clasped. It has
sometimes pleased the philosopher and relieved the tedium of a dull
sermon to look round the congregation and to pick out the lovers--here a
pair and there a pair. Even in the church, you see, Love is conqueror
and king.

These lovers, therefore, went to church in a frame of mind truly
heavenly: nobody in the whole congregation felt more deeply pious: every
response was an Act of Praise: every prayer an Act of Gratitude: every
hymn a personal Thank-offering. But beneath those seemingly calm faces
was flying and rushing a whirlwind of hopes, memories, plans, projects,
and gratitudes. He who looks back upon the days immediately before his
wedding-day--most men no more remember their own emotions than a child
remembers yesterday's earache--will wonder how he lived through that
time of change, when all that he prayed for was granted, but on the
condition of a turning upside down of all his habits, customs, and
petted ways.

All round them sat the people, no doubt with minds wholly attuned to the
service of Prayer and Praise. Well, the sheep in a flock to outward
seeming are all alike, yet every animal has his own desires and small
ambitions for himself. So I suppose with the congregation. As every man
shuts the street door behind him and trudges along the way to
church--the _Via Sacra_--with wife and children, he carries in his
waistcoat pocket, close to his heart, a little packet of business cares
to think upon during the sermon. And if all the thoughts of all the
people could be collected after the sermon instead of the offertory,
they would make a salutary oblation indeed.

'George,' said Elsie, as they came out, 'let us go into the Gardens and
sit under a tree and talk. Let us get away from everybody for half an
hour.'

Kensington Gardens were filled with the customary throng of those who,
like themselves, had been to church. The carping philosopher says unkind
things about Church, and Gardens, and Fashion. As if Church would ever
keep like from congregating with like! There were shoals of beautiful
girls, dressed as well as they knew or could afford: dozens of young
fellows, and with them the no longer quite so young, the no longer
young, the no longer young at all, the middle-aged, the elderly and the
old, not to speak of the children. Elsie looked up and down the walk.
'We are never so much alone as in a crowd,' she said, with the air that
some girls assume of saying an original thing which no woman ever did
say yet, unless by accident. They joined the stream: presently George
led the girl out of the road and across the grass to a place where two
or three chairs were set under the trees. They sat down. Then occurred
the miracle wrought in these gardens every day and all day long. Out of
the ground sprang a man--for such he seemed, though doubtless a
spirit-messenger--who demanded twopence. This paid, he vanished
straightway. After this ceremony they talked.

'George,' said the girl, 'every day now, wherever I am, even at church,
I feel as if I should like to jump up and sing and dance. This morning I
should have liked a service all to ourselves--you to read and I to sing:
you to pray and I to praise. I kept wondering if there was any girl in
the place so happy as myself--or so unhappy as I was three short weeks
ago.'

'Elsie,' said George--a simple thing to say, but it had a thousand
meanings.

'We have not deserved it. Indeed, indeed--we have not. Why are we
singled out for such joy? We already had the greatest thing of all--we
had love. That is happiness enough for some women. We only wanted a
little more money, and now we have all this great fortune.'

'It is wonderful, Elsie!'

She laid her hand on his and spoke in her sweet low voice, gazing
upwards. 'George! I am so happy, that I want everybody else to be happy
as well. The angels, I am sure, must lose some of their joy in wishing
that all were with them. I pity all those poor girls who have no lovers:
all those poor married people who are lying in poverty: all those poor
creatures who are trying for what they cannot get; all those who are
weeping outside the gates of Heaven. George, it is a beautiful world,
and it should be such a happy world: there should be nothing but joy all
through life. There is such an abundance of happiness possible in it.
Sadness is only a passing cloud: anxiety is only a touch of east wind:
evil and pain are only fleeting shadows.'

She sighed and clasped her hands, and the tears rose to her eyes.

'We shall grow old together, George,' she went on, murmuring rather than
speaking.--I omit her lover's interruptions and interjections.--'You
will always love me, long after my beauty--you know you will call it
beauty, George--is past and gone: even when I am a poor old crone
doubled up in my arm-chair: you will always love me. My life will be
full--full--full of love. Perhaps----' Here her face flushed, and she
stopped. 'We shall have no trouble about money: we shall go on always
learning more and more, growing wiser and wiser and wiser. You will be a
wise and good man, thinking and working all your life for other people,
just as Mr. Dering imagined--three weeks ago. Everybody will love and
respect you. Then you will grow grey-headed, you poor, dear boy; and all
the world will say how wise and strong you are; and I shall be prouder
of my old husband than even I was of my young lover. The life that
others have dreamed, we shall live. Every day shall come laden with its
own joy, so that we would not, if we could help it, suffer it to go
away.' She struck a deeper note, and her voice trembled and sank and her
eyes filled with tears: 'Life shall be all happiness, as God intended
for us. Even Death will be little sorrow, for the separation will be so
short.' Once more she laid her hand on his.

Even to the most frivolous, the prospect of the wedded life awakens
grave and solemn thoughts: for those who have eyes to see and ears to
hear and brains to understand, there is no prospect so charged with
chances and possibilities, where even life itself may become a Death in
Life.

When George left her in the evening, he drove to see Athelstan.

'So,' he said, 'you have been courting all day, I suppose. You ought to
have had enough of it. Sit down and have something--a pipe--a
cigar.--Well--you are going to be very jolly, I suppose. Elsie's little
fortune will help a bit, won't it?'

'I should think so, indeed.'

'Yes--I've been very glad, ever since you told me that the child had had
this stroke of luck. I wonder who gave her the money? To be sure, there
is plenty of money knocking about among the Arundels. Most of us have
had a sort of instinct for making money. Put us down anywhere among a
lot of men in a city, and we begin to transfer the contents of their
pockets to our own.'

'Meanwhile, give up this old resentment. Come back to your own people.
Come to our wedding.'

'I cannot possibly, unless you will tell me who forged that cheque. How
could I go back to people who still believe me guilty? When you are
married, I will go and see Elsie, which I can do with a light heart. You
have not told any one about my return?'

'Certainly not. No one suspects, and no one talks or thinks about you.'

Athelstan laughed a little. 'That is a doubtful piece of information. Am
I to rejoice or to weep, because I am completely forgotten and out of
mind? It is rather humiliating, isn't it?'

'You are not forgotten at all. That is a different thing. Only they do
not speak of you.'

'Well, George, never mind that now. I am glad you came to-night, because
I have some news for you. I have found the commissionaire who took the
cheque to the Bank--actually found the man.'

'No! After all these years?'

'I wrote out the particulars of the case--briefly. Yesterday I took the
paper to the commissionaires' barrack in the Strand and offered a reward
for the recovery of the man who had cashed the cheque. That same evening
the man presented himself and claimed the reward. He remembered the
thing very well--for this reason: the gentleman who employed him first
sent him with a bag to a Parcel Delivery Office: he did not look at the
address. The gentleman was staying at the Cecil Hotel. Now the
commissionaire was a one-armed man. Because he had only one arm, the
gentleman--who was a pleasant-spoken gentleman--gave him ten shillings
for his trouble, which was nine shillings more than his proper pay. The
gentleman sent him to the Bank with this cheque to cash, and he returned
with seven hundred and twenty pounds in ten-pound notes. Then it was
that the gentleman--who seems to have been a free-handed gentleman--gave
him the ten shillings. The man says that he would know that gentleman
anywhere. He was old, and had grey hair. He says that he should know him
wherever he saw him. What do you think of that?'

'Well--it is something, if you could find that old man.'

'Why, of course it was Checkley--grey-haired Checkley. We'll catch that
old fox, yet. Beware of Checkley. He's a Fox. He's a Worm. He's a
creeping Centipede. When the old man goes, you must make Checkley
pack.'




CHAPTER X

A MYSTERIOUS DISCOVERY


On Monday morning the Unexpected happened. It came with more than common
malignity. In fact, nothing more threatening to the persons chiefly
concerned in the calamity could have happened, though at first they were
happily spared the comprehension of its full significance.

There is a wide-spread superstition--so wide that it must be true--that
at those rare moments when one feels foolishly happy, at peace with all
the world, at peace with one's own conscience, all injuries forgiven,
the future stretched out before like a sunlit peaceful lake, some
disaster, great or small, is certainly imminent. 'Don't feel too happy,'
says Experience Universal. The Gods resent the happiness of man. Affect
a little anxiety. Assume a certain sadness. Restrain that dancing leg.
If you must shake it, do so as if by accident, or as if in terror--for
choice, shake it over an open grave in the churchyard. Stop singing that
song of joy; try the Lamentation of a Sinner instead. So will the Gods
be deceived. Above all, never allow yourself to believe that the Devil
is dead. He is not even asleep. By carefully observing these
precautions, a great many misfortunes may be averted. If, for instance,
George had gone home soberly on Sunday night instead of carrying on like
a schoolboy in playtime, obviously happy, and so inviting calamity,
perhaps he would never have been connected--as he afterwards
became--with this disaster.

You have heard that Mr. Dering was a man of method. Every morning he
arrived at his office at a quarter before ten: he hung up his coat and
hat in a recess behind the door: he then opened his safe with his own
hand. Checkley had already laid out the table with a clean blotting-pad,
pens, and letter-paper: he had also placed the letters of the day upon
the pad. The reading of the letters began the day's work. The lawyer
read them, made notes upon them, rang for his shorthand clerk, and
dictated answers. These dispatched, he turned to the standing business.
This morning, with the usual routine, he was plodding through the
letters of the day, taking up one after the other, and reading half
mechanically. Presently he opened one, and looked at the heading. 'Ellis
& Northcote,' he said. 'What do they want?' Then he suddenly stopped
short and started. Then he began the letter again, and again he stopped
short. It was from his brokers in the City, and it recommended a certain
advantageous investment. That was not in itself very extraordinary. But
it contained the following remarkable passage: 'You have made such great
transfers and so many sales during the last few months that you have
probably more profitable uses for money in your own business. But if you
should have a few thousands available at the present moment, it is a
most favourable opportunity----'

'Great transfers and many sales?' asked Mr. Dering, bewildered. 'What
transfers? What sales does he mean?'

He turned over the pages of his Diary. He could find no transactions of
the kind at all. Then he reflected again. 'I can remember no transfers,'
he murmured. 'Is this another trick of memory?'

Finally, he touched the bell upon his table.

'Checkley,' said Mr. Dering, on the appearance of the ancient clerk, 'I
have got a letter that I don't understand at all. I told you that my
memory was going. Now you see. Here is a letter about transfers and
sales of stock. What transfers? I don't understand one word of it. My
memory is not only going--it is gone.'

'Memory going? Nonsense,' the old man shook his head. 'No--no; your
memory is all right. Mine is as clear as a bell. So's yours. You eat
hearty. So do I. You sleep well. So do I. We're both as hale and hearty
as ever.'

'No--no. My memory is not what it was. I've told you so a dozen times. I
lose myself sometimes. Yesterday, when the clock struck twelve, I
thought it was only ten. I had lost two hours. And sometimes when I walk
home, I lose recollection of the walk afterwards.'

'Tut, tut; nobody of your age is such a young man as you. Why, you walk
like five-and-twenty. And you eat hearty--you eat very hearty.' His
words were encouraging, but he looked anxiously at his master. Truly,
there was no apparent decay in Mr. Dering. He sat as upright: he looked
as keen: he spoke as clearly, as ever.

'Well--about this letter. My friend Ellis, of Ellis & Northcote, writes
to me about something or other, and speaks of my effecting great
transfers and sales of stock lately. What does he mean?'

'You haven't bought or sold any stock lately, that I know of.'

'Well, you would have known.--Have we had to make any investments for
clients of late? There was the Dalton-Smith estate.'

'That was eleven months ago.'

'I suppose he must mean that--he can't mean anything else. Yes, that is
it. Well--I've got a Partner now, so that it matters less than it would
have done--had my memory played me tricks with no other responsible man
in the place.'

'You didn't want a partner,' said Checkley jealously. 'You had ME.'

'He must mean that,' Mr. Dering repeated. 'He can't mean anything else.
However--has my Bank book been made up lately?'

'Here it is. Made up last Friday. Nothing been in or out since.'

Mr. Dering had not looked at his book for three or four months. He was
well served: his people took care of his Bank book. Now he opened it,
and began to run his finger up and down the pages.

'Checkley,' he said, 'what has happened to Newcastle Corporation Stock?
The dividends were due some weeks ago. They are not paid yet. Is the
town gone bankrupt? And--eh? Where is Wolverhampton? And--and----' He
turned over the paper quickly. 'Checkley, there is something wrong with
the book. Not a single dividend of anything entered for the last four
months. There ought to have been about six hundred pounds in that time.'

'Queer mistake,' said Checkley. 'I'll take the book round to the Bank,
and have it corrected.'

'A very gross and careless mistake, I call it. Tell the manager I said
so. Let it be set right at once, Checkley--at once--and while you wait.
And bring it back to me.'

The Bank was in Chancery Lane, close to the office. The old clerk went
off on his errand.

'A very careless mistake,' the lawyer repeated; 'any clerk of mine who
committed such a mistake should be dismissed at once.' In fact, the
certainty of full and speedy justice kept Mr. Dering's clerks always at
a high level of efficiency.

He returned to the letters, apparently with no further uneasiness.

After ten minutes, Checkley taking longer than he expected, Mr. Dering
became aware that his attention was wandering. 'Great transfers and many
sales,' he repeated. 'After all, he must mean the investment of that
Dalton-Smith money. Yet that was only a single transaction. What can he
mean? He must have made a mistake. He must be thinking of another
client. It's his memory, not mine, that is confused. That's it--his
memory.'

The large open safe in the corner was filled with stacks of paper tied
up and endorsed. These papers contained, among other things, the
securities for the whole of Mr. Dering's private fortune, which was now
very considerable. Even the greatest City magnate would feel for Mr.
Dering the respect due to wealth if he knew the amount represented by
the contents of that safe. There they were, the leases, agreements,
mortgages, deeds, bonds, conveyances, shares, all the legal documents by
which the wicked man is prevented from seizing and appropriating the
rich man's savings. Formerly the rich man kept his money in a box with
iron bands. He locked up the box and put it in a recess in the cellar
contrived in the stone wall. If he was only a bourgeois, it was but a
little box, and he put it in a secret place (but everybody knew the
secret) at the head of his bed. If he were a peasant, he tied his money
up in a clout and put it under the hearthstone. In any case, thieves
broke in and stole those riches. Now, grown wiser, he has no box of
treasures at all: he lends it all in various directions and to various
associations and companies. Every rich man is a money-lender: he is
either Shylock the Great or Shylock the Less, according to the amount he
lends. Thieves can steal nothing but paper which is no use to them. As
we grow wiser still, we shall have nothing at all in any house that can
be of any use to any thief, because everything in the least valuable
will have its papers, without the production of which nothing of value
will be bought or sold. And all the gold and silver, whether forks or
mugs, will be lodged in the Bank. Then everybody will become honest, and
the Eighth Commandment will be forgotten.

Among Mr. Dering's papers were share certificates, bonds, and scrip of
various kinds, amounting in all to a great many thousands. Of this money
a sum of nearly thirteen thousand pounds belonged to Elsie, but was
still in her guardian's name. This, of course, was the fortune which had
fallen so unexpectedly into the girl's hands. The rest, amounting to
about twenty-five thousand pounds, was his own money. It represented of
course only a part, only a small part, of his very respectable fortune.

Mr. Dering, whose memory, if it was decaying, was certainly clear on
some points, looked across the room at the open safe, and began to think
of the papers representing their investments. He remembered perfectly
all the different Corporation Stock. All the water, gas, railway shares,
the Indian Stock and the Colonial Stock: the Debenture companies and the
Trading companies. He was foolish, he thought, to be disturbed by a mere
mistake of the broker: his recent lapses of memory had made him nervous:
there could be nothing wrong: but that clerk at the Bank ought to be
dismissed for carelessness. There could be nothing wrong: for the sake
of assurance he would turn out the papers: but there could be nothing
wrong.

He knew very well where they were; everything in his office had its
place: they were all tied up together in a bulky parcel, bestowed upon a
certain shelf or compartment of the safe. He pushed back his chair, got
up, and walked over to the safe.

Strange! The papers were not in their place. Again he felt the former
irritation at having forgotten something. It was always returning: every
day he seemed to be forgetting something. But the certificates must be
in the safe. He stood irresolutely looking at the piles of papers,
trying to think how they could have been displaced. While he was thus
wondering and gazing, Checkley came back, Bank-book in hand.

'There is something wrong,' he said. 'No dividends at all have been paid
to your account for the last three months. There is no mistake at the
Bank. I've seen the manager, and he's looked into it, and says there
can't be any mistake about the entries.'

'No dividends? What is the meaning of it, Checkley? No dividends? Why,
there's thirty-eight thousand pounds worth of stock. The certificates
are kept here in the safe; only, for some reason or other, I can't find
them at the moment. They must be in the safe somewhere. Just help me to
find them, will you?'

He began to search among the papers, at first a little anxiously, then
nervously, then feverishly.

'Where are they?' he cried, tossing over the bundles. 'They must be
here. They must be here. Let us turn out the whole contents of the safe.
We must find them. They have never been kept in any other place. Nobody
has touched them or seen them except myself.'

The old clerk pulled out all the papers in the safe and laid them in a
great pile on the table. When there was nothing left in the safe, they
began systematically to go through the whole. When they had finished,
they looked at each other blankly.

Everything was there except the certificates and scrip representing the
investment of thirty-eight thousand pounds. These alone could not be
found. They examined every packet: they opened every bundle of papers:
they looked into every folded sheet of parchment or foolscap. The
certificates were not in the safe. 'Well,' said the clerk at last,
'they're not here, you see.--Now then!'

In the midst of their perplexity happened a thing almost as surprising
and quite as unexpected as the loss of the certificates. Among the
papers was a small round parcel tied up with red tape. Checkley opened
it. 'Bank-notes,' he said, and laid it aside. They were not at the
moment looking for bank-notes, but for certificates. When he was
satisfied that these were not in the safe, and had thrown, so to speak,
the responsibility of finding out the cause of their absence upon his
master, he took up once more this bundle. It was, as he had said, a
bundle of bank-notes rolled up and tied round. He untied the knot and
laid them flat, turning up the corners and counting. 'Curious,' he said;
'they're all ten-pound notes--all ten-pound notes: there must be more
than fifty of them. And the outside one is covered with dust. What are
they?'

'How should I know?' said Mr. Dering irritably. 'Give them to me.
Bank-notes? There are no bank-notes in my safe.'

'Forgotten!' the clerk murmured. 'Clients' money, perhaps. But the
client would have asked for it. Five or six hundred pounds. How can five
hundred pounds be forgotten? Even a Rothschild would remember five
hundred pounds. Forgotten!' He glanced suspiciously at his master, and
shook his head, fumbling among the papers.

Mr. Dering snatched the bundle from his clerk. Truly, they were
bank-notes--ten-pound bank-notes; and they had been forgotten. The clerk
was right. There is no Firm in the world where a bundle worth five
hundred pounds could be forgotten and no inquiry made after it. Mr.
Dering stared blankly at them. 'Notes!' he cried--'notes! Ten-pound
notes. What notes?--Checkley, how did these notes come here?'

'If you don't know,' the clerk replied, 'nobody knows. You've got the
key of the safe.'

'Good Heavens!' If Mr. Dering had been twenty years younger, he would
have jumped. Men of seventy-five are not allowed to jump. The dignity of
age does not allow of jumping. 'This is most wonderful! Checkley, this
is most mysterious!'

'What is it?'

'These notes--the Devil is in the safe to-day, I do believe. First the
certificates are lost; that is, they can't be found--and next these
notes turn up.'

'What notes are they, then?'

'They are nothing else than the bank-notes paid across the counter for
that forged cheque of eight years ago. Oh! there is no doubt of it--none
whatever. I remember the numbers--the consecutive numbers--seventy-two
of them--seven hundred and twenty pounds. How did they get here? Who put
them in? Checkley, I say, how did these notes get here?'

He held the notes in his hand and asked these questions in pure
bewilderment, and not in the expectation of receiving any reply.

'The notes paid to that young gentleman when he forged the cheque,' said
Checkley, 'must have been put back in the safe by him. There's no other
way to account for it. He was afraid to present them. He heard you say
they were stopped, and he put them back. I think I see him doing it.
While he was flaring out, he done it--I'm sure I see him doing it.'

Mr. Dering received this suggestion without remark. He laid down the
notes and stared at his clerk. The two old men stared blankly at each
other. Perhaps Checkley's countenance, of the two, expressed the greater
astonishment.

'How did those notes get into the safe?' the lawyer repeated. 'This is
even a more wonderful thing than the mislaying of the certificates. You
took them out. Show me exactly where they were lying.'

'They were behind these books. See! the outside note is covered with
dust.'

'They must have been lying there all these years. In my safe! The very
notes paid across the counter to the forger's messenger! In my safe!
What does this mean? I feel as if I was going mad. I say-- What does all
this mean, Checkley?'

The clerk made answer slowly, repeating his former suggestion.

'Since young Arundel forged the cheque, young Arundel got the notes.
Since young Arundel got the notes, young Arundel must have put them
back. No one else could. When young Arundel put them back, he done it
because he was afraid of your finding out. He put them back unseen by
you that day when you charged him with the crime.'

'I did not charge him. I have charged no one.'

'I charged him, then, and you did not contradict. I'd charge him again
if he was here.'

'Any man may charge anything upon any other man. There was no proof
whatever, and none has ever come to light.'

'You're always for proofs that will convict a man. I only said that
nobody else could do the thing. As for putting the notes back again in
the safe, now I come to think of it'--his face became cunning and
malignant--'I do remember--yes--oh! yes--I clearly remember--I quite
clearly remember--I see it as plain as if it was before me. He got
sidling nearer and nearer the safe while we were talking: he got quite
close--so--he chucked a bundle in when he thought I wasn't looking. I
think--I almost think--I could swear to it.'

'Nonsense,' said the lawyer. 'Your memory is too clear. Tie up the
notes, Checkley, and put them back. They may help, perhaps, some time,
to find out the man. Meantime, let us go back to our search. Let us find
these certificates.'



They had now examined every packet in the safe: they had looked at every
paper: they had opened every book and searched through all the leaves.
There was no doubt left: the certificates were not there.

Checkley began to tie up the bundles again. His master sat down trying
to remember something--everything--that could account for their
disappearance.




CHAPTER XI

A MYSTERIOUS DISCOVERY


The safe disposed of, there remained a cupboard, two tables full of
drawers, twenty or thirty tin boxes. Checkley examined every one of
these receptacles. In vain. There was not anywhere any trace of the
certificates.

'Yet,' said Mr. Dering, 'they must be somewhere. We have been hunting
all the morning, and we have not found them. They are not in this room.
Yet they must be somewhere. Certificates and such things don't fly away.
They are of no use to any one. People don't steal certificates. I must
have done something with them.'

'Did you take them home with you?'

'Why should I do that? I have no safe or strong-room at home.'

'Did you send them to the Bank for greater safety? To be sure, they
would be no more safe there than here.'

'Go and ask. See the manager. Ask him if he holds any certificates of
mine.'

The clerk turned to obey.

'No.' Mr. Dering stopped him. 'What's the good? If he held the things,
there would have been dividends. Yet what can I do?' For the first time
in his life the lawyer felt the emotion that he had often observed in
clients at times of real disaster. He felt as if there was nothing
certain: not even Property: as if the law itself, actually the law--was
of no use. His brain reeled: the ground was slipping under his feet, and
he was falling forward through the table, and the floor and the
foundation--forward and down--down--down. 'What can I do?' he repeated.
'Checkley, go. See the manager. There may be something to find out. I
can't think properly. Go.'

When the clerk left him, he laid his head upon his hands and tried to
put things quite clearly before himself. 'Where can the certificates
be?' he asked himself, repeating this question twenty times. He was
quite conscious that if he had been consulted on such a point by a
client he would have replied with the greatest readiness, suggesting the
one really practical thing to do. For himself he could advise nothing.
'Where can the certificates be? Nobody steals Corporation stock and gas
companies' shares. They are no good if you do steal them. They can't be
sold without the authority of the owner: he has got to sign transfer
papers: if they were stolen, the dividends would go on being paid to the
owner just the same. Besides----' Somewhere about this point he
bethought him of the Bank-book. If the stock had been sold the money
would appear to his credit. He snatched the book and looked at it. No;
there was no entry which could possibly represent the sale of stock. He
knew what every entry meant, and when the amount was paid in: his memory
was perfectly clear upon this point.

Checkley's suggestion occurred to him. Had he taken the certificates
home with him? He might have done for some reason which he had now
forgotten. Yes; that was the one possible explanation. He must have
done. For a moment he breathed again--only for a moment, because he
immediately reflected that he could not possibly do such a thing as take
those securities to a house where he never transacted any business at
all. Then he returned to his former bewilderment and terror. What had
become of them? Why had he taken them out of the safe? Where had he
bestowed them?

And why were there no dividends paid to him on these stocks? Why? He
turned white with terror when he realised that if he got no more
dividends, he could have no more stocks.

During a long professional career of fifty years, Mr. Dering had never
made a mistake--at least he thought so. If he had not always invested
his money to the greatest profit, he had invested it safely. He did not
get the interest that some City men expect, but he made no losses. He
looked upon himself, therefore, as a man of great sagacity, whereas in
such matters he was only a man of great prudence. Also, during this long
period he was always in the enjoyment of a considerable income.
Therefore he had never known the least anxiety about money. Yet all his
life he had been counselling other people in their anxieties. It was
exactly as if a specialist in some mortal disease should be himself
attacked by it. Or it was as if the bo'sun, whose duty it is to
superintend the flogging, should be himself tied up.

Nothing came to him: no glimmer of light: not the least recollection of
anything. Then he thought desperately, that perhaps if he were to
imagine how it would be if somebody else, not himself at all, were to
come to himself and lay the story before him as a solicitor, for advice.
Or how it would be if he himself were to go to himself as a solicitor
and put the case.

When Checkley came back, he found his master leaning back in his chair,
his eyes wide open and staring at him as he opened the door--yet they
saw nothing. Checkley stood under the gaze of those eyes, which saw him
not. 'Good Lord!' he murmured. 'Is the time come? Is he going to die?'

His face was white. He seemed to be listening anxiously: his lips were
parted. 'He's in a fit of some kind,' thought the old clerk.

He stood watching. He ought, perhaps, to have called for assistance. He
did not think of it. He stood and watched, his face as pale as his
master's. Was it the end? If so--we all think of ourselves first--what
about his berth and salary?

Suddenly his master's eyes closed; he dropped his head: he heaved a deep
sigh: he moved his head and opened his eyes. He was restored to himself.
The fit, whatever it was, had passed.

'Checkley,' he said, 'I've been trying to put the thing to myself as if
some other man--a client--was putting his case to me. I began very well.
The other man came--that is, I myself called upon myself. I sat and
heard my own story. I forgot, somehow, what the story was'--he shook his
head impatiently. 'Forget--forget--I always forget. But I remember that
it wasn't the story I wanted him to tell. It was another story
altogether. He didn't tell me what I wanted to know. That is--what has
become of the certificates. I'm no nearer than I was. He made out that I
was actually selling the certificates myself.'

'You're wandering a bit,' said Checkley, anxiously watching him. 'That's
all. You'll be all right presently. You've bin shook up a bit, with the
certificates and the notes and all. If I were you I'd have a glass of
something stiff.'

'No--no; I shall come round presently. Yes--that's it. I'm a good deal
upset by this business. Somehow, I don't seem able to think clearly
about it. Let me see'--he sighed heavily--'I think you went
somewhere--somewhere for me, before--before the other man came.'

'For Lord's sake, don't talk about the other man. There's no such
person. Yes--I did go for you; I went to ask the manager of the Bank
whether he held any stock for you.'

'The manager of the Bank. True. Well, and does he hold anything?'

'Not a scrap. Never had any.'

'Then, Checkley'--Mr. Dering dropped his hands helplessly--'what is to
be done?'

'I don't know, I'm sure,' the clerk replied with equal helplessness. 'I
never heard of such a thing before in all my life. Thirty-eight thousand
pounds! It can't be. Nobody ever heard of such a thing before. Perhaps
they are about the place somewhere. Let's have another search.'

'No--no. It is useless. Why--I have had no dividends. The shares were
all transferred, and nothing has been paid for them. The shares have
been stolen. Checkley, I can't think. For the first time in my life, I
can't think--I want some one to advise me. I must put the case in
somebody's hands.'

'There's your young partner--a chance for him to show that he's worth
his pay. Why don't you consult him, and then come back to the old plan
of you and me? We're knocked a bit silly just at first; but the case
will come to us in the long run. You would have a partner--nothing would
do but a partner. The boy's in his own room now, I suppose, with a crown
upon his head and the clerks kneelin' around--as grand as you please.
Send for him.'

Mr. Dering nodded.

The partner, when he arrived a few minutes later, found the Chief
walking about the room in uncontrollable agitation. On the table
lay piled the whole contents of the safe. In front of it stood
the ancient clerk, trembling and shaking--head, hands, knees, and
shoulders--following the movements of his master with eyes full of
anxiety and terror. This strange fit, this forgetfulness, this rambling
talk about another man, this new restlessness, frightened him.

'You are come at last.' Mr. Dering stopped and threw himself into his
chair. Now, my partner, hear the case and resolve the difficulty for
us, if you can.--Tell him, Checkley--or--stay; no. I will tell it
myself. Either I have lost my reason and my memory, or I have been
robbed.'

George stood at the table and listened. Something of the utmost gravity
had happened. Never before had he seen his Chief in the least degree
shaken out of his accustomed frigidity of calm. Now he was excited; his
eyes were restless; he talked fast, he talked badly. He made half a
dozen attempts to begin: he marshalled his facts in a slovenly and
disorderly manner, quite unlike his usual clear arrangement: for fifty
years he had been marshalling facts and drawing up cases, and at his own
he broke down.

'I think I understand the whole,' said George, when his Chief paused and
Checkley ceased to correct and to add. 'You had certificates
representing investments to the amount of 38,000_l_.: these are gone,
unaccountably gone: no dividends have been paid for some months, and
your broker speaks of large transfers.'

'That's not all,' said Checkley. 'Tell him about the notes.'

'Yes. The fact may have some bearing upon the case. While we were
looking for the certificates, and in order, I suppose, to complicate
things and to bewilder me the more, we found in the safe the very
notes--give me the bundle, Checkley--there they are--that were paid over
the Bank counter to the man who forged my name eight years ago.'

'What? The case in which Athelstan Arundel was accused?'

'The same. There they are--you hold them in your hand--the very notes!
Strange! on the very day when I am threatened with another and a worse
robbery! Yes--yes; the very notes!--the very notes! This is wonderful.
Who put them there?'

'How can I know?'

'Well--but in any case one thing is certain. Athelstan's name is cleared
at last. You will tell his mother that.'

'Not at all,' said Checkley. 'Why shouldn't he put 'em in himself? I saw
him edging up towards the safe----'

'Saw him edging--stuff and nonsense! His name is cleared. This will be
joyful news to his mother and sisters.'

'Austin, get me back my certificates,' said Mr. Dering; 'never mind
those notes now. Never mind the joyful news. Never mind Athelstan's
name; that can wait. The thought of him and the old forgery only
bewilders my brain at this juncture. I cannot act. I cannot think. I
feel as if I was blinded and stupefied. Act for me--think for me--work
for me. Be my solicitor, George, as well as my partner.'

'I will do my best. It is difficult at first to understand--for what has
happened? You cannot find--you have mislaid--certain papers. Certain
dividends which were due do not appear to have been paid: and your
brokers, Ellis & Northcote, have used a phrase in a letter which you do
not understand. Would it not be well to get them here; or shall I go
into the City and ask them exactly what they meant and what has been
done?'

'If I could remember any transactions with them during the last six
months. But I cannot, except a small purchase of Corporation stock last
month--a few hundreds. And here are the papers belonging to that.'

'Which of the partners do you deal with?'

'The old man, Ellis--he's always acted for me. He has been my friend for
close on fifty years.'

'Well, I will send for him, and tell him to come as soon as possible,
and to bring along with him all the letters and papers he has.'

'Good, good,' said Mr. Dering, more cheerfully. 'That is practical. I
ought to have thought of that at the very outset. Now we shall get
along. The first thing is to arrive at the facts--then we can act. If it
was another man's case, I should have known what to do. But when it is
your own--and to lose the certificates, and when a sum of nearly forty
thousand pounds is at stake--it looks like losing the money itself--and
the feeling of uncertainty----'

'All taken together, becomes rather overwhelming. Of course I should
like to see the letter-book, and we must run through the letters to see
if they throw any light upon the business. Perhaps the papers themselves
may be found among them.'

The presence of this young man, cheerful, decided, taking practical
measures at once, cheered up the lawyer, and steadied his shattered
nerves. But Checkley the clerk looked on gloomily. He replaced the
papers in the safe, and stood beside it, as if to guard it; he followed
the movements of the new partner with watchful, suspicious eyes; and he
muttered sullenly between his teeth.

First George sent a telegram to the City for the broker. Then, while the
old clerk still stood beside the safe, and Mr. Dering continued to show
signs of agitation uncontrollable, sometimes walking about the room and
sometimes sitting at his table, sometimes looking into the empty shelves
of the safe, he began to look through the copied letters, those, that
is, which had gone out of Mr. Dering's office. He searched for six
months, working backwards.

'Nothing for six months,' he said.--'Checkley, give me the letters.' He
went through these. They were the letters received at the office, all
filed, endorsed, and dated. There was not one during the letters of six
months which he examined which had anything to do with the sales of
stocks and shares.

'If,' he said, 'you had written to Ellis & Northcote, a copy of your
letter would be here in this book. If they had written to you, these
letters would be among these bundles. Very well. Since no such letters
are here, it is clear that no such letters were written. Therefore, no
sales.'

'Then,' said Mr. Dering, 'where are my certificates? Where are my
dividends?'

'That we shall see. At present, we are only getting at the facts.'

Then Mr. Ellis, senior partner of Ellis & Northcote, arrived, bearing a
small packet of papers. Everybody knew Mr. Ellis, of Ellis & Northcote,
one of the most respectable stockbrokers in London--citizen and Lorimer.
He belonged eminently to the class called worthy: an old gentleman,
carefully dressed, of smooth and polished appearance, pleasing manners,
and great integrity. Nobody could look more truly _integer vitae_ than
Mr. Ellis. Nor did his private practice belie his reputation and his
appearance. His chin and lips looked as if they could not possibly
endure the burden of beard or moustache; his sentiments, one observed at
a glance, would certainly be such as one expects from a citizen of his
respectability.

'Here I am, dear sir,' he said cheerfully--'here I am, in immediate
obedience to your summons. I hope that there is nothing wrong; though
your request that I would bring with me certain papers certainly made me
a little apprehensive.'

'There is, I fear, a good deal wrong,' said Mr. Dering. 'Sit down, my
old friend.--Give Mr. Ellis a chair, Checkley.--Austin, you will tell
him what he wants to know.'

'You wrote to Mr. Dering yesterday recommending a certain
investment----'

'I certainly did. A very favourable opportunity it is, and a capital
thing it will prove.'

'You mentioned in your letter certain transfers and sales which,
according to your letter, he had recently effected.'

'Certainly.'

'What sales were they?'

Mr. Ellis looked at his papers. 'February last--sale of various stock,
all duly enumerated here, to the value of 6,500_l_. March last, sale of
various stock, also all duly enumerated, to the value of 12,000_l_. odd.
April last, sale of stock to the value of 20,000_l_.--more or
less--realising----'

'You note the dates and amounts, Austin?' said Mr. Dering.

'Certainly; we will, however, get the dates and the amounts more exactly
in a moment.--Now, Mr. Ellis, of course you received instructions with
the papers themselves. Were they in writing or by word of mouth?'

'In writing. By letters written by Mr. Dering himself.'

'Have you got these letters with you?'

'Everything is here, and in proper order.' He laid his hand upon the
papers. 'Here, for instance, is the first letter, dated February 14,
relating to these transactions.--You will no doubt remember it, Mr.
Dering.' He took up a letter, and read it aloud: '"MY DEAR ELLIS,--I
enclose a bundle of certificates and shares. They amount to somewhere
about 6,500_l_. at current price. Will you have these transferred to the
name of Edmund Gray, gentleman, of 22 South Square, Gray's Inn? Mr.
Edmund Gray is a client, and I will have the amount paid to my account
by him. Send me, therefore, the transfer papers and the account showing
the amount due to me by him, together with your commission.--Very
sincerely yours, EDWARD DERING." That is the letter. The proceeding is
not usual, yet not irregular. If, for instance, we had been instructed
to buy stock for Mr. Dering---- But of course you know.'

'Pardon me,' said George. 'I am not so much accustomed to buy stock as
my partner. Will you go on?'

'We should have done so, and sent our client the bill for the amount
with our commission. If we had been instructed to sell, we should have
paid in to Mr. Dering's bank the amount realised less our commission. A
transfer is another kind of work. Mr. Dering transferred this stock to
Edmund Gray, his client. It was therefore for him to settle with his
client the charges for the transfer and the value of the stock. We
therefore sent a bill for these charges. It was sent by hand, and a
cheque was received by return of the messenger.'

George received the letter from him, examined it, and laid it before his
partner.



Mr. Dering read the letter, held it to the Checkley.

'If anybody knows my handwriting,' he said, 'it ought to be you. Whose
writing is that?'

'It looks like yours. But there is a trembling in the letters. It is not
so firm as the most of your work. I should call it yours; but I see by
your face that it is not.'

'No; it is not my writing. I did not write that letter. This is the
first I have heard of the contents of that letter.--Look at the
signature, Checkley. Two clots are wanting after the word Dering, and
the flourish after the last "n" is curtailed of half its usual
dimensions. Did you ever know me to alter my signature by a single
curve?'

'Never,' Checkley replied. 'Two clots wanting and half a flourish.--Go
on, sir; I've just thought of something. But go on.'

'You don't mean to say that this letter is a forgery?' asked Mr. Ellis.
'Why--then---- Oh! it is impossible. It must then be the beginning of a
whole series of forgeries. It's quite impossible to credit it. The
letter came from this office: the post-mark shows it was posted in this
district: the answer was sent here. The transfers--consider--the
transfers were posted to this office. They came back duly signed and
witnessed--from this office. I forwarded the certificate made out in the
name of Edmund Gray--to this office: and I got an acknowledgment--from
this office. I sent the account of the transaction with my commission
charges--to this office, and got a cheque for the latter--from this
office. How can such a complicated business as this--only the first of
these transactions--be a forgery? Why, you want a dozen confederates at
least for such a job as this.'

'I do not quite understand yet,' said George, inexperienced in the
transfer of stocks and shares.

'Well, I cannot sell stock without the owner's authority; he must sign a
transfer. But if I receive a commission from a lawyer to transfer his
stock to a client, it is not my business to ask whether he receives the
money or not.'

'Yes--yes. And is there nothing to show for the sale of this 6,000_l_.
worth of paper?' George asked Mr. Dering.

'Nothing at all. The letters and everything are a forgery.'

'And you, Mr. Ellis, received a cheque for your commission?'

'Certainly.'

'Get me the old cheques and the cheque-book,' said Mr. Dering. The
cheque was drawn, as the letter was written, in Mr. Dering's
handwriting, but with the slight difference he had pointed out in the
signature.

'You are quite sure,' asked George, 'that you did not sign that cheque?'

'I am perfectly certain that I did not.'

'Then as for this Edmund Gray of 22 South Square, Gray's Inn--what do
you know about him?'

'Nothing at all--absolutely nothing.'

'I know something,' said Checkley. 'But go on--go on.'

'He may be a non-existent person, for what you know.'

'Certainly. I know nothing about any Edmund Gray.'

'Wait a bit,' murmured Checkley.

'Well, but'--Mr. Ellis went on--'this was only a beginning. In March you
wrote to me again; that is to say, I received a letter purporting to be
from you. In this letter--here it is--you instructed me to transfer
certain stock--the papers of which you enclosed--amounting to about
12,000_l_.--to Edmund Gray aforesaid. In the same way as before the
transfer papers were sent to you for signature: in the same way as
before they were signed and returned: and in the same way as before the
commission was charged to you and paid by you. It was exactly the same
transaction as before--only for double the sum involved in the February
business.'

Mr. Dering took the second letter and looked at it with a kind of
patient resignation. 'I know nothing about it,' he said--'nothing at
all.'

'There was a third and last transaction,' said the broker, 'this time in
April. Here is the letter written by you with instructions exactly the
same as in the previous cases, but dealing with the stock to the amount
of 19,000_l_., which we duly carried out, and for which we received your
cheque--for commission.'

'Every one of these letters--every signature of mine to transfer papers
and to cheques--was a forgery,' said Mr. Dering slowly. 'I have no
client named Edmund Gray: I know no one of the name: I never received
any money from the transfers: these investments are stolen.'

'Let me look at the letters again,' said George. He examined them
carefully, comparing them with each other. 'They are so wonderfully
forged that they would deceive the most careful. I should not hesitate,
myself, to swear to the handwriting.'

It has already been explained that Mr. Dering's handwriting was of a
kind which is not uncommon with those who write a good deal. The
unimportant words were conveyed by a curve, with or without a tail,
while the really important words were clearly written. The signature,
however, was large, distinct, and florid--the signature of the House,
which had been flourishing for a hundred years and more, a signature
which had never varied.

'Look at it,' said George again. 'Who would not swear to this writing?'

'I would for one,' said Mr. Ellis. 'And I have known it for forty years
and more.--If that is not your own writing, Dering, it is the very
finest imitation ever made.'

'I don't think my memory can be quite gone.--Checkley, have we ever had
a client named Edmund Gray?'

'No--never. But you've forgotten one thing. That forgery eight years
ago--the cheque of 720_l_.--was payable to the order of Edmund Gray.'

'Ah! So it was. This seems important.'

'Most important,' said George. 'The forger could not possibly by
accident choose the same name. This cannot be coincidence. Have you the
forged cheque?'

'I have always kept it,' Mr. Dering replied, 'on the chance of using it
to prove the crime and convict the criminal. You will find it, Checkley,
in the right-hand drawer of the safe. Thank you. Here it is. "Pay to the
order of Edmund Gray;" and here is his endorsement. So we have his
handwriting at any rate.'

George took it. 'Strange,' he said. 'I should without any hesitation
swear to your handwriting here as well. And look--the signature to the
cheque is exactly the same as that of these letters. The two dots
missing after the name, and the flourish after the last "n" curtailed.'

It was so. The handwriting of the cheque and of the letters was the
same: the signatures were slightly, but systematically, altered in
exactly the same way in both letters and cheque.

'This again,' said George, 'can hardly be coincidence. It seems to me
that the man who wrote that cheque also wrote those letters.'

The endorsement was in a hand which might also be taken for Mr. Dering's
own. Nothing to be got out of the endorsement.

'But about the transfer papers,' said George. 'They would have to be
witnessed as well as signed.'

'They were witnessed,' said the broker, 'by a clerk named Lorry.'

'Yes, we have such a man in our office.--Checkley, send for Lorry.'

Lorry was a clerk employed in Mr. Dering's outer office. Being
interrogated, he said that he had no recollection of witnessing a
signature for a transfer paper. He had witnessed many signatures, but
was not informed what the papers were. Asked if he remembered especially
witnessing any signature in February, March, or April, he replied that
he could not remember any, but that he had witnessed a great many
signatures: that sometimes Mr. Dering wanted him to witness his own
signature, sometimes those of clients. If he were shown his signature he
might remember. Lorry, therefore, was allowed to depart to his own
place.

'There can be no longer any doubt,' said George, 'that an attempt has
been made at a robbery on a very large scale.'

'An attempt only?' Mr. Dering asked. 'Where are my certificates?'

'I say attempt, because you can't really steal stock. Dividends are only
paid to those who lawfully possess it. This Edmund Gray we can find, if
he exists. I take it, however, that he does not. It is probably a name
assumed by the forger. And I suppose that he has made haste to sell his
stock. Whether or no, you will certainly recover your property. People
may as well steal a field as steal stocks and shares.'

'We can easily find out for you,' said Mr. Ellis, 'what has become of
your paper.'

'If the thieves have kept it,' George went on, 'all they could make
would be the dividends for five months. That, however, is only because
the Bank-book was not examined for so long. They could not reckon upon
such an unusual stroke of luck. It seems almost certain that they must
get rid of the stock as quickly as they could. Suppose that they have
realised the whole amount. It is an immense sum of money. It would have
to be paid by cheque into a bank: the holder could only draw out the
money gradually: he might, to be sure, go to America and have the whole
amount transferred, but that would not help him much unless he could
draw it out in small sums payable to confederates. In fact, the robbery
seems to me hedged about with difficulties almost impossible.'

'It is the most extraordinary attempt at robbery that ever was,' said
Mr. Ellis. 'Thirty-eight thousand pounds in shares. Well, I will find
out for you if they have been sold and to whom. Meantime, my old friend,
don't you be down-hearted about it. As Mr. Austin says, you will
certainly get your property back again. What? We live in a civilised
country. We cannot have large sums like 40,000_l_. stolen bodily.
Property isn't kept any longer in bags of gold. Bank notes, banks,
investments, all tend to make great robberies impossible. Courage; you
will get back your property.'

Mr. Dering shook his head doubtfully.

'There is another chance,' George suggested. 'One has heard of robberies
effected with the view of blackmail afterwards. Suppose we were to get a
letter offering the whole to be returned for a certain sum.'

'No--no. It is now four months since the thing was done. They have sold
out the stock and disappeared--gone to America, as you suggested. Why,
the things may have been sold a dozen times over in the interval. That
is the danger. Suppose they _have_ been sold a dozen times over.
Consider. Here is a share in the Great Western. I transfer it from A to
B. Very good. The share now belongs to B, and stands in his name whether
honestly come by or not. B sends it to another broker, who sells it to
C. He, again, to D. Every transaction is right and in form except the
first. You can trace the share from owner to owner. B has vanished. A
says to C: "You bought that share of a thief." C says: "Very sorry. How
was I to know? D has got it now." D says that it is his, and he will
stick to it. We go to law about the share. What is going to happen? Upon
my word, I don't know. Well--but this is only conjecture. Let me first
find out what has become of the shares. Of course there is a record, to
which I have only to refer. I will let you know by to-morrow morning, if
I can.'

When Mr. Ellis was gone, George began to sum up, for the clearing of his
own mind, the ascertained facts of the case, so far as they had got.

'First,' he said, 'the letters to Ellis and Northcote were written on
our headed paper. Clearly, therefore, the writer must have had access to
the office. Next, he knew and could copy your handwriting. Third, he was
able to intercept the delivery of letters, and to prevent your getting
any he wished to stop, because the correspondence was conducted openly
through the post. That seems to be a very important point. Fourth, the
letters were all, apparently, in your handwriting, very skilfully
imitated, instead of being dictated and then signed. Fifth, he must at
least have known of the last forgery, or how did he arrive at the name
of Edmund Gray?' And was it out of devilry and mockery, because that
forgery escaped detection, that he used the name again? Sixth, he must
have had access to the safe where the cheque-book (as well as the
certificates) was kept. Seventh, he must have known the office pretty
well, or how did he find out the names of your brokers? Eighth, the
handwriting appeared to be exactly the same as that of the former
forgery.'

'It is the same as last time,' said Checkley. 'That forgery was done in
the office, if ever a thing was done here. Same with this--same with
this. Well--time will show. Same with this.' He glared from under his
great eyebrows at the young partner, as if he suspected that the young
gentleman could throw some light upon that mystery if he wished.

'We have given Time long enough to discover the author of the last
business,' said Mr. Dering; 'but he has not chosen to do so as yet. The
loss of property,' he groaned--'the loss of close on forty thousand
pounds.'

'I don't believe it is lost,' said George. 'It can't be lost. It is a
bit of a railway--part of a reservoir--a corner of the gas-works--you
can't lose these things--unless, indeed, the difficulty suggested by Mr.
Ellis occurs.'

Here Mr. Dering pushed back his chair and began again to walk about the
room in restless agitation. He was no longer the grave and serious
lawyer; he became one of his own clients, lamenting, as they had so
often lamented in that room, the greatness of his misfortune. He uttered
the actual commonplaces of men in distress--there is a dreadful sameness
about the Lamentations of Ill Luck. We all know them--the hardness of
the thing: the injustice of it: the impossibility of warding it off: his
own sagacity in taking every precaution: the dreadfulness of being
singled out of a whole generation for exceptional misfortune. Mr. Dering
himself, the grave, calm, reserved old lawyer, who seemed made of
granite, broke down under the blow and became an ordinary human
creature. In the lower walks, they weep. Checkley would have wept. Mr.
Dering became eloquent, wrathful, sarcastic. No retired General who has
ruined himself by gambling in stocks could so bemoan his luck. George
listened, saying nothing. It was an experience. No man so strong but has
his weak point. No man is completely armoured against the arrows of
fate.

Presently he grew a little more calm, and sat down. 'Forgive me,
George,' he said gently--'forgive this outbreak. There is more in the
business than you know of. I feel as if I know something about it, but
can't bring it out. I am growing so forgetful--I forget whole days--I am
filled with the feeling that I ought to know about it. As for the loss,
what I have said is true. You do not yet feel as I do about Property.
You are too young: you have not got any Property yet. Wait a few
years--then you will be able to agree with me that there is nothing in
the world so hard as to lose your Property--the Property that you have
made--by your own exertions--for yourself.'

'Now you talk like yourself,' said Checkley. 'That's sense. Nothing so
dreadful as to lose Property. It's enough to kill people, it has killed
many people.'

'Property means everything. You understand that the more the older you
get.'

'You do,' echoed Checkley. 'There's nothing in the world worth
considering except Property.'

'It means--remember--all the virtues--prudence--courage--quick
sight--self-restraint--tenacity--all the fighting qualities. We do well
to honour rich men. I hoped to receive honour myself as a rich man. When
you have put together a few thousands--by the exercise of these finer
qualities, so that the thought of this gives you dignity----'

'Ah!' cried Checkley, straightening himself.

'To feel that they are gone--gone--gone--it is cruel.--George, you don't
understand it. You are young: as yet you have no money.--Checkley, you
have saved----'

'Me? Oh! A trifle, a trifle.' But he covered his mouth with his hand to
conceal the smile of satisfaction.

'You are reputed rich.'

'No--no--no. Not rich. My chances have been few. I have not let them go.
But rich? No--no.'

'How would you regard the loss--the robbery of your property--Checkley?'

The old clerk shook his head. He had no words adequate to the question.

'Apart from the loss,' Mr. Dering went on, 'there is the sense of
insecurity. I felt it once before when the other forgery took place.
There seems no safety anywhere. Papers that I keep in my private safe,
to which no one has a key but myself, which I never leave open if I
leave the room even to go into another room, are taken. Cheque-books
which I keep there are taken out and cheques stolen. Finally, things are
put in--the bundle of notes--for instance. I say that I feel a sense of
helplessness, as if everything might be taken from me and I should be
powerless to resist.'

'Let us first get back the certificates,' said George, 'and we will find
out and defeat this gang, if it is a gang, of confederates. Yes--it is
as you say--the ground itself seems sinking beneath one's feet--when
one's own investments are sold for nothing by a letter so like your own
writing that it would deceive anybody.'

'Done in the office,' Checkley murmured--'in the office. Same as last
time. Well--we shall find him--we shall find him.' He began to bundle
the papers back into the safe, murmuring: 'Same as last time--done in
the office--we shall find him--we shall find him. We found him before,
and we'll find him now.'




CHAPTER XII

THE FIRST FIND


'Yes,' said George thoughtfully, 'a day or two ought to unravel this
matter. We must first, however, before going to the Police, find out as
much as we can ourselves. Let me take up the case by myself for a bit.'

'No--no,' Checkley grumbled. 'Police first. Catch the man first.'

'Put aside everything,' said the Chief, 'everything, George. Forget
everything until you have found out the mystery of the conspiracy.'

'It looks to me like a Long Firm,' George went on--'a Long Firm with a
sham name and a respectable address. Of course there is no such person,
really, as Edmund Gray.'

'It is not only the loss--perhaps, let us hope'--Mr. Dering
sighed--'only a temporary loss; if a real loss, then a most terrible
blow--not only that, but it is the sense of insecurity. No one ever
found out about that cheque--and here are the notes in the safe all the
time.'

'He put 'em in,' said Checkley.

'This is the second time--and the same name still--Edmund Gray. It fills
me with uneasiness--I am terrified, George. I know not what may be the
next blow--what may be taken from me--my mortgages--my houses--my
land--everything. Go. I can do the work of the office--all the work--by
myself. But this work I cannot do. I am not able to think about it.
These thoughts overpower me and cloud my reason.'

'Well,' said George, 'I will do what I can. I don't suppose there is any
Edmund Gray at all: but one must try to find out. There can be no harm
in paying a visit to Gray's Inn. If the thing had been done yesterday,
it would be necessary to strike at once with a warrant for the arrest of
the said Edmund Gray. As it is four months since the last robbery, there
can be small harm in the delay of a day or two. I will go and inquire a
little.'

Nothing easier than to inquire. There was the man's address: everybody
knows Gray's Inn: everybody knows South Square. The place is only ten
minutes' walk from Lincoln's Inn. George took his hat, walked over and
proceeded straight to No. 22, expecting to find no such name on the
door-posts. On the contrary, there it was. '2nd Floor, Mr. Edmund Gray,'
among the other occupants of the staircase. He mounted the stairs. On
the second floor right was the name over the door, 'Mr. Edmund Gray.'
But the outer door was closed. That is a sign that the tenant of the
Chambers is either not at home or not visible. On the first floor were
the offices of a Firm of Solicitors. He sent in his card. The name of
Dering and Son commands the respectful attention of every solicitor in
London. One of the partners received him. The firm of Dering and Son was
anxious to see Mr. Edmund Gray, who had the Chambers overhead. At what
hours was Mr. Edmund Gray generally in his rooms? Nobody knew, not
either of the partners, not any of the clerks. He might have been met
going up and down the stairs, but nobody knew him by sight or anything
about him. This at first sight seemed suspicious; afterwards George
reflected that men may live for years on the same staircase and never
know anything about each other. Men who live in Gray's Inn do not visit
each other: there is little neighbourly spirit among men in Chambers,
but rather an unspoken distrust.

'But,' said the partner, 'I can tell you who is his landlord. He does
not take the rooms of the Inn direct, but as we do, from one who has
several sets on a long lease, and sublets the rooms. They may know
something about the man at the Steward's office across the Square. If
not, the landlord will certainly know.'

George asked if Edmund Gray was newly arrived. No. It appeared that he
had been in the Inn for a long time. 'But then,' his informant added,
'he may have been here a hundred years for all we know: we never think
of our neighbours in Chambers. Opposite is a man whose name has been
over the door as long as I can remember anything. I don't know who he is
or what is his business. I don't even know him by sight. So with Mr.
Edmund Gray. If I were to meet him on the stairs, I should not be any
the wiser. You see, I am only here in the daytime. Now, the other man on
the second floor I do know something about, because he is a coach and
was a Fellow of my College. And the man in the garrets I hear about
occasionally, because he is an old barrister who sometimes defends a
prisoner.'

At the Steward's office George put the same question. 'I am a
solicitor,' he said. 'Here is my card. I am most anxious to see Mr.
Edmund Gray, of No. 22. Could you save me time by letting me know at
what hour he is in his Chambers?'

They could tell him nothing. Mr. Gray was not a tenant of the Inn. Very
likely he was a residential tenant who came home in the evenings after
business.

Everything learned is a step gained. Whether Edmund Gray was a man or a
Long Firm, the name had been on the door for many years. But--many
years?--could a confederacy of swindlers go on for many years,
especially if they undertook such mighty schemes for plunder as this
business?

Next he went to the address of the landlord. He was a house agent in
Bloomsbury, and apparently a person of respectability.

'If you could tell me,' George began with the same question, 'at what
hours I could find your tenant in his Chambers; or if you could give me
his business address, we should be very greatly obliged. We want to find
him at once--to-day, if possible, on very important business.'

'Well, I am sorry, very sorry--but--in fact, I don't know anything about
my tenant's hours, nor can I give you his place of business. I believe
he has no business.'

'Oh! But you took him as a tenant. You must have had some references.'

'Certainly. And upon that I can satisfy you very shortly.' He opened a
great book and turned over the pages. 'Here it is--to No. 22, South
Square, Gray's Inn, Second floor, north side--Edmund Gray, gentleman.
Rent 40_l_. a year. Date of taking the rooms, February, 1882, at the
half-quarter. Reference, Messrs. Dering and Son, Solicitors, New Square,
Lincoln's Inn.'

'Why--you mean that he referred to us--to Messrs. Dering and Son--in the
year 1882!'

'That is so. Would you like to see the letter which we received on
application? Wait a moment.' He rang the bell, and a clerk appeared, to
whom he gave instructions. 'I am bound to say,' the landlord went on,
'that a more satisfactory tenant than Mr. Gray does not exist. He pays
his rent regularly by Post-office order every quarter, on the day before
quarter day.'

'Oh! I wonder----' But he stopped, because to begin wondering is always
futile, especially at so early a stage. When there are already
accumulated facts to go upon, and not till then, wondering becomes the
putting together of the puzzle.

'Well, here is the letter. "Gentlemen"'--the house agent read the letter
received on application to the reference-'"In reply to your letter of
the 13th, we beg to inform you that Mr. Edmund Gray is a client of ours,
a gentleman of independent means, and that he is quite able to pay any
reasonable rent for residence or Chambers.--Your obedient servants,
DERING AND SON."--I suppose,' he added, 'that a man doesn't want a
better reference than your own?'

'No; certainly not.' George looked at the letter. It presented as to
handwriting exactly the same points of likeness and of difference as all
the other letters in this strange case: the body of the letter
apparently written in the hand of Mr. Dering; that is, so as to deceive
everybody: the signature, with one or two small omissions. 'Certainly
not,' he repeated. 'With such a reference, of course, you did not
hesitate. Did you ever see Mr. Gray?'

'Certainly. I have seen him often. First when he was getting his rooms
furnished, and afterwards on various occasions.'

'What kind of a man is he to look at?'

'Elderly. Not exactly the kind of man you'd expect to have Chambers.
Mostly, they're young ones who like the freedom. An elderly gentleman:
pleasant in his manners: smiling and affable: gray-haired.'

'Oh!' Then there was a real Edmund Gray of ten years' standing in the
Inn, who lived or had Chambers at the number stated in the forged
letters.

'I suppose,' said the house agent, 'that my respectable tenant has not
done anything bad?'

'N-no--not to my knowledge. His name occurs in rather a disagreeable
case. Would you be so very kind as to let him know, in case you should
meet him--but of course we shall write to him--that we are most anxious
to see him?'

This the landlord readily promised. 'There is another person,' he said,
'who can tell you a great deal more than anybody else. That is his
laundress. I don't know who looks after him, but you can find out at
the Inn. The policeman will know. Go and ask him.'

In the game of battledore and shuttlecock, the latter has no chance
except to take the thing coolly, without temper. George was the
shuttlecock. He was hit back into Gray's Inn--this time into the arms of
the policeman.

'Well, sir,' said the guardian of the peace, 'I do not know anything
about the gentleman myself. If he was one of the noisy ones, I should
know him. But he isn't, and therefore I have never heard of him. But if
he lives at No. 22, I can tell you who does his rooms; and it's old Mrs.
Cripps, and she lives in Leather Lane.'

This street, which is now, comparatively speaking, purged and cleansed,
is not yet quite the ideal spot for one who would have pure air and
cleanliness combined with godliness of conversation. However, individual
liberty is nowhere more absolutely free and uncontrolled than in Leather
Lane.

Mrs. Cripps lived on the top floor, nearest to Heaven, of which she
ought to be thinking because she was now old and near her end. She was
so old that she was quite past her work, and only kept on Mr. Gray's
rooms because he never slept there, and they gave her no trouble except
to go to them in the morning with a duster and to drop asleep for an
hour or so. What her one gentleman gave her, moreover, was all she had
to live upon.

Though the morning was warm, she was sitting over the fire watching a
small pan, in which she was stewing a savoury mess, consisting of a
'block ornament' with onions, carrots, and turnips. Perhaps she was
thinking--the poor old soul--of the days gone by--gone by for fifty
years--when she was young and wore a feather in her hat. Old ladies of
her class do not think much about vanished beauty, but they think a good
deal about vanished feathers and vanished hats: they remember the old
free carriage in the streets with the young friends, and the careless
laugh, and the ready jest. It is the ancient gentlewoman who remembers
the vanished beauty, and thinks of what she was fifty years ago.

Mrs. Cripps heard a step on the narrow stair leading to her room--a
manly step. It mounted higher and more slowly, because the stairs were
dark as well as narrow. Then the visitor's hat knocked against the door.
He opened it, and stood there looking in. A gentleman! Not a District
Visitor or a Sister trying to persuade her to early Church--nor yet the
clergyman--a young gentleman.

'You are Mrs. Cripps?' he asked. 'The policeman at Gray's Inn directed
me here. You are laundress, I believe, to Mr. Edmund Gray of No. 22?'

'Suppose I am, sir,' she replied suspiciously. A laundress is like the
Hall Porter of a Club: you must not ask her about any of her gentlemen.

'I have called to see Mr. Edmund Gray on very important business. I
found his door shut. Will you kindly tell me at what hours he is
generally in his Chambers?'

She shook her head: but she held out her hand.

The young gentleman placed half a sovereign in her palm. Her fingers
closed over the coin. She clutched it, and she hid it away in some
secret fold of her ragged dress. There is no woman so ragged, so
dropping to pieces with shreds and streamers and tatters, but she can
find a safe hiding-place, somewhere in her rags, for a coin or for
anything else that is small or precious.

'I never tell tales about my gentlemen,' she said, 'especially when they
are young and handsome, like you. A pore laundress has eyes and ears and
hands, but she hasn't got a tongue. If she had, there might be terrible,
terrible trouble. Oh! dear--yes. But Mr. Gray isn't a young gentleman.
He's old, and it isn't the same thing.'

'Then,' said George, 'how and when can I find him?'

'I was coming to that. You can't find him. Sometimes he comes, and
sometimes he doesn't come.'

'Oh! He doesn't live in the rooms, then!'

'No. He doesn't live in the rooms. He uses the rooms sometimes.'

'What does he use them for?'

'How should I know? All the gentlemen do things with pens and paper. How
should I know what they do? They make their money with their pens and
paper. I dun know how they do it. I suppose Mr. Gray is making his money
like the rest of them.'

Oh! he goes to the Chambers and writes?'

'Sometimes it's weeks and weeks and months and months before he comes at
all. But always my money regular and beforehand sent in an envelope and
a postal order.'

'Well, what is his private address? I suppose he lives in the country?'

'I don't know where he lives. I know nothing about him. I go there every
morning, and I do the room. That's all I know.'

There was no more information to be obtained. Sometimes he came to the
Inn; sometimes he stayed away for weeks and weeks, and for months and
months.

'I might ha' told you more, young gentleman,' murmured the old woman,
'and I might ha' told you less. P'raps you'll come again.'

He went back to Lincoln's Inn, and set down his facts.

First, there was a forgery in the year 1882, in which the name of Edmund
Gray was used. Next, in the series of forgeries just discovered, not
only was the name of Edmund Gray used throughout, but the handwriting of
the letters and cheques was exactly the same as that of the first
cheque, with the same peculiarities in the signature. This could hardly
be a coincidence. The same man must have written the whole.

Then, who was Edmund Gray?

He was a real personage--a living man--not a Firm--one known to the
landlord of the Chambers, and to the laundress, if to nobody else. He
did not live in the Chambers, but he used them for some business
purposes; he sometimes called there and wrote. What did he write? Where
was he, and what was he doing, when he was not at the Chambers? He might
be one--leader or follower--of some secret gang. One has read of such
gangs, especially in French novels, where the leaders are noble Dukes of
the first rank, and Princesses--young, lovely, of the highest fashion.
Why should there not be such a gang in London? Clever conspirators could
go a very long way before they were even suspected. In this civilisation
of cheques and registered shares and official transfers, property is so
much defended that it is difficult to break through the armour. But
there must be weak places in that armour. It must be possible for the
wit of man to devise some plan by means of which property can be
attacked successfully. Had he struck such a conspiracy?

Thus. A man calling himself Edmund Gray gets a lease of Chambers by
means of a forged letter in answer to a reference. It is convenient for
certain conspirators, hereinafter called the company, to have an
address, though it may never be used. The conspiracy begins by forging
a cheque to his order for 720_l_. That was at the outset, when the
conspirators were young. It was found dangerous, and the notes were
therefore replaced in the safe. Note, that the company, through one or
other of its members, has access to that safe. This might perhaps be by
means of a key--in the evening, after office hours: or by some one who
was about the place all day.

Very good. The continued connection of some member of the Firm with
Dering and Son is proved by the subsequent proceedings. After eight
years, the company having matured their machinery, and perhaps worked
out with success other enterprises, return to their first quarry, where
they have the advantage of access to the letters, and can look over
their disposition. They are thus enabled to conduct their successive
_coups_, each bigger than the one before. And for four months the thing
remains undiscovered. Having the certificates in their hands, what was
to prevent them from selling the whole and dividing the proceeds?
Nothing. Yet, in such a case they would disappear, and here was Edmund
Gray still fearlessly at large. Why had he not got clear away long
before?

Again--all the correspondence concerning Edmund Gray was carried on
between the office and the brokers. There were no letters from Edmund
Gray at all. Suppose it should be found impossible to connect Edmund
Gray with the transactions carried on in his name. Suppose the real
Edmund Gray were to deny any knowledge at all of the transactions.
Suppose he were to say that ten years before he had brought a letter of
introduction to Mr. Dering, and knew nothing more about him. Well--but
the certificates themselves--what about them? Their possession would
have to be accounted for. So he turned the matter over and over and
arrived at nothing, not even the next step to take.

He went back to the Chief and reported what he had discovered: the
existence of an Edmund Gray--the letter of recommendation to the
landlord. 'Another forgery,' groaned Mr. Dering.

'It is done in the office,' said George. 'It is all done in the
office--letters--cheques--everything.'

'The office,' Checkley repeated. 'No doubt about it.'

'Give up everything else, George,' said Mr. Dering eagerly 'everything
else. Find out--find out. Employ detectives. Spend money as much as you
please. I am on a volcano--I know not what may be taken from me next.
Only find out, my partner, my dear partner--find out.'

When George was gone, Checkley went after him and opened the door
mysteriously, to assure himself that no one was listening.

'What are you going on like that for, Checkley?' asked his master
irritably. 'Is it another forgery? It rains forgeries.'

'No--no. Look here. Don't trouble too much about it. Don't try to think
how it was done. Don't talk about the other man. Look here. You've sent
that young gentleman to find out this business. Well--mark my words: he
won't. He won't, I say. He'll make a splash, but he won't find anything.
Who found out the last job?'

'You said you did. But nothing was proved.'

'I found that out. Plenty of proof there was. Look here'--his small eyes
twinkled under his shaggy eyebrows--'I'll find out this job as well, see
if I don't. Why----' He rubbed his hands. 'Ho! ho! I _have found out_.
Don't ask me--don't put a single question. But--I've got 'em--oh! I've
got 'em. I've got 'em for you--as they say--on toast.'




CHAPTER XIII

THINGS MORE REMARKABLE


After such a prodigious event as the discovery of these unparalleled
forgeries, anything might happen without being regarded. People's minds
are open at such times to see, hear, and accept everything. After the
earthquake, ghosts walk, solid things fly away of their own accord, good
men commit murder, rich men go empty away, and nobody is in the least
surprised.

See what happened, the very next day, at the office in New Square. When
George arrived in the morning he found that the senior Partner had not
yet appeared. He was late. For the first time for fifty years and more,
he was late. He went to his place, and the empty chair gave an air of
bereavement to the room. Checkley was laying out the table; that is, he
had done so a quarter of an hour before, but he could not leave off
doing it: he was loth to leave the table before the master came: he took
up the blotting pad and laid it down again: he arranged the pens: he
lingered over the job.

'Not come yet?' George cried, astonished. 'Do you think that yesterday's
shock has been too much for him?'

'I believe it's killed him,' said the old clerk--'killed him. That's
what it has done;' and he went on muttering and mumbling. 'Don't,'he
cried, when George took up the letters. 'P'r'aps he isn't dead yet--you
haven't stepped into his shoes just yet. Let them letters alone.'

'Not dead yet. I hope not.' George began to open the letters, regardless
of the surly and disrespectful words. One may forgive a good deal to
fidelity. 'He will go on for a good many years after we have got the
money back for him.'

'After some of us'--Checkley corrected him--'have got his money back for
him.' He turned to go back to his own office, then turned again and came
back to the table. He laid both hands upon it, leaned forward, shaking
his head, and said with trembling voice: 'Did you never think, Mr.
Austin, of the black ingratitood of the thing? Him that done it you
know--him that eat his bread and took his money.' When Checkley was
greatly moved, his grammar went back to the early days before he was
confidential clerk.

'I daresay it was ungrateful. I have been thinking, hitherto, of
stronger adjectives.'

'Well--we've agreed--all of us--haven't we?--that it was done in this
office--some one in the office done it with the help of some one out:
some one who knows his ways'--he pointed to the empty chair--'some one
who'd known all his ways for a long time, ten years at least.'

'Things certainly seem to point that way'--'and they point to you,' he
would have added, but refrained.

The old man shook his head again and went on. 'They've eaten his bread
and done his work; and--and--don't you call it, Mr. Austin--I ask you
plain--don't you call it black ingratitood?'

'I am sure it is. I have no doubt whatever about the ingratitude. But,
you see, Checkley, that vice is not one which the Courts recognise. It
is not one denounced in the Decalogue.--There is a good deal to
consider, in fact, before we get to the ingratitude. It is probably a
criminal conspiracy; it is a felony; it is a thing to be punished by a
long term of penal servitude. When we have worried through all this and
got our conspirators under lock and key, we will proceed to consider
their ingratitude. There is also the bad form of it and the absence of
proper feeling of it; and the want of consideration of the trouble they
give. Patience! We shall have to consider the business from your point
of view presently.'

'I wouldn't scoff and snigger at it, Mr. Austin, if I were you. Scoffin'
and sniggerin' might bring bad luck. Because, you know, there's others
besides yourself determined to bring this thing to a right issue.'

George put down his papers and looked at this importunate person. What
did he mean? The old man shrunk and shrivelled and grew small. He
trembled all over. But he remained standing with his hands on the
table--leaning forward. 'Eight years ago,' he went on, 'when that other
business happened--when Mr. Arundel cut his lucky----'

'I will have nothing said against Mr. Arundel. Go to your own room.'

'One word--I will speak it. If _he's_ dead I shall not stay long here.
But I shall stay so long as he's alive, though you are his partner. Only
one word, sir. If Mr. Arundel hadn't--run away--he'd 'a been a partner
instead of you.'

'Well?'

'Well, sir--s'pose he'd been found out _after_ he was made a partner,
instead of before?'

George pointed to the door. The old man seemed off his head--was it with
terror? Checkley obeyed. But at the door he turned his head and grinned.
Quite a theatrical grin. It expressed malignity and the pleasure of
anticipation. What was the matter with the old man? Surely, terror. Who,
in the office, except himself, had the control of the letters? Who drew
that quarterly cheque? Surely, terror.

It was not until half-past eleven that Mr. Dering arrived at the office.
He usually passed through the clerk's office outside his own; this
morning he entered by his own private door, which opened on the stairs.
No one had the key except himself. He generally proceeded in an orderly
and methodical manner to hang up his hat and coat, take off his gloves,
place his umbrella in the stand, throw open the safe, sit down in his
chair, adjusted at a certain distance of three inches or so, to put on
his glasses, and then, without either haste or dawdling, to begin the
work of the day. It is very certain that to approach work always in
exactly the same way saves the nerves. The unmethodical workman gets to
his office at a varying hour, travels by different routes--now on an
omnibus, now on foot; does nothing to-day in the same way that he did it
yesterday. He breaks up early. At sixty he talks of retiring, at seventy
he is past his work.

This morning, Mr. Dering did nothing in its proper order. First, he was
nearly two hours late. Next, he came in by his private door. George rose
to greet him, but stopped because--a most wonderful thing--his Partner
made as if he did not observe his presence. His eyes went through George
in creepy and ghostly fashion. The junior partner stood still, silent,
in bewilderment. Saw one ever the like, that a man should at noontide
walk in his sleep! His appearance, too, was strange; his hat, pushed a
little back, gave a touch of recklessness--actually recklessness--to the
austere old lawyer: his eyes glowed pleasantly; and on his face--that
grave and sober face--there was a pleased and satisfied smile: he looked
happy, interested, benevolent, but not--no--not Mr. Edward Dering.
Again, his coat, always tightly buttoned, was now hanging loose;
outside, it had been swinging in the breeze, to the wonder of Lincoln's
Inn: and he wore no gloves, a thing most remarkable. He looked about the
room, nodded his head, and shut the door behind him.

'He's somnambulating,' George murmured, 'or else I am invisible: I must
have eaten fern-seed without knowing it.'

Mr. Dering, still smiling pleasantly, walked across the room to the safe
and unlocked it. He had in his hand a brown-paper parcel tied with red
tape--this he deposited in the safe, locked it up, and dropped the keys
in his pocket. The window beside the safe was open. He sat down, looking
out into the Square.

At this moment Checkley opened the door softly, after his wont, to bring
in more letters. He stopped short, seeing his master thus seated, head
in hand, at the window. He recognised the symptoms of yesterday--the
rapt look, the open eyes that saw nothing. He crept on tiptoe across the
room. 'Hush!' he whispered. 'Don't move. Don't speak. He went like this
yesterday. Don't make the least noise. He'll come round presently.'

'What is it?'

'Kind of fit, it is. Trouble done it. Yah! Ingratitood.' He would have
hissed the word, but it has no sibilant. You can't hiss without the
materials. 'Yesterday's trouble. That's what's done it.'

They stood watching in silence for about ten minutes. The office was
like the Court of the sleeping Princess. Then Checkley sneezed. Mr.
Dering probably mistook the sneeze for a kiss, for he closed his eyes
for a moment, opened them again, and arose once more himself, grave and
austere.

He nodded cheerfully, took off his hat, hung it on its peg, buttoned his
coat, and threw open the safe. Evidently he remembered nothing of what
had just passed.

'You are early, George,' he said. 'You are before me, which is unusual.
However--the early bird--we know.'

'Before you for once. Are you quite well this morning? None the worse
for yesterday's trouble?'

'He's always well,' said Checkley, with cheerfulness assumed. 'Nobody
ever sees him ill--_he_ get ill? Not him. Eats as hearty as
five-and-twenty and walks as upright.'

'I am perfectly well, to the best of my knowledge. Yesterday's business
upset me for the time--but it did not keep me awake. Yet it is certainly
a very great trouble. You have no news, I suppose, that brought you here
earlier than usual?'

'Nothing new since yesterday.'

'And you feel pretty confident?'

'I feel like a sleuth-hound. I understand the pleasures of the chase. I
long to be on the scent again. As for Edmund Gray, he is as good as in
prison already.'

'Good. I was for the moment shaken out of myself. I was bewildered. I
was unable to look at the facts of the case calmly. For the first time
in my life I wanted advice. Well: I now understand what a great thing it
is that our profession exists for the assistance of men in trouble. How
would the world get along at all without solicitors?'

He took his usual place at the table and turned over his letters. 'This
morning,' he went on, 'I feel more assured: my mind is clear again. I
can talk about the case. Now then. Let us see--Edmund Gray is no shadow
but a man. He has made me recommend him to his landlord. He is a clever
man and a bold man. Don't be in a hurry about putting your hands upon
him. Complete your case before you strike. But make no delay.'

'There shall be none. And you shall hear everything from day to day, or
from hour to hour.'

Left alone, Mr. Dering returned to his papers and his work.

At half-past one, Checkley looked in. 'Not going to take lunch this
morning?'

'Lunch? I have only just----' Mr. Dering looked at his watch. 'Bless me!
Most extraordinary! This morning has slipped away. I thought I had only
just sat down. It seems not more than half an hour since Mr. Austin left
me. Why, I should have forgotten all about it and let the time go
by--nothing worse for a man of my years than irregular feeding.'

'It's lucky you've got me,' said his clerk. 'Half-a-dozen partners
wouldn't look after your meal-times.--Ah!' as his master went up-stairs
to the room where he always had his luncheon laid out, 'he's clean
forgotten. Some of these days, walking about wropped up in his thoughts,
he'll be run over.--Clean forgotten it, he has. Sits down in a dream:
walks about in a dream: some of these days he'll do something in a
dream. Then there will be trouble.' He closed the door and returned to
his own desk, where he was alone, the juniors having gone out to dinner.
His own dinner was in his coat pocket. It consisted of a saveloy cut in
thin slices and laid in bread with butter and mustard--a tasty meal. He
slowly devoured the whole to the last crumb. Then, Mr. Dering having by
this time finished his lunch and descended again, Checkley went
up-stairs and finished the pint of claret of which his master had taken
one glass. 'It's sour stuff,' he said. 'It don't behave as wine in a
man's inside ought to behave. It don't make him a bit joyfuller. But
it's pleasant too. Why they can't drink Port wine--which is real
wine--when they can afford it, I don't know.'

It was past three in the afternoon when George returned, not quite so
confident in his bearing, yet full of news.

'If you are quite ready to listen,' he said, 'I've got a good deal to
tell. First of all, I thought I would have another shot at Gray's Inn. I
went to the Chambers. The outer door was open, which looked as if the
man was at home. I knocked at the inner door, which was opened by the
laundress, the old woman whom I saw yesterday. "Well, sir," she said,
"you are unlucky. The master has been here this very morning. And he
hasn't been long gone. You've only missed him by half an hour or so." I
asked her if he would return that day; but she knew nothing. Then I
asked her if she would let me write and leave a note for him. To this
she consented, rather unwillingly. I went in therefore, and wrote my
note at Mr. Gray's table. I asked him to call here on important
business, and I marked the note "Urgent." I think there can be no harm
in that. Then I looked about the room. It is one of those old wainscoted
rooms, furnished simply, but everything solid and good--a long table,
nearly as large as this one of yours: solid chairs--a solid sofa. Three
or four pictures on the wall, and a bookcase full of books. No signs of
occupation: no letters: no flowers. Everything covered with dust,
although the old woman was there. I could have wished to examine the
papers on the table, but the presence of the old woman forbade that
dishonourable act. I did, however, look at the books. And I made a most
curious discovery. Mr. Edmund Gray is a Socialist. All his books are on
Socialism: they are in French, German, and English: all books of
Socialism. And the pictures on the wall are portraits of distinguished
Socialists. Isn't that wonderful? Did one ever hear before of Socialism
and forgery going together?'

'Not too fast. We haven't yet connected Edmund Gray with the forgery. At
present, we only know that his name was used.'

'Wait a bit. I am coming to that. After leaving the Chambers, I went
into the City and saw Mr. Ellis. First of all, none of the stock has
been sold.'

'Oh! they have had three months, and they have not disposed of it? They
must have met with unforeseen difficulties. Let me see.'

Mr. Dering was now thoroughly alert. The weakness of the morning had
completely passed away. 'What difficulties? Upon my word, I cannot
understand that there could have been any. They have got the papers from
a respectable solicitor through a respectable broker. No--no. Their
course was perfectly plain. But rogues often break down through their
inability to see the strength of their own case.'

'Next, Mr. Ellis has ascertained that some of the dividends are received
by your Bank. I therefore called on the manager. Now, be prepared for
another surprise.'

'Another forgery?'

'Yes--another forgery. It is nine or ten years since you sent a letter
to the manager--I saw it--introducing your client Edmund Gray,
gentleman, who was desirous of opening a private account. He paid in a
small sum of money, which has been lying to his credit ever since, and
has not been touched. In February last he received another letter from
you; and again in March and April, forwarding certificates, and
requesting him to receive the dividends. With your own hand you placed
the papers in the Bank. I saw the letters. I would swear to your
handwriting.'

'These people are as clever as they are audacious.'

'At every point a letter from you--a letter which the ablest expert
would tell was your handwriting. Your name covers and vouches for
everything.'

'Did you tell the manager what has happened?'

'Certainly; I told him everything. And this is in substance the line he
takes. "Your Partner," he says, "alleges that those papers have been
procured by forgery. He says that the letter of introduction is a
forgery. Very good. It may be so. But I have opened this account for a
customer who brought me an introduction from the best solicitor in
London, whose handwriting I know well, and recognise in the letter. Such
an allegation would not be enough in itself for me to take action: until
a civil or criminal action is brought--until it is concluded--I could
not refuse to treat the customer like all the rest. At the same time I
will take what steps I can to inquire into my customer's antecedents."'

'Quite right,' said Mr. Dering.

'I asked him next, what he would do if the customer sent for the papers.
He said that if an action were brought, he would probably be served with
a _sub poena duces tecum_, making him keep and produce these papers as
forming part of the documents in the case.'

'Certainly, certainly; the manager knows his law.'

'"And," he went on, "as regards cheques, I shall pay them or receive
them until restrained."'

'In other words, he said what we expected. For our own action now.'

'We might apply to a judge in Chambers for an attachment or a garnishee
order. That must be _pendente lite_, an interlocutory proceeding, in the
action. As yet, we have not brought an action at all. My partner'--Mr.
Dering rubbed his hands cheerfully--'I think we have done very well so
far. These are clumsy scoundrels, after all. They thought to divert
suspicion by using my name. They thought to cover themselves with my
name. But they should have sold and realised without the least delay.
Very good. We have now got our hands upon the papers. It would have
complicated matters horribly had the stock been sold and transferred. So
far we are safe. Because, you see, after what they have heard, the Bank
would certainly not give them up without letting us know. They would
warn us: they would put the man off: they would ask him awkward
questions about himself. Oh! I think we are safe--quite safe.'

Mr. Dering drew a long breath. 'I was thinking last night,' he
continued, 'of the trouble we might have if those certificates had
changed hands. They might have been bought and sold a dozen times in
four months: they might have been sold in separate small lots, and an
order of the Court necessary for every transaction. We have now nothing
but the simple question before us: how did the man Edmund Gray get
possession of this property?'

He sat in silence for a few minutes. Then he went on quietly. 'To lose
this money would be a heavy blow for me--not all my fortune, nor a
quarter, but a large sum. I have plenty left. I have no hungry and
expectant heirs: my people are all wealthy. But yet a very heavy loss.
And then--to be robbed. I have always wondered why we left off hanging
robbers. They ought to be hanged, every one. He who invades the sacred
right of property should be killed--killed without hope of mercy.' He
spoke with the earnestness of sincerity. 'To lose this property would
not be ruin to me; yet it would be terrible. It would take so many years
out of my past life. Every year means so much money saved. Forty
thousand pounds means ten years of my past--not taken away so that I
should be ten years younger, but, ten years of work annihilated. Could I
forgive the man who would so injure me? Never.'

'I understand,' said George. 'Fortunately, we shall get the papers
back. The fact of their possession must connect the possessor with
the fraud. Who is he? Can he be warned already? Yet who should tell
him? Who knows that we have discovered the business? You--your friend
Mr. Ellis--the manager of the Bank--no one else. Yes--there is also
Checkley--Checkley,' he repeated. He could not--yet--express his
suspicions as to the old and faithful servant. 'Checkley also knows.'

At this point Checkley himself opened the door and brought in a
card--that of the Bank manager.

'I have called,' said the visitor hurriedly, 'to tell you of something
important, that happened this morning. I did not know it when we were
talking over this business, Mr. Austin. It happened at ten o'clock, as
soon as the doors were open. A letter was brought by hand from Mr.
Dering----'

'Another forgery! When will they stop?'

'----asking for those certificates to be given to the bearer--Mr. Edmund
Gray's certificates. This was done. They are no longer at the Bank.'

'Oh! Then they have been warned,' cried George. 'Who was the messenger?'

'He was a boy. Looked like an office boy.'

'I will inquire directly if it was one of our boys. Go on.'

'That settles the difficulty as to our action in case the papers are
wanted by you. We no longer hold them. As to the dividends, we shall
continue to receive them to the account of Mr. Edmund Gray until we get
an order or an injunction.'

'The difficulty,' said George, 'is to connect the case with Mr. Edmund
Gray bodily. At present, we have nothing but the letters to go upon.
Suppose the real Edmund Gray says that he knows nothing about it. What
are we to do? You remember receiving the dividends for him. Has he drawn
a cheque?'

'No; we have never paid any cheque at all for him.'

'Have you seen him?'

'No; I have never seen him.'

'It is a most wonderful puzzle. After all, the withdrawal of the papers
can only mean a resolution to sell them. He must instruct somebody. He
must appear in the matter.'

'He may instruct somebody as he instructed me--in the name of Mr.
Dering.'

'Another forgery.'

'Yes,' said George. 'We must watch and find out this mysterious Edmund
Gray. After all, it will not help us to say that a forged letter gave
certain instructions to do certain things for a certain person--say the
Queen--unless you can establish the complicity of that person. And
that--so far--we certainly have not done. Meantime--what next?'

Obviously, the next thing was to find out if any of the office boys had
taken that letter to the Bank. No one had been sent on that errand.




CHAPTER XIV

CHECKLEY'S CASE


That evening Mr. Checkley was not in his customary place at the
_Salutation_, where his presence was greatly desired. He arrived late,
when it wanted only a quarter to eleven. The faded barrister was left
alone in the room, lingering over the day's paper with his empty glass
beside him. Mr. Checkley entered with an air of triumph, and something
like the elastic spring of a victor in his aged step. He called Robert,
and ordered at his own expense, for himself, a costly drink--a compound
of Jamaica rum, hot water, sugar and lemon, although it was an evening
in July and, for the time of year, almost pleasantly warm. Nor did he
stop here, for with the manner of a man who just for once--to mark a
joyful occasion--plunges, he rattled his money in his pocket and ordered
another for the barrister. 'For,' he said, 'this evening I have done a
good work, and I will mark the day.'

When the glasses were brought, he lifted his and cried: 'Come, let us
drink to the confusion of all Rogues, great and small. Down with 'em!'

'Your toast, Mr. Checkley,' replied the barrister, 'would make my
profession useless; if there were no rogues, there would be no Law.
That, however, would injure me less than many of my brethren. I drink,
therefore, confusion to Rogues, great and small. Down with 'em.--This is
excellent grog.--Down with 'em!' So saying, he finished his glass and
departed to his garret, where, thanks to the grog, he slept nobly, and
dreamed that he was a Master in Chancery.

The reason of this unaccustomed mirth was as follows: Checkley by this
time had fully established in his own mind the conclusion that the
prime mover in the deed--the act--the Thing--was none other than the new
partner, the young upstart, whom he hated with a hatred
unextinguishable. He was as certain about him as he had been certain
about Athelstan Arundel, and for much the same reasons. Very well. As
yet he had not dared to speak: King Pharaoh's chief scribe would have
had the same hesitation at proffering any theory concerning Joseph.
To-night, however---- But you shall hear.

Everybody was out of the office at half-past seven, when he left it. He
walked round the empty rooms, looking into unlocked drawers--one knows
not what he expected to find. He looked into Mr. Austin's room and shook
his fist and grinned at the empty chair.

'I'll have you yet,' he said. 'Oh, fox! fox! I'll have you, if I wait
for thirty years?'

It adds an additional pang to old age when one feels that if the end
comes prematurely, when one is only ninety or so, there may be a revenge
unfinished. I have always envied the dying hero who had no enemies to
forgive because he had killed them all.

When Checkley left the place he walked across the Inn and so into
Chancery Lane, where he crossed over and entered Gray's Inn by the
Holborn archway. He lingered in South Square: he walked all round it
twice: he read the names on the door-posts, keeping all the time an eye
on No. 22. Presently, he was rewarded. A figure which he knew, tall and
well proportioned, head flung back, walked into the Inn and made
straight for No. 22. It was none other than Athelstan Arundel.--The old
man crept into the entrance, where he was partly hidden; he could see
across the Square, himself unseen. Athelstan walked into the house and
up the stairs: the place was quiet: Checkley could hear his steps on the
wooden stairs: he heard him knock at a door--he heard the door open and
the voices of men talking.

'Ah!' said Checkley, 'now we've got 'em!'

Well--but this was not all. For presently there came into the Inn young
Austin himself.

'Oh!' said Checkley, finishing his sentence--'on toast. Here's the
other; here they are--both.'

In fact, George, too, entered the house known as No. 22 and walked up
the stairs.

Checkley waited for no more. He ran out of the Inn and he called a cab.

If he had waited a little longer, he would have seen the new partner
come out of the house and walk away: if he had followed him up the
stairs, he would have seen him knocking at the closed outer door of Mr.
Edmund Gray. If he had knocked at the door opposite, he would have found
Mr. Athelstan Arundel in the room with his own acquaintance, Mr. Freddy
Carstone, the Cambridge scholar and the ornament of their circle at the
_Salutation_. But being in a hurry, he jumped to a conclusion and called
a cab.

He drove to Palace Gardens, where Sir Samuel had his town-house. Sir
Samuel was still at dinner. He sat down in the hall, meekly waiting.
After a while the Service condescended to ask if he wished a message to
be taken in to Sir Samuel.

'From his brother's--from Mr. Dering's office, please tell him. From his
brother's office--on most important business--most important--say.'

Sir Samuel received him kindly, made him sit down, and gave him a glass
of wine. 'Now,' he said, 'tell me what it all means. My brother has had
a robbery--papers and certificates and things--of course they are
stopped. He won't lose anything. But it is a great nuisance, this kind
of thing.'

'He has already lost four months' dividends--four months, sir, on
thirty-eight thousand pounds. And do you really think that he will get
back his papers?'

'Certainly--or others. They are, after all, only vouchers. How is my
brother?'

'Well, Sir Samuel, better than you'd think likely. This morning, to be
sure----' He stopped, being loth to tell how his master had lost
consciousness. 'Well, sir, I've been thinking that the property was
gone, and from what I know of them as had to do with the job, I thought
there was mighty little chance of getting it back. It kept me awake. Oh!
it's an awful sum. Close upon forty thousand pounds. He can stand that
and double that----'

'And double that again,' said Sir Samuel. 'I should hope so.'

'Certainly, sir. But it's a blow-- I can feel for him. I'm only a clerk;
but I've saved a bit and put out a bit, Sir Samuel. Cheese-parings,
you'd say; but I've enjoyed saving it up--oh! I've enjoyed it. I don't
think there is any pleasure in life like saving up--watching it
grow--and grow and grow--it grows like a pretty flower, doesn't it?--and
adding to it. Ah!' he sighed, and drank his glass of wine. 'Sir Samuel,
if I was to lose my little savings, it would break my heart. I'm an old
man, and so is he--it would break me up, it would indeed. Ever since
yesterday morning, I've been thinking whether anything could happen to
make me lose my money. There's Death in the thought. Sir Samuel--for an
old man--and a small man--like me--there's Death in the thought.'

'Don't tell anybody where your investments are, and lock up the papers,
Checkley.--Now, what do you want me to do for you?'

'I want you to listen to me for half an hour, Sir Samuel, and to give me
your advice, for the business is too much for me.'

'Go on, then. I am listening.'

'Very well. Now, sir, I don't know if I shall be able to make my case
clear--but I will try. I haven't been about Mr. Dering for fifty years
for nothing, I hope. The case is this. Nine years ago, a man calling
himself Edmund Gray took Chambers in South Square, Gray's Inn, forty
pounds a year. He is represented as being an elderly man. He has paid
his rent regularly, but he visits his Chambers at irregular intervals.
Eight years ago there was a forgery at your brother's. The cheque was
payable to the order of Edmund Gray; mark that. The money was paid----'

'I remember. Athelstan Arundel was accused or suspected of the thing.'

'He was. And he ran away to avoid being arrested. Remember that. And
he's never been heard of since. Well, the series of forgeries by which
the shares and stocks belonging to Mr. Dering have been stolen are all
written in the same handwriting as the first, and are all carried on in
the name and for the order of Edmund Gray. That you would acknowledge in
a moment if you saw the papers: there are the same lines and curves of
the letters----'

'Which proves, I should say, that Athelstan never did it.'

'Wait a minute. Don't let's be in a hurry. The forgers by themselves
could do nothing. They wanted some one in the office, some one always
about the place: some one who could get at the safe: some one who could
get from the office what the man outside wanted: some one to intercept
the letters----'

'Well?'

'That person, Sir Samuel, I have found.'

Sir Samuel sat up. 'You have found him?'

'I have. And here's my difficulty. Because, Sir Samuel, he is your
brother's new partner; and unless we lodge him in the Jug before many
days, he will be your own brother-in-law.'

Sir Samuel changed colour, and got up to see that the door behind the
screen was shut. 'This is a very serious thing to say, Checkley--a very
serious thing.'

'Oh! I will make it quite plain. First, as to opportunities; next, as to
motives; third, as to facts. For opportunities, then. Latterly, for the
last six months, he's been working in the Chief's office nearly all day
long. There he sat, at the little table between the windows, just half
turned round to catch the light, with the open safe within easy reach of
his hand when the Chief wasn't looking; or when--because he doesn't
always touch the bell--Mr. Dering would bring papers into my office and
leave him alone--ah! alone--with the safe. That's for opportunities. Now
for motives. He's been engaged for two years, I understand, to a young
lady----'

'To Lady Dering's sister.'

'Just so, sir. And I believe, until the unexpected luck of his
partnership, against the wish of Lady Dering's family.'

'That is true.'

'He had two hundred a year. And he had nothing else--no prospects and no
chances. So I think you will acknowledge that there's sufficient motive
here for him to try anything.'

'Well, if poverty is a motive--no doubt he had one.'

'Poverty was the motive. You couldn't have a stronger motive. There
isn't in the whole world a stronger motive--though, I admit, some young
men who are pore may keep honest. I did. Mr. Austin, I take it, is one
of those that don't keep honest. That's for motive. Now for facts. Mr.
Austin had nothing to do with the forgery eight years ago; he was only
an articled clerk beginning. But he knew young Arundel who did the
thing, remember. That cheque was written by young Arundel, who ran away.
The letters of this year are written by _the same hand_--by your
brother-in-law, Sir Samuel--by Mr. Athelstan Arundel.'

'But he is gone: he has disappeared: nobody knows where he is.'

Checkley laughed. This was a moment of triumph. 'He is back again, Sir
Samuel. I have seen him.'

'Where? Athelstan back again?'

'I will tell you. All these forgeries use the name of Edmund Gray, of 22
South Square, Gray's Inn. I have told you that before. When the thing is
discovered, young Austin goes off and makes himself mighty busy tracking
and following up, hunting down, doing detective work, and so on. Oh! who
so busy as he? Found out that Edmund Gray was an old man, if you please;
and this morning again, so cheerful and lively that it does your heart
good--going to settle it all in a day or two. Yah! As if I couldn't see
through his cunning! Why! I'm seventy-five years old. I'm up to every
kind of dodge: what will happen next, unless you cut in? First, we shall
hear that Mr. Edmund Gray has gone abroad, or has vanished, or
something. When he's quite out of the way, we shall find out that he did
the whole thing--him and nobody else. And then if there's no more money
to be made by keeping the papers, they will all come back--from Edmund
Gray, penitent--oh! I know.'

'But about Athelstan Arundel?'

'To be sure. I'm an old man, Sir Samuel, and I talk too much. Well, I go
most nights to a parlour in Holborn--the _Salutation_ it is--where the
company is select and the liquor good. There I saw him a week ago. He
was brought in by one of the company. I knew him at once, and he wasn't
in hiding. Used his own name. But he didn't see me. No--no, thinks I. We
won't give this away. I hid my face behind a newspaper. He's been
staying in Camberwell for the last eight years, I believe, all the
time.'

'In Camberwell? Why in Camberwell?'

'In bad company--as I was given to understand. In Prodigal Son's
company.'

'You don't mean this, Checkley? Is it really true?'

'It is perfectly true, Sir Samuel. I have seen him. He was dressed like
a Prince--velvet jacket and crimson tie and white waistcoat. And he
walked in with just his old insolence--nose up, head back, looking round
as if we were not fit to be in the same room with him--just as he used
to do.'

'By Jove!' said Sir Samuel, thrusting his hands into his pockets. 'What
will Hilda say--I mean--Lady Dering, say, when she hears it?'

'There is more to hear, Sir Samuel--not much more. But it drives the
nail home--a nail in their coffin, I hope and trust.'

'Go on. Let me hear all.'

'You've caught on, have you, to all I said about Edmund Gray of 22 South
Square--him as was mentioned eight years ago--and about the handwriting
being the same now as then?'

'Yes.'

'So that the same hand which forged the cheque then has forged the
letters now?'

'Quite so.'

'I said then--and I say now--that young Arundel forged that cheque. I
say now that he is the forger of these letters, and that Austin stood in
with him and was his confidant. What do you think of this? To-night,
after office, I thought I would go and have a look at 22 South Square.
So I walked up and down on the other side: my eyes are pretty good
still: I thought I should perhaps see something presently over the way.
So I did. Who should come into the Square, marching along as if the old
place, Benchers and all, belonged to him, but Mr. Athelstan Arundel! He
pulled up at No. 22--No. 22, mind--Edmund Gray's number--he walked
up-stairs--I heard him--to the second floor--Edmund Gray's floor.'

'Good Lord!' cried Sir Samuel. 'This is suspicious with a vengeance.'

'Oh! but I haven't done. I stayed where I was, wondering if he would
come down, and whether I should meet him and ask him what he was doing
with Edmund Gray. And then--I was richly rewarded--oh! rich was the
reward, for who should come into the Square but young Austin himself!
He, too, went up the stairs of No. 22. And there I left them both, and
came away--came to put the case into your hands.'

'What do you want me to do?'

'I want you to advise me. What shall I do? There is my case complete--I
don't suppose you want a more complete case--for any Court of Justice.'

'Well, as for that, I'm not a lawyer. As a City man, if a clerk of mine
was in such a suspicious position as young Austin, I should ask him for
full explanations. You've got no actual proof, you see, that he, or
Athelstan either, did the thing.'

'I beg your pardon, Sir Samuel. I'm only a clerk, and you're a great
City Knight, but I don't know what better proof you want. Don't I see
young Austin pretending not to know who Edmund Gray is, and then going
up to his Chambers to meet his pal Athelstan Arundel? Ain't that proof?
Don't I tell you that the same hand had been at work in both forgeries?
Isn't that hand young Arundel's?'

'Checkley, I see that you are greatly interested in this matter----'

'I would give--ah!--twenty pounds--yes, twenty hard-earned pounds to see
those two young gentlemen in the Dock--where they shall be--where they
shall be,' he repeated. His trembling voice, cracked with old age,
seemed unequally wedded to the malignity of his words and his
expression.

'One of these young gentlemen,' said Sir Samuel, 'is my brother-in-law.
The other, unless this business prevents, will be my brother-in-law
before many days. You will, therefore, understand that my endeavours
will be to keep them both out of the Dock.'

'The job will be only half complete without; but still--to see young
Austin drove out of the place--with disgrace--same as the other one
was--why, that should be something--something to think about
afterwards.'

Checkley went away. Sir Samuel sat thinking what was best to be done.
Like everybody else, he quite believed in Athelstan's guilt. Granted
that fact, he saw clearly that there was another very black-looking case
against him and against George Austin. What should be done? He would
consult his wife. He did so.

'What will Elsie say?' she asked. 'Yet, sooner or later, she must be
told. I suppose that will be my task. But she can wait a little. Do you
go to-morrow morning to Mr. Dering and tell him. The sooner he knows the
better.'



You now understand why Mr. Checkley was so joyous when he arrived at the
_Salutation_, and why he proposed that toast.

In the morning Sir Samuel saw his brother and whispered in his ear the
whole of the case, as prepared and drawn up by Checkley. 'What do you
say?' he asked when he had concluded.

'I say nothing.' Mr. Dering had heard all the points brought out one
after the other without the least emotion. 'There is nothing to be
said.'

'But, my dear brother, the evidence!'

'There is no evidence. It is all supposition. If Athelstan committed the
first forgery--there is no evidence to show that he did--if he has been
living all these years a life of profligacy in England--I have evidence
to the contrary in my own possession--if he was tempted by poverty--if
young Austin was also tempted by poverty--if the two together--or either
separately--could undertake, under temptation, risks so terrible--you
see, the whole case is built upon an "if."'

'Yet it holds together at every point. It is a perfect case. Who else
could do it? Checkley certainly could not. That old man--that old
servant.'

'I agree with you, Checkley could not do it. Not because he is too
old--age has nothing to do with crime--nor because he is an old servant.
He could not do it because he is not clever enough. This kind of thing
wants grasp and vision. Checkley hasn't got either. He might be a
confederate. He may have stopped the letters. He is miserly--he might be
tempted by money. Yet I do not think it possible.'

'No--I cannot believe that,' said Sir Samuel.

'Yet it is quite as difficult to believe such a thing of young Austin.
Oh! I know everything is possible. He belongs to a good family: he has
his own people to think of: he is engaged--he has always led a blameless
life. Yet--yet--everything is possible.'

'I have known cases in the City where the blameless seeming was only a
pretence and a cloak--most deplorable cases, I assure you--the cloak to
hide a profligate life.'

'I think if that were so, I should not be deceived. Outward signs in
such cases are not wanting. I know the face of the profligate, open or
concealed. Young Austin presents no sign of anything but a regular and
blameless life. For all these reasons, I say, we ought to believe him
incapable of any dishonourable action. But I have been in practice for
fifty years--fifty years--during this long period I know not how many
cases--what are called family cases--have been in my hands. I have had
in this room the trembling old profligate of seventy, ready to pay any
price rather than let the thing be known to his old wife, who believes
in him, and his daughters, who worship him. I have had the middle-aged
man of standing in the City imploring me to buy back the paper--at any
price--which would stamp him with infamy. I have had the young man on
his knees begging me never to let his father know the forgery, the
theft, the villainy, the seduction--what not. And I have had women of
every age sitting in that chair confessing their wickedness, which they
do for the most part with hard faces and cold eyes, not like the men,
with shame and tears. The men fall being tempted by want of money, which
means loss of pride and self-respect, and position, and comfort. There
ought to have been a clause in the Litany, "From want of money at all
ages and on all occasions, Good Lord, deliver us."'

'True--most true,' said Sir Samuel. '"From want of money"--I shall say
this next time I go to church--"from want of money at all ages, and
particularly when one is getting on in years, and has a title to keep
up--Good Lord, deliver us." Very good indeed, brother. I shall quote
this in the City. To-morrow, I have to make a speech at the Helmet
Makers' Company. I shall quote this very remarkable saying of yours.'

Mr. Dering smiled gravely. 'A simple saying, indeed. The greatest
temptation of any is the want of money. Why, there is nothing that the
average man will not do rather than be without money. He is helpless: he
is a slave: he is in contempt: without money.--Austin, you tell me, was
tempted by want of money. I think not. He was poor: he had enough to
keep him: he was frugal: he had simple wants: he had never felt the want
of money. No--I do not think that he was tempted by poverty. Everything
is possible--this is possible.--But, brother, silence. If you speak
about this, you may injure the young man, supposing him to be innocent.
If he is guilty, you will put him on his guard. And, mind, I shall show
no foolish mercy--none--when we find the guilty parties. All the more
reason, therefore, for silence.'

Sir Samuel promised. But he had parted with the secret--he had given it
into the keeping of a woman.




CHAPTER XV

WHO IS EDMUND GRAY?


Athelstan laughed on the first hearing of the thing--it was on the
Tuesday evening, the day after the discovery, and George was dining with
him. He laughed both loud and long and with some of the old bitterness.
'So the notes were in the safe all along, were they? Who put them there?
"I," says old Checkley, "with my pretty fingers--I put them there."'

'As soon as this other business is over, the Chief must tell your
mother, Athelstan. It ought to come from him. I shall say nothing to
Elsie just yet. She shall learn that you are home again, and that your
name is clear again, at the same moment.'

'I confess that I should be pleased to make them all confess that their
suspicions were hasty and unfounded. At the same time I did wrong to go
away; I ought to have stuck to my post. As for this other business, one
thinks with something like satisfaction of the wise old lawyer losing
forty thousand pounds. It made him sit up, did it? For such a man to sit
up indicates the presence of deep emotion. Lost forty thousand pounds!
And he who holds so strongly to the sanctity of Property! Forty thousand
pounds!'

'Well; but we shall recover the certificates, or get new ones in their
place.'

'I suppose so. Shares can't be lost or stolen, really--can they?
Meantime, there may be difficulty, and you must try to find the forger.
Has it yet occurred to you that Checkley is the only man who has had
control of the letters and access at all times to the office?'

'It has.'

'Checkley is not exactly a fox: he is a jackal: therefore he does
somebody's dirty work for him at a wage. That is the way with the
jackal, you know. Eight years ago he tried to make a little pile by a
little forgery--he did not commit the forgery, I am sure--but he did the
jackal; only he forgot that notes are numbered: so when he remembered
that, he put them back. Now, his friend the forger, who is no doubt a
begging-letter writer, has devised an elaborate scheme for getting hold
of shares--ignorant that they are of no value.'

'Well, he has drawn the dividends for four months.'

'That is something, you see; but he hoped to get hold of thirty-eight
thousand pounds. It is the same hand at work, you infer from the
writing. You are quite sure of that?'

'There can be no doubt of it. How could two different hands present
exactly the same curious singularities?'

'And all the letters, cheques, and transfers for the same person. What
is his name?'

'One Edmund Gray, resident at 22 South Square, Gray's Inn.'

'No. 22? Oh! that is where Freddy Carstone lives. Do you know anything
about the _nomme_ Edmund Gray?'

'I have been in search of information about him. He is described by the
landlord of the rooms and by his laundress as an elderly gentleman.'

'Elderly. Checkley is elderly.'

'Yes, I thought of Checkley, of course. But somehow the indications
don't fit. My informants speak of a gentleman. Nobody at his kindliest
and most benevolent mood could possibly call Checkley a gentleman.'

'The word gentleman,' said Athelstan, 'is elastic. It stretches with the
employer or the consumer of it. It is like the word truth to a
politician. It varies from man to man. You cannot lay down any
definition of the word gentleman. Do you know nothing more about him?'

'A little. He has held this set of Chambers for nine years, and he pays
his rent regularly before the day it falls due. Also I called upon him
the other day when his laundress was at work and wrote a note to him at
his table. The room is full of Socialist books and pamphlets. He is
therefore, presumably, a Socialist leader.'

'I know all their leaders,' said Athelstan the Journalist.

'I've made the acquaintance of most for business purposes. I've had to
read up the Socialist Literature and to make the acquaintance of their
chiefs. There is no Edmund Gray among them. Stay--there is a Socialist
letter in the _Times_ of to-day--surely---- Waiter'--they were dining at
the club where Athelstan was a temporary member--'let me have the
_Times_ of to-day. Yes, I thought so. Here is a letter from the
Socialist point of view, signed by Edmund Gray--and--and yes--look
here--it is most curious--with the same address--22 South Square--a long
letter, in small print, and put in the supplement; but it's there. See;
signed "Edmund Gray." What do you think of that, for impudence in a
forger?'

George read the letter through carefully. It was a whole column long;
and it was in advocacy of Socialism pure and simple. One was surprised
that the editor had allowed it to appear. Probably he was influenced by
the tone of it, which was generous, cheerful, and optimistic. There was
not the slightest ring of bitterness about it. 'We who look,' it said,
'for the coming disappearance of Property, not by violence and
revolution, but by a rapid process of decay and wasting away, regard the
present position of the holders of Property with the greatest
satisfaction. Everywhere there are encouraging signs. Money which
formerly obtained five per cent. now yields no more than half that rate.
Shares which were formerly paying ten, twelve, and twenty per cent. are
now falling steadily. Companies started every day in the despairing hope
of the old great gains, fail and are wound up. Land, which the old wars
forced up to an extraordinary value, has now sunk so enormously that
many landlords have lost three-fourths and even more of their income.
All those enterprises which require the employment of many hands--as
docks, railways, printing-houses, manufactories of all kinds--are
rapidly falling into the condition of being able to pay no dividend at
all, because the pay of the men and the maintenance of the plant absorb
all. When that point is reached, the whole capital--the
millions--embarked in these enterprises will be lost for ever. The stock
cannot be sold because it produces nothing: it has vanished. In other
words, sir, what I desire to point out to your readers is that while you
are discussing or denouncing Socialism, the one condition which makes
Socialism possible and necessary is actually coming upon the
world--namely, the destruction of capital. Why have not men in all ages
combined to work for themselves? Because capital has prevented them.
When there is no capital left to employ them, to bully them, to make
laws against their combinations, or to bribe them, they will then have
to work with and for themselves or starve. The thing will be forced upon
them. Work will be a necessity for everybody: there will be no more a
privileged class: all who work will be paid at equal rates for their
work: those who refuse to work will be suffered to starve.'

The letter went on to give illustrations of the enormous losses in
capital during the last fifteen years, when the shrinkage began. It
concluded: 'For my own part, I confess that the prospect of the future
fills me with satisfaction. No more young men idle, middle-aged men
pampered, and old men looking back to a wasted life: nobody trying to
save, because the future of the old, the widows, the children, the
decayed, and the helpless, will be a charge upon the strong and the
young--that is, upon the juvenes, the workers of the State. No more
robbery: no more unproductive classes. Do not think that there will be
no more men of science and of learning. These, too, will be considered
workers. Or no more poets, dramatists, artists, novelists. These, too,
will be considered workers. And do not fear the coming of that time. It
is stealing upon us as surely, as certainly, as the decay of the powers
in old age. Doubt not that when it comes we shall have become well
prepared for it. Those of us who are old may lament that we shall not
live to see the day when the last shred of property is cast into the
common hoard. Those of us who are young have all the more reason to
rejoice in their youth, because they may live to see the Great Day of
Humanity dawn at last.--EDMUND GRAY, 22 South Square, Gray's Inn.'

'You have read this?' asked George.

'Yes; I read it this morning before I knew the significance of the
signature. Letter of a dreamer. He sees what might happen, and thinks
that it will happen. Capital is too strong yet.'

'Is this the letter of a forger, a conspirator--a thief?'

'It does not strike me in that light. Yet many great thieves are most
amiable in their private lives. There is no reason why this dreamer of
dreams should not be also a forger and a thief. Still, the case would be
remarkable, I admit.'

'Can there be two Edmund Grays--father and son?'

'Can there be a clerk to Edmund Gray, imprudently using his master's
name, and ready to open any letter that may come? Consider--Clerk is a
friend of old Checkley. Clerk invents the scheme. Checkley does his
share. However, we can easily find out something more about the man,
because my old friend, Freddy Carstone, has Chambers on the same floor.
We will walk over after dinner, and if Freddy happens to be sober--he
is about this time pleasantly, not stupidly, drunk, as a rule--he will
tell us what he knows about his neighbour.'

'I ought to see Elsie this evening, but this is more important.'

'Much more. Send her a telegram. Waiter, we will take coffee here. So.
You have got the conduct of the case in your own hands. What has
Checkley got?'

'Nothing. I believe he is jealous of me. I don't know why. But it does
not matter what an old man like that thinks.'

'Even an old man can strike a match and light a fire. Checkley is a
malignant old man. He is quite capable of charging you with the job. I
wonder he hasn't done it by this time. Remember my case, old man.'
Athelstan's face darkened at the recollection. 'Dirt sticks sometimes.
Look at me. I am smirched all over.'

'His manner was very odd this morning--insolent and strange. He began to
talk mysteriously of the ingratitude of the forger.'

'Why he's actually going to do it! Don't you see--he means that you are
the forger?'

'Oh! does he? Very well, Athelstan'--George finished his coffee and got
up--'the sooner we find out this mystery of this Edmund Gray the better.
Let us seek your tipsy Scholar.'

They walked from Piccadilly to Holborn, turning the thing over and
making a dozen surmises. Edmund Gray, twins: Edmund Gray, father and
son--father wanting to destroy property, a Socialist; son wanting to
steal property, individualist: Edmund Gray cousins--one the mild
philosopher, rejoicing in the decay of wealth; the other a bandit,
robber and conspirator: Edmund Gray, father and daughter--the young lady
of the advanced type, who has not only thrown over her religion but her
morals also: Edmund Gray, master and clerk: Edmund Gray under domination
of a villain: there was in every situation a noble chance for the
imagination. George showed a capacity unsuspected: he should have been a
novelist. The hypothesis was always beautiful and admirable: but it
wanted one thing--_vraisemblance_: one felt, even while advancing and
defending one, that it was impossible.

They turned into the gateway of the Inn and walked down the passage into
the Square. 'Look!' Athelstan caught his companion by the wrist. 'Who is
that?'

'Checkley himself. He is coming out of No 22!'

'Yes, out of 22. What is he doing there? Eh? What has he been doing
there?'

It was Checkley. The old man walking feebly, with bent head, came out
from the entrance of No. 22 and turned northward into Field Court. They
waited, watching him, until he left the Square. 'What is he doing
there?' asked George again. 'Come. Edmund Gray must be at home. Let us
go up.'

They found the outer door shut. They knocked with their sticks: there
was no answer.

'What was he doing here?' asked Athelstan.

The Scholar's door stood open. The Scholar himself was for once
perfectly sober, and welcomed them joyously and boisterously.

'We are here on business, Freddy,' said Athelstan.

'You are here to sit and talk and drink whisky-and-soda till midnight,
till two o'clock in the morning. It is not until two in the morning that
you can get the full flavour of the Inn. It is like a college then,
monastic, shut off from the world, peaceful----'

'Business first, then. You know your neighbour, Mr. Edmund Gray?'

'Certainly. We exchange the compliments of the season and the news of
the weather when we meet on the stairs. He has been in here, but not
often. A man who drinks nothing is your true damper. That, believe me,
and no other, was the veritable skeleton at the Feast.'

'Our business concerns your neighbour, Mr. Edmund Gray. We want you to
tell us what you know about him.'

'Go on, then. Question, and I will answer, if I can.'

'Does Mr. Edmund Gray live at these Chambers?'

'No. He may sometimes sleep in them, but I should say not often. He
calls at irregular intervals. Sometimes in the afternoon, sometimes in
the morning, sometimes not for several weeks together. He is most
uncertain.'

'Do many people call upon him?'

'No one ever calls upon him.'

'Does he keep clerks? Does he carry on an extensive correspondence?'

'I have never heard the postman knock at his door.'

'Has he a son or a brother or a partner or anything?'

'I don't know. He may have these hindrances, but they are not apparent.'

'What is his occupation or trade?'

'He is a Socialist. He is athirst for the destruction of property.
Meantime, I believe, he lives on his own. Perhaps his will be spared to
the last. He is an old gentleman of pleasant manners and of benevolent
aspect. The old women beg of him; the children ask him the time; the
people who have lost their way apply to him. He dreams all the time: he
lives in a world impossible. Oh! quite impossible. Why, in a world all
Socialist, I myself should be impossible. They wouldn't have me. My old
friend told me the other day that I should not be tolerated. They would
kill me. All because I do no work--or next to none.'

George looked at Athelstan. 'We are farther off than ever,' he said.

'Mr. Edmund Gray believes that the Kingdom of Heaven is a kind of hive
where everybody has got to work with enormous zeal, and where nobody
owns anything. Also he thinks that it is close at hand, which makes him
a very happy old gentleman.'

'This can't be Checkley,' said George.

'It would seem not,' Athelstan replied. 'Did you ever see another old
man up here--we saw him coming out just now--one Checkley, a lawyer's
clerk?'

'No; not up here. There is an elderly person--a Party--of the name, who
uses the parlour of the _Salutation_, where I myself sometimes--one must
relax--Porson loved a tavern; so did Johnson--I myself, I say, sometimes
forget that I used to belong to the Combination room, and sit with
Checkley and his companions. But I do not think he is a friend of Mr.
Gray. As well call the Verger the friend of the Bishop. Mr. Gray is a
gentleman and a scholar; he is a man of generous instincts and culture.
He _could_ not be a friend of the man Checkley.'

'Yet we saw Checkley coming out of this very staircase.'



They talked of other things. They talked till midnight; when they came
away the Scholar was at his best: one more glass--which he took after
they left--would have turned the best into the worst.

'We are as far off as before,' said George.

'No--we are so much the nearer that we know who Edmund Gray is not. He
is not Checkley. He has no clerks. He has no visitors. He comes seldom.
George, this looks to me suspicious. We met Checkley stealing out of the
door. Why does Edmund Gray keep these Chambers? No business done there:
no letters brought there: no callers: the man does not live there. The
Socialism may be--must be--a blind. Why does the man keep on these
Chambers?'



Meantime at the _Salutation_ the usual company was assembled. 'I fear,'
said the barrister, 'that we shall not have our friend the Scholar here
this evening. As I came down the stairs I saw him through his door
receiving two gentlemen--young gentlemen. He will display his wonted
hospitality upon them this evening instead.' He sighed, and called for
the glass of old and mild mixed, which was all he could afford. Had the
Scholar been with them, certainly there would have been a nobler and a
costlier glass. He took up the morning paper and began to read it.

The conversation went on slowly and with jerks. A dull conversation: a
conversation of men without ideas: a day-before-yesterday conversation:
the slow exchange of short, solid sentences taken from the paper, or
overheard and adopted. We sometimes praise the old tavern life, and we
regret the tavern talk. We need not: it was dull, gross, ignorant, and
flat: it was commonplace and conventional: because it was so dull, the
men were fain to sing songs and to propose sentiments, and to drink more
than was good for them. Why and when do men drink more than is good for
them? First, when and because things are desperately dull: there is
nothing to interest them: give them animation, thoughts, amusements, and
they will not begin to drink. When they have begun, they will go on.
When they have arrived at a certain stage, let them drink as fast as
they can, and so get out of the way, because they will never mend, and
they only cumber the earth. Here is, you see, a complete solution--a
short solution--of the whole drink question. It will not be accepted,
because people like a long solution--a three-column solution.

The barrister lifted his head. 'There is a letter here,' he said,
interrupting the ex-M.P., who was clearing the way for what he called an
argument by an introduction in the usual form. 'While on the one hand,
gentlemen,' he was saying, 'I am free to confess----'

'There is a letter here,' he repeated in a louder voice. The barrister
was now old, but he could still assume at times the masterful manner of
counsel before the Court, 'which should be read. It is a letter on
Socialism.'

'Ugh!' said the money-lender. 'Socialism! They want to destroy Property.
Socialism! Don't tell me, sir.'

'It is a dream of what might be--a noble--a generous letter.' He looked
round him. In their dull and fishy eyes there was no gleam or sparkle of
response. 'I forgot,' he said; 'you cannot be interested in such a
letter.--I beg your pardon, sir.' He bowed with great courtesy to the
ex-M.P. 'I interrupted your valuable observations. We shall listen, I am
sure, with--the--greatest----' He buried his head in the paper again.

The legislator began again. 'As I was a-saying, gentlemen, when I was
interrupted, on the subject of education and the ratepayers, being a
ratepayer myself, as we all are, and having our taxes to pay, which is
the only advantage we ever get from being a ratepayer, while on the one
hand I am free to confess----'

'Why!' the barrister interrupted once again, 'this letter is from a man
on our staircase, No. 22'--Checkley started--'an acquaintance of mine,
if I can call him so, and of our friend the Scholar. A very able man,
now somewhat in years. By name Edmund Gray.'

'What?' said Checkley, 'Edmund Gray? You know Edmund Gray?'

'Certainly. I have known him this nine years. Ever since he has been in
the Inn.'

'W-w-what sort of a man is he?' Checkley stammered in his eagerness.

'A very good sort of a man. Why do you ask?'

'I want to know--for his advantage--oh! yes--yes--for his own
advantage.'

'Yes.' The barrister retreated to his paper. 'Oh, yes,' he added. 'Quite
so.'

'For his great personal advantage,' Checkley repeated.--'Robert, I think
the gentleman would take a tumbler, if you will bring it--hot,
Robert--strong--with lemon and sugar--a large rummer, Robert.'

The ancient barrister's head behind the paper was observed to tremble.

Robert returned with his rummer, the glass spoon tinkling an invitation.
Dinner had been but a sorry affair that day--a stop-gap--insufficient in
bulk; the tempted man felt a yearning that could not be resisted. He
stretched out his hand and took the glass and tasted it. Then turning to
Checkley:

'You have purchased my speech, sir. You were asking me about Mr. Edmund
Gray. What do you wish to know?'

'Everything--his business--his private life--anything.'

'As for his business, he has none; he is a gentleman living on his
means--like myself; but his means are larger than my own: he has a
residence elsewhere--I don't know where; he uses his Chambers but
little: he has a collection of books there, and he keeps them for
purposes of study.'

'Does he call there every day?'

'No. Only at irregular times. Sometimes not for many weeks together.'

'Has he got any friends?'

'I should say that he has no friends at all--at least none that come to
the Inn. I have never heard or seen anyone in his room. A quiet man. No
slammer. An excellent man to have on the staircase. No trampler; doesn't
tramp up and down like an elephant. Isn't brought home drunk.'

'What does he look like?'

'He is a man advanced in years--perhaps seventy--a good-looking
man--very cheerful countenance: tall and well set up still--wears a long
frock coat. And that I believe is all I know about him.'

'That's all you've got to tell me, is it?'

'That is all, Mr. Checkley. Except that he has written a very remarkable
letter to the _Times_ of this morning.'

'Well, sir, if that is all, it isn't much for your rum-and-water, let me
tell you.'

The barrister rose and poured the half-glass that remained into the
cinders. 'Then let me drink no more than my information was worth,' he
said; and at the sight of so much magnanimity the broad earth trembled
and Mr. Checkley sat aghast.

The ex-statesman cleared his throat and began again. 'After the third
interruption, gentlemen, I may hope for a hearing. While, therefore, on
the one hand----'




CHAPTER XVI

THE VOICE OF DUTY


Elsie in her studio was at work. She was painting a fancy portrait. You
have seen how, before her interview with Mr. Dering, she transformed him
from a hard and matter-of-fact lawyer into a genial, benevolent old
gentleman. She was now elaborating this transformation. It is a
delightful process, known to every portrait-painter, whereby a face
faithfully represented becomes the face of another person, or the face
as it might be, so that a hard and keen face, such as Mr. Dering's, may
become a face ennobled with spiritual elevation, benevolence, charity,
and kindness of heart. Or, on the other hand, without the least change
of feature, this hard keen face may become, by the curve of a line or
the addition of a shadow, the face of a cruel and pitiless Inquisitor.
Or, again, any face, however blurred and marred by the life of its
owner, may by the cunning portrait-painter be restored to the face
intended by its Maker, that is to say, a sweet and serious face. Great
indeed is the power, marvellous is the mystery, of the limner's art.

'Now,' Elsie murmured, 'you look like some great philanthropist--a
thoughtful philanthropist, not a foolish person: your high forehead and
your sharp nostril proclaim that you are no impulsive gusher: your
kindly eyes beam with goodness of heart: your lips are firm because you
hate injustice. Oh, my dear guardian, how much I have improved you!
Something like this you looked when you told me of my fortune--and like
this when you spoke of your dream, and your illusions--something like
this you looked.'

She went on working at her fantasy, crooning a simple ditty, composed of
many melodies running into one, as girls use when they are quite happy.
The afternoon was hot. Outside, Elsie's windows looked upon a nest of
little London gardens, where nasturtiums twisted round strings upon the
walls; hollyhocks and sunflowers, which love the London smoke, lifted
their heads; and Virginia creepers climbed to the house-tops. The
little London gardens do sometimes look gay and bright in the yellow
glow of a July afternoon. The window was open, and the room was almost
as hot as the street outside; we get so few hot days that one here and
there cannot be too hot. On the table lay a photograph of her lover;
over the mantel hung her own drawing in Pastel of that swain; on her
finger was his ring: round her neck lay his chain: all day long she was
reminded of him, if she should cease for a moment to think of him. But
there was no need of such reminder. It was Friday afternoon, four days
after the great Discovery. Elsie had been informed of the event, the
news of which she received after the feminine manner, with an
ejaculation of surprise and an interjection of sympathy. But one cannot
expect a girl on the eve of her marriage to be greatly distressed
because her guardian, a rich man, is annoyed by the temporary loss of
certain shares. And as to finding the criminal and getting back those
shares--it was man's work. All the troublesome and disagreeable part of
the world's work belongs to man.

It was nearly five o'clock. Elsie was beginning to think that she had
done enough, and that, after tea, a walk in the Gardens might be
pleasant. Suddenly, without any noise or warning of steps outside, her
door was opened and her sister Hilda appeared. Now, so swift is the
feminine perception, that Elsie instantly understood that something had
happened--something bad--something bad to herself. For first, the door
was opened gently, as in a house of mourning; and next, Hilda had on a
dress--lavender with heliotrope, costly, becoming, sympathetic, and
sorrowful--a half-mourning dress--and she stood for a moment at the door
with folded hands, her classical head inclined a little downward to the
left, and her eyes drooping--an artistic attitude of sadness. Hilda not
only said the right thing and held the proper sentiments, but she liked
to assume the right attitude and to personate the right emotion. Now it
is given to woman, and only to her when she is young, tall, and
beautiful, to express by attitude all or any of the emotions which
transport or torture her fellow-creatures. Hilda, you see, was an
artist.

'Come in, dear,' said Elsie. 'I am sure that you have got something
disagreeable to tell me.'

Hilda kissed her forehead. 'My poor child,' she murmured. 'If it could
have been told you by anybody else!'

'Well--let us hear it. Is it anything very disagreeable?'

'It is terrible. I tremble--I dare not tell you. Yet I must. You ought
to know.'

'If you would go on. It is much more terrible to be kept in suspense.'

'It is about George.'

'Oh!' said Elsie, flaming. 'I have had so much trouble about George
already, that I did think----'

'My dear, all opposition of the former kind is removed, as you know.
This is something very different. Worse,' she added in a hollow
voice--'far worse.'

'For Heaven's sake, get along.'

'He has told you about the dreadful robbery. Of course you have talked
about nothing else since it happened. I found my mother full of it.'

'Yes--George is in charge of the case. He says that everything must be
recovered, and that Mr. Dering will in the end suffer no more injury
than the trouble of it.'

'That may be so. Elsie--I hardly dare to tell you--there is a clue.
Checkley has got that clue, and has told Sir Samuel everything. He is
following up the clue. I shudder to think of it. The man is as
relentless as a bloodhound.'

'Does that clue concern me?' Her cheek became pale because she
guessed--she knew not what.

'Sir Samuel, against his will, is convinced that Checkley has found the
clue. He has told me the whole. He has consented to my telling the
dreadful story to my mother and to you--and now I am afraid. Yet I
must.'

Elsie made a gesture of impatience.

'Go back, Elsie, eight years, if you can. Remember the wretched business
of our unworthy brother.'

'I remember it. Not unworthy, Hilda. Our most unfortunate brother. Why,
they have found the very notes he was charged with stealing. They were
found in the safe on the very day when they made the other discovery.
Have they not told you?'

'Checkley told Sir Samuel. He also remembers seeing Athelstan place the
packet in the safe.'

'Oh! Does he dare to say that? Why, Hilda, the robbery was proved to lie
between himself and Athelstan. If he saw that, why did he not say so? He
keeps silence for eight long years, and then he speaks.'

Hilda shook her head sadly. 'I fear,' she said, 'that we cannot accept
the innocence of our unfortunate brother. However, Athelstan was accused
of forging Mr. Dering's handwriting and signature. In this new forgery,
the same handwriting is found again--exactly the same. The forger is the
same.'

'Clearly, therefore, it cannot be Athelstan. That settles it.'

'Yes--unfortunately--it does settle it. Because, you see, Athelstan is
in London. He is said to have been living in London all the time--in
some wretched place called Camberwell, inhabited, I suppose, by runaways
and low company of every kind. He has lately been seen in the
neighbourhood of Gray's Inn, apparently passing under his own name.
Checkley has seen him. Another person has seen him.'

'Have you come to tell me that Athelstan is charged with this new
wickedness?'

'The forger must have had an accomplice in the office; a man able
to get at the safe: able to intercept the post: acquainted with Mr.
Dering's ways: such a man as--say--Checkley--or--the only other
possible--George.' Hilda paused.

'Oh! This is too absurd. You are now hinting that George--my George,'
she said proudly, 'was the confederate of Athelstan--no--of a forger.'

'They have been seen together. They have been seen together at the house
from which the forger addresses his letters. Has George told you that he
has known all along--for eight years--of Athelstan's residence in
London?'

Observe how that simple remark made in the _Salutation_ Parlour, that
Athelstan must have been living in Camberwell, had by this time grown
into a complete record of eight years' hiding, eight years' disgraceful
company on the part of one, and eight years' complicity and guilty
knowledge on the part of the other. Hilda had not the least doubt. It
was quite enough for her that Checkley said so. Half the contents of our
newspapers are conducted on the same confiding principle.

'If George has not told me,' Elsie replied, 'it must be for some good
reason. Perhaps he was pledged to secrecy.'

'My dear'--Hilda rose impressively with fateful face-'the hand that
forged the letters is the hand that forged the cheque--your brother's
hand. The hand that took the certificates from the safe'--she laid her
own upon Elsie's hand--'the hand of the confederate, my poor sister,
is--your lover's hand.'

'I knew,' said the girl, 'that you were coming to this. I have felt it
from the beginning.'

'Remember, the thing was done in the months of February, March, and
April. First of all, Athelstan was then, as now, desperately poor: the
life that he has led for the last eight years--the life of
a--a--Camberwell profligate'--she spoke as if that respectable suburb
was the modern Alsatia-'has certainly destroyed whatever was left of
honour and of principle. There comes a time, I have read, in the career
of every wicked man when he hesitates no longer whatever means are
offered him of making money. Athelstan it was--so they believe--who
devised this scheme, which has been as successful as it is disgraceful.
My dear Elsie, this is the most terrible disgrace that has ever befallen
my family: the most dreadful and the most unexpected calamity for you.'

Elsie caught her sister by the wrist. 'In the name of God, Hilda, are
you telling me what is proved and true, or what is only suspected?'

'I am telling you what is as good as proved. More than suspected.'

'As good as proved. Oh!' Elsie drew a long breath. 'As good as proved.
That is enough. Like Athelstan's guilt eight years ago,' she flared out
suddenly, springing up again and walking about the room. 'Oh! it is
wonderful!' she cried--'wonderful! What a family we are! We had a
brother, and we believed that he was an honourable gentleman, as the son
of his father must be. Then there was a charge, a foolish charge, based
upon nothing but may--have--been and must--have--been---- We believed
the charge----'

'Because we had no choice but to believe, Elsie,' her sister
interrupted. 'Do you think we wanted to believe the charge?'

'We should have believed him innocent until the thing was proved. We did
not. We cast him out from among us; and now, after eight years--he has
come back poor, you say, and sunk so low that he is ashamed to see his
people, and we are going to believe another charge based on may have
been and must have been. No, Hilda. I will not believe it--I will
not.--And then there is George. If I cease to believe in his honour and
his truth, I cease to believe in everything. I cannot believe in Heaven
itself unless I believe in my lover. Why, his heart is light about this
business: he is not concerned: he laughs at that old man's ravings.
Ravings? If Athelstan is right, then his is the hand that has done it
all--his--Hilda--Checkley is the man concerned with both crimes.'

Hilda shook her head. 'No, Elsie, no. The old man is above suspicion.'

'Why should he be above suspicion more than George? And you ask me on
the first breath of accusation to treat George as you treated Athelstan.
Well--Hilda, I will not.'

'I make every allowance for you, Elsie. It is a most dreadful
business--a heart-breaking business. You may misrepresent me as much as
you please-- I will continue to make allowances for you. Meantime, what
will you do?'

'Do? What should I do? Nothing, nothing, nothing. I shall go on as if
this thing had never happened.'

'Sir Samuel ordered me to warn you most seriously. If you consent to see
him again----'

'Consent? Consent? Why should I refuse? In a fortnight he will be my
husband and my master, whom I must obey. He calls me his mistress now,
but I am his servant. Consent to see him?' She sat down and burst into
tears.

'If you see him again,' her sister continued, 'warn him to leave the
country. The thing is so certain that in a day or two the proofs will be
complete, and it will then be too late. Make him leave the country. Be
firm, Elsie. Better still, refuse to see him at all and leave him to his
fate. What a fate! What madness!'

'We allowed Athelstan to leave the country. He ought to have stayed. If
I advise George at all I shall advise him to stick to his post and see
the business through. If he were to leave the country, I would go with
him.'

'You are infatuated, Elsie. I can only hope that he may fly the country
of his own accord. Meantime, there is one other point----'

'What is it? Pray, don't spare me, Hilda. After what has gone before, it
must be a very little point.'

'You are bitter, Elsie, and I don't deserve your bitterness. But that is
nothing. At such a moment everything must be pardoned and permitted. The
point is about your wedding. It is fixed for the 12th of next month,
less than three weeks from to-day. You must be prepared to put it off.'

'Indeed! Because you say that a thing impossible is as good as proved!
Certainly not, Hilda.'

'I have come here to-day, Elsie, by Sir Samuel's express wish, in order
to soften the blow and to warn you. Whether you will tell--that unhappy
young man or not, is for you to decide. Perhaps, if you do, he may
imitate our unworthy brother and run away. If he does not, the blow will
fall to-morrow--to-day--the day after to-morrow--I know not when. He
will be arrested: he will be taken before a magistrate: he will be
remanded: he will be out on bail. Oh, Elsie, think of marrying a man out
on bail! One might as well marry a man in convict dress. Oh! Horrible!'

'I would rather marry George in convict dress than any other man in fine
raiment. Because, once more, the thing is impossible.'

'You carry your faith in your lover beyond bounds, Elsie. Of course a
girl is right to believe in a man's honour. It makes her much more
comfortable, and gives her a sense of security. Besides, we always like
to believe that we are loved by the best of men. That makes us feel like
the best of women.--But in this case, when I tell you that Sir Samuel--a
man who has always lived among money--so to speak--and knows how money
is constantly assailed--is firmly convinced of George's complicity, I do
think that you might allow something for human frailty. In the case of
Athelstan, what did Mr. Dering say? Everything is possible. So I say of
George Austin, everything is possible.'

'Not everything. Not that.'

'Yes, even that.--What do you know of his private life? Why has he
concealed the fact of Athelstan's residence in London? Why has he never
told us of his friendship with that unfortunate outcast?'

'I don't know. He has his reasons.'

'It is a most dreadful thing for you,' Hilda went on. 'And after getting
to believe in the man and--well--becoming attached to him--though such
attachments mean little and are soon forgotten--and after going the
length of fixing the day and ordering the dress and the wedding-cake,
and putting up the banns---- Oh! it is a wretched business--a horrible
misfortune. The only thing to be said is that in such a case, the fact
being known to everybody, no one can blame a girl; and perhaps, in the
long run, she will suffer no injury from it. Our circle, for instance,
is so different from that of this young man's friends, that the thing
would not even be known among us.'

'I believe, Hilda, you will drive me mad.'

'My dear, one must look ahead. And remember that I look ahead for you.
As for the young man, I dissociate him henceforth from you. What he does
and where he goes I do not inquire or care about, any more than I
trouble myself about a disgraceful brother. Some acts cut a man off from
his mistress--from his sisters--from the world.'

'Do not talk any more,' said Elsie. 'Let the blow, as you call it, fall
when it pleases. But as for me, I shall not warn George that he is to be
charged with dishonesty, any more than I will believe him capable of
dishonesty.'

'Well, my dear, there is one comfort for us. You may resolve on marrying
him. But a man charged with a crime--out on bail--cannot marry any girl.
And he will be charged, and the evidence is very strong.'

'No doubt. As good as proved--as good as proved. Poor George! Who never
had ten pounds in the world until he was made a partner----'

'True. And there we have the real motive. Seek the motive, Sir Samuel
says, and we shall find the criminal. Here you have the reason of the
secret partnership with Athelstan. Poverty is the tempter--Athelstan is
the suggested.'

Elsie shook her head impatiently.

'Mr. Dering was to give you away. Who will now? Athelstan? How can
we--Sir Samuel and I--assist at a wedding where the bridegroom lies
under such a charge?--by one so near to us as Mr. Dering? How can your
mother be present? Oh, Elsie, think!'

Elsie shook her head again, with greater impatience.

'Think what a fate you may be dragging upon yourself! Think of possible
children with such a brand upon them!'

'I think only of an honourable and an innocent man.'

'I have just come from my mother, Elsie. She says positively that if the
charge is brought, the wedding must be put off until the man is cleared.
And for the moment she does not feel strong enough to meet him. You can
receive him here if you please. And she desires that there may be no
disputes or arguments about it.'

'It is truly wonderful!' Elsie walked to the open window and gasped as
if choking. 'Wonderful!' she repeated. 'The same fate--in the same
manner--threatens George that fell upon Athelstan. And it finds us as
ready to believe in the charge and to cast him out. Now, Hilda, go to my
mother and tell her that though the whole world should call George--my
George--a villain, I will marry him. Tell her that though I should have
to take him from the prison door, I will marry him. Because, you see,
all things are not possible. This thing is impossible.'

'We shall have trouble with Elsie,' Lady Dering told her mother. 'Call
her soft and yielding? My dear, no mule was ever more stubborn. She will
marry her convict, she says, even at the prison door.'




CHAPTER XVII

WAS HE IN RAGS?


Stubborn as a mule. Yes--it is the way with some girls: man is soft as
wax compared with woman: man concedes, compromises, gives way, submits:
woman has her own way--when that way is the right way she becomes a
pearl above price.

Elsie, when the door was shut and her sister gone, stood silent,
immovable. A red spot burned in her cheeks: her eyes were unnaturally
bright: her lips parted: she was possessed by a mighty wrath and great
determination: she was the tigress who fights for her beloved. Meantime,
everything was changed: the sunshine had gone out of the day: the warmth
out of the air: her work, that had pleased her so much an hour ago,
seemed a poor weak thing not worth thinking about. Everything was a
trifle not worth thinking about--the details of her wedding: her
presents: her honeymoon: her pretty flat--all became insignificant
compared with this threatened charge against her lover. How was it to be
met? If it was only a suspicion put into shape by Sir Samuel and old
Checkley it would be best to say nothing. If it was really going to be
brought against him, would it not be best to warn him beforehand? And
about her brother----

She sat down and wrote out the facts. To be doing this cleared her
brain, and seemed like working for her lover. In March 1882 a cheque for
720_l_. to the order of one Edmund Gray was cashed in ten-pound notes by
a commissionaire sent from an hotel in Arundel Street, Strand. No one
ever found out this Edmund Gray. Athelstan was suspected. The notes
themselves were never presented, and were found the other day in Mr.
Dering's safe, covered with dust, at the back of some books.

In February, March, and April, by means of forged letters, a great
quantity of shares were transferred from the name of Edward Dering to
that of Edmund Gray. The writing of the letters was the same as that of
the forged cheque.

These were the only facts. The rest was all inference and presumption.
Athelstan had been seen in London: Athelstan had been living all the
time in London: Athelstan had been seen going into the house which was
given as the residence of Edmund Gray. Well--Athelstan must be seen the
very first thing. Further than this point she could not get. She rang
the bell, ordered tea to be brought to her own room, and then put on her
hat and went out to the Gardens, where she walked about under the trees,
disquieted and unhappy. If a charge is going to be brought against him,
the most innocent man in the world must be disquieted until he knows the
nature of the evidence against him. Once satisfied as to that, he may be
happy again. What evidence could they bring against George?

She went home about eight, going without dinner rather than sit down
with her mother. It is a miserable thing for a girl to be full of
hardness against her mother. Elsie already had experience, as you have
seen. For the present better not to meet at all. Therefore she did not
go home for dinner, but took a bun and a cup of coffee--woman's
substitute for dinner--at a confectioner's.

When George called about nine o'clock, he was taken into the studio,
where he found Elsie with the traces of tears in her eyes.

'Why, Elsie,' he cried, 'what is the matter? Why are you crying, my
dear? and why are you alone in this room?'

'I choke in this house, George. Take me out of it--take me away. Let us
walk about the Squares and talk. I have a good deal to say.'

'Now, dear, what is it?'--when they were outside. 'What happened? You
are trembling--you have been shaken. Tell me, dear.'

'I don't think I can tell you just at present--not all.'

'Something then--the rest afterwards. Tell me by instalments.'

'You are quite happy, George? Nobody has said anything to make you
angry, at the office, or anywhere else?'

'Nobody. We are going on just the same. Mr. Dering thinks and talks
about nothing but the robbery. So do I. So does everybody else. I
suppose Checkley has told, for every clerk in the place knows about it,
and is talking about it. Why do you ask if anybody has made me angry?'

'My dear George, Hilda has been here this afternoon. You know
that--sometimes--Hilda does not always say the kindest things about
people.'

'Not always. I remember when she wrote me a letter asking whether I
thought that a lawyer's clerk was a fit aspirant for the hand of her
sister. Not always just the kindest things. But I thought we were all on
the most affectionate terms, and that everything had been sponged out.
Has she been saying more kind, sisterly, things about me? What have I
done now? Isn't the money difficulty solved?'

'I will tell you some other time--not now--what she said. At the present
moment I want to ask you a question. If you have reasons for not
answering, say so, and I shall be quite satisfied; but answer me if you
can. This is the question. Hilda says that Athelstan is secretly in
London, and that you know it, and that you have been seen with him. Is
that true?'

'Well--Elsie--the only reason for not telling you that Athelstan is here
is that he himself made me promise not to tell you. Athelstan is in
London. I see him often. I shall see him this evening after leaving you.
He is in London, walking about openly. Why not? I know no reason for any
concealment. But he cannot go to see his mother, or enter his mother's
house, until this charge against him has been acknowledged to be
baseless. As for you, he will be the first person to visit you--and will
be your most frequent visitor--when we are married. He is always talking
about you. He is longing for the time when he can see you openly. But
nothing will persuade him to come here. He is still bitter against his
mother and against Hilda.'

Elsie sighed. 'It is very terrible--and now---- But go on.'

'I have answered your question, Elsie.'

'Oh, no. I have only just begun. You say that Athelstan is in London;
but you do not tell me what he is doing and how he fares.'

'He fares very well, and he is prosperous.'

'Hilda says that he has been living in some wretched quarter of London
all these years; that he has been frequenting low company; and that he
has been, until the last few weeks, in rags and penniless.'

George laughed aloud. 'Where on earth did Hilda get this precious
information? Athelstan in a low quarter? Athelstan a Prodigal? Athelstan
in rags? My dearest Elsie, if Lady Dering were not your sister, I should
say that she had gone mad with venomous hatred of the brother whom she
made so much haste to believe guilty.'

'Oh! Tell me quick, George. Don't say anything against Hilda, please. I
am already---- Tell me quick the whole truth.'

'Well, dear, the whole truth is this. Athelstan is doing very well. I
suppose you might call him prosperous. When he went away, he had ten
pounds to begin with. People kindly credited him with the nice little
sum of 720_l_. obtained by a forgery. We now know that this money has
been lying in the safe all the time--how it got there, the Lord
knows--perhaps Checkley could tell. He went to America by the cheapest
way possible. He had many adventures and many ups and downs, all of
which he will tell you before long. Once he had great good fortune on a
silver mine or something: he made thousands of pounds over it. Then he
lost all his money--dropped it down a sink or into an open drain--you
know, in America, these traps are plentiful, and started again on his
ten pounds. He was a journalist all the time, and he is a journalist
still. He is now over here as the London correspondent of a great paper
of San Francisco.--That, my dear Elsie, is, briefly, the record of your
brother since he went away.'

'Oh! But are you quite sure, George?--quite--quite sure? Because, if
this can be proved----'

'Nothing is more easy to prove. He brought letters to a London Bank
introducing him as the correspondent, and empowering him to draw certain
moneys.'

'How long has Athelstan been at home?' She remembered the dates of the
recent forgeries, and the alleged fact that all were in the same
handwriting.

'You are so persistent, Elsie, that I am certain you have got something
serious on your mind--won't you tell me?'

'No, George--not to-night. But--how long has Athelstan been in England?'

'I will tell you exactly how and when I met him. Do you remember three
weeks ago, that Sunday evening when we were so happy and so
miserable--resolved on braving everything--going to live on love and a
crust for the rest of our lives?--you poor, dear, brave girl!' He
touched her fingers. 'I shall always be thankful for that prospect of
poverty, because it revealed my mistress to me in all her loveliness of
love and trust and courage.'

'Oh, George--you spoil me. But then I know myself better.'

'Well--on that evening we went to Church together; and after Church, as
I was not allowed in the house, we walked round and round the Square
until the rain came on, and we had to go home. Well, you did not take
any notice; but as you stood on the steps waiting for the door to be
opened, a man was standing on the kerb under the lamp close by. When the
door was shut behind you, I turned and walked away. This man followed me
and clapped me on the shoulder. It was Athelstan.'

'And I saw him and did not know him!'

'He has grown a big beard now, and wore a felt hat. He is a picturesque
object to look at. Ought to have been one of Drake's men. I daresay he
was in a former existence. He had then been in England exactly a week,
and every day he had prowled about the place in the hope of seeing
you--not speaking to you--he trusted that you would not know him again.'

'Oh, poor Athelstan! That is nearly three weeks ago. He has been in
England four weeks--a month--and three--four--five months ago--where was
he?'

'I told you. In California.'

'Oh! then he could not--possibly--not possibly--and it can be
proved--and oh! George--George--I am so glad--I am so glad.' She showed
her joy by a light shower of tears.

'Why, my dear,' he said, soothing her, 'why are you so troubled and yet
so glad?'

'You don't quite understand, George. You don't know the things that are
said. All these forgeries are in the same handwriting.'

'Certainly.'

'One man has written all these letters and cheques and things--both that
of eight years ago and those of last March?'

'That is perfectly certain.'

'Then, don't you see? Athelstan was out of England when these
newly-discovered forgeries were done. Therefore, he had no hand in them.
Therefore, again, he could have had no hand in the earlier one. Why--you
establish his innocence perfectly. Now you see one of the reasons why I
was so glad.'

The other reason--that this fact destroyed at one blow the whole of the
splendid edifice constructed upon the alleged stay of Athelstan in
London--Elsie concealed. Her heart, it must be acknowledged, was
lightened. You may have the most complete belief in the innocence of a
person, but it is well to have the belief strengthened by facts.

'As for me,' said George, 'I have been so long accustomed to regard him
as one of the worst used of men, that I never thought of that
conclusion. Of course, if the handwriting is the same, and it certainly
seems the same--a very good imitation of Mr. Dering's hand--there is
nothing now to be said. Athelstan was in California in the spring. That
settles it. And the notes were in the safe. Two clinchers. But to some
minds a suspicion is a charge, and a charge is a fact.'

'George, you must take me to Athelstan. Give me his address.'

'He is in lodgings in Half Moon Street. I will ask him if he will meet
you.'

'No--no; let me go to him. It is more fitting. You will see him
presently. Will you tell him that I will call upon him to-morrow morning
at eleven? And tell him, George, that something has happened--something
that makes it impossible for me to remain at home--even for the short
time before our wedding.'

'Elsie! this is very serious.'

'Yes, it is very serious. Tell him that I shall ask him to receive me
until the wedding, or until certain things have happened.--But in any
case--oh! they must happen so--they must--it is too absurd.'

'Elsie, my dear, you grow interjectional.'

'Yes--yes. I mean, George, that if things turn out as I hope they may, I
will go home again. If not, we will be married from Athelstan's
lodgings.'

'And you will not tell me what this terrible business is?'

'Not to-night, George,' she repeated. 'It is very serious, and it makes
me very unhappy that my mother and sister----'

'It is something to do with me, Elsie, clearly. Never mind. You will
tell me when you please. Whatever you do is sure to be right. I will see
him this evening.'

'Thank you, George. I think that what I propose is the wisest thing to
do. Besides, I want to be with you and Athelstan. Tell him that as he
left the house eight years ago I leave it now.'

'You? Why, my dear child, what forgeries have you been committing?'

'None. And yet---- Well, George, that is enough about me and my
troubles. Tell me now about your search into this business. How have you
got on?'

'There is nothing new to report. I told you that I left a note on Edmund
Gray's table. No answer has come to that. The Bank has written to tell
him that his letter of introduction was a forgery. No answer. The
dividends are accumulating: he draws no cheques: he makes no sign. In a
word, though this money is lying to his credit, and the shares are
transferred to his name, and the letters give his address, there is
nothing whatever to convict the man himself. We could not prove his
signature, and he has taken none of the money. He might call any day and
say that he knew nothing about it. I wonder he hasn't done it. When he
does, we shall just have to put everything straight again. As for poor
old Checkley, I really believe that he is going mad. If I meet him he
glares; if he is in his master's room, his eyes follow me about under
his shaggy eyebrows with a malignity which I have never seen painted. As
for being described, words couldn't do it. I suppose he sees that the
end is inevitable. Really, Elsie, the man would murder me if he dared.'

'The man is dangerous, George, as well as malignant. But I think he will
do you no harm in the long run. Have you told Athelstan what is going
on?'

'Certainly. He follows the business with the greatest interest. He
agrees with me that the thing is done out of the office with the help of
some one in it. Now, the point is, that the man in the office must have
the control of the post. All the letters must pass through his hands.
'Who is that man? No one but Checkley. Everything turns on that. Now,
here is a lucky accident. An old friend of Athelstan's, a man who
coaches, has Chambers on the same stairs and on the same floor. He knows
this Mr. Edmund Gray. We have been to his rooms to question him.'

'Is it to see this old friend that Athelstan visits No. 22?'

'Yes. His name is Carstone--commonly called Freddy Carstone--a pleasing
man, with a little weakness, which seems to endear him to his friends.'

'This is the way in which things get distorted in a malignant mind!
Well. What did this gentleman tell you about this mysterious Edmund
Gray?'

'Nothing definite. That he is some kind of Socialist we knew before:
that he has occupied the Chambers for ten years or so we knew before.
Also, that he is an elderly gentleman of benevolent aspect. And that he
is irregular in his visits to his Chambers. We seem to get no further.
We see Checkley coming out of the house. That connects him, to be sure.
But that is not much. There is no connection established between Edmund
Gray and the forgeries in his name. Nor between Checkley and the
forgeries. One feels that if one could lay hold of this mysterious
elderly gentleman, a real step in advance would be taken.'

'You talked at first of arresting him on the charge.'

'Well--there is no evidence. His name has been used--that is all. On
that evidence no magistrate would issue a warrant. Sometimes one's head
goes round with the bewilderment of it. I've managed to learn something
about Checkley in the course of these inquiries. He is quite a great
man, Elsie; a tavern oracle in the evening; a landlord and householder
and collector of his own rents at odd hours; a capitalist and a miser.
But he is not, as thought at first--Edmund Gray.'

They had by this time got round to the house again. 'Go, now, George,'
said Elsie. 'See Athelstan this evening. Tell him that I must go to him.
I will tell him why to-morrow.'

'If he is not at his club I will go to his lodgings. If he is not there
I will wait till he comes home. And before I go home I will drop a note
for you.--Good-night, sweetheart--good-night.'




CHAPTER XVIII

THE PRODIGAL AT HOME


In the morning, Elsie rose at seven and put together such things as she
should want for the three weeks before her marriage, if she was to spend
that interval under her brother's care. At eight o'clock she received
her letters--including one in a handwriting she did not know. She opened
it.

     'Dear Elsie,' it said, 'come to me at once. Come early. Come
     to breakfast at nine. I will wait for you till ten, or any
     time.

  'Your affectionate Brother,
  'ATHELSTAN.'

'Oh!' she murmured. 'And I did not know his writing. And to think that I
am twenty-one, and he is thirty-one; and that I have never had a letter
from him before!'

Her boxes were packed. She put on her jacket and hat and descended into
the breakfast-room, where her mother was already opening her letters and
waiting breakfast.

'You are going out, Elsie?' she asked coldly.

'Yes. Hilda told you, I suppose, what she came here for yesterday. In
fact, you sent me a message.'

'I hope she delivered it correctly.'

'She said that you would not sanction my wedding while this charge, or
suspicion, was hanging over George's head. And that you would not see
him until it was withdrawn or cleared away.'

'Certainly. In such a case it would be worse than hypocrisy to receive
him with friendliness.'

'Then, like Hilda, you accept the conclusion.'

'I am unable to do anything else. The conclusion seems to me
inevitable. If not, let him explain. I hope that no time will be lost in
bringing the formal charge. It is foolish kindness--real cruelty--to all
concerned to keep such a thing hanging over our heads. I say _our_
heads, not yours only, Elsie, because you know your brother is
implicated--perhaps the real contriver--of the dreadful scheme.'

'Would you believe me if I were to tell you that Athelstan _could_ not
be implicated?'

'My dear--believe you? Of course, I would believe if I could.
Unfortunately, the evidence is too strong.'

Elsie sighed. 'Very well; I will say nothing more. You have driven out
my lover, as you drove out my brother for the self-same cause, and on
the self-same charge. I follow my lover and my brother.'

'Elsie!'--her mother started. 'Do not, I pray you, do anything rash.
Remember--a scandal--a whisper even--may be fatal to you hereafter. Sit
down and wait. All I ask you to do is to wait.'

'No; I will not wait. If those two are under any cloud of suspicion, I
too will sit under the cloud and wait until it lifts. I am going to stay
with my brother until my wedding. That is to be on the 12th.'

'No--no--my poor child. There will be no wedding on the 12th.'

'Before that time, everything will be cleared up, and I shall be
married from this house, so that I have left all my things, my
presents--everything.'

Her mother shook her head.

'Try not to think so cruelly of George and of Athelstan, mother. You
will be sorry afterwards. Try to believe that though a case may look
strange, there may be a way out.'

'I have told you'--her mother was perfectly cold and unmoved--'that I
have come to this conclusion on the evidence. If the young man can
explain things, let him do so. There will be no wedding on the 12th,
Elsie. You can come home as soon as you are convinced that your brother
is an improper person for a young lady to live with, and as soon as you
have learned the truth about the other young man. That is to say, I will
receive you under these distressing circumstances, provided there has
been no scandal connected with your name.'

Elsie turned and left the room. The Fifth Commandment enjoins that under
such circumstances as these the least said the soonest mended.

When a man learns that his sister, his favourite sister, from whom he
has been parted for eight years, the only member of his family who stood
up for him when he was falsely accused of a disgraceful thing, is about
to take breakfast with him, he naturally puts as much poetry into that
usually simple meal as circumstances allow. Mostly Athelstan took a cup
of coffee and a London egg. This morning he had flowers, raspberries
lying in a bed of leaves, a few late strawberries, various kinds of
confitures in dainty dishes, toast and cake, with fish and
cutlets--quite a little feast. And he had had the room cleared of the
bundles of newspapers; the pipes and cigar-cases and all the
circumstances of tobacco were hidden away--all but the smell, which
lingered. One thinks a good deal about a sister's visit, under such
conditions. At a quarter past nine Elsie arrived. Athelstan hastened to
open the door, and to receive her with open arms and kisses strange and
sweet. Then, while the people of the house took in her luggage, he led
his sister into the room, which was the front room on the ground-floor.

'Elsie!' he said, taking both her hands in his, 'eight years since we
parted--and you are a tall young lady whom I left a little girl. To hold
your hand--to kiss you, seems strange after so long.' He kissed her
again on the forehead. She looked up at the tall handsome man with a
kind of terror. It was almost like casting herself upon the care of a
strange man.

'I remember your voice, Athelstan, but not your face. You have changed
more than I, even.'

'And I remember your voice, Elsie--always a soft and winning voice,
wasn't it?--to suit soft and winning ways. There never was any child
more winning and affectionate than you--never.'

'Oh! you are grown very handsome, Athelstan. See what a splendid beard,
and the brown velvet jacket, and white waistcoat--and the crimson tie.
You look like an artist. I wish all men wore colours, as they used to
do. I only heard yesterday that you were in London. Hilda told me.'

'Was that the reason why you cannot stay at home?'

'Part of the reason. But you shall have breakfast first. You can take me
in without any trouble?'

'My dear child, I am more than delighted to have you here. There is a
room at the back where you will be quiet: we have only this one room for
sitting-room, and I think we shall find it best to go out every day to
dinner. That will not hurt us, and George will come every evening.--Now,
Elsie, you sit here, and I will---- No-- I quite forgot. You will pour
out the tea. Yes--I see. I thought I was going to wait upon you
altogether.--There--now you will make a good breakfast, and--and----
Don't cry, dear child.'

'No--Athelstan.' She brushed away the tears. 'It is nothing. I shall be
very happy with you. But why are you not at home? And why am I here? Oh!
it is too cruel--too perverse of them!'

'We had better have it out before breakfast, then.--Strawberries don't
go well with tears, do they? Nor jam with complainings. Come, Elsie, why
need you leave home?'

'Because, in two words, they are treating George as they treated you. I
was younger then, or I would have gone away with you.'

'Treating George? Oh! I understand. They are pouring suspicion upon him.
Well, I saw that this was coming. Old Checkley, I swear, is at the
bottom of this.'

'Yes--Checkley went to Sir Samuel with the "Case," as he called it,
complete. He has proved to their joint satisfaction that nobody could
have done the thing except George, assisted by you.'

'Oh! assisted by me.'

'Yes--while you were in California, I suppose. There is to be a warrant
for your arrest--yours and George's--in a few days, they say. Hilda
brought the news to my mother. They both believe it, and they want me to
break off my engagement. My mother refuses to see George so long as this
charge, as she calls it, remains over him. So I came away.'

'You did wisely. Well--any one may call up a cloud of suspicion, and it
is sometimes difficult to disperse such a cloud. Therefore, we must do
everything we can to find out who is the real criminal.--Now, let us
rest quite easy. There can be no arrest--or any charge--or anything but
a fuss created by this old villain. It is only troublesome to find one's
own people so ready to believe.'

'Why did you not tell me that you were home again?'

'Pour out the coffee, Elsie, and begin your breakfast. I wanted to
reserve the Return of the Prodigal until you came home after your
honeymoon. Then I meant to call mysteriously about sunset, before George
was home. I thought I would have a long cloak wrapped about me. I should
have begun: "Madam: you had once a brother."--"I had"--that is you.--"On
his deathbed."--"My brother dead?"--that's you.--"With this
packet."--Oh! we have lost a most beautiful little play. How can I
forgive you?'

Then they went on with breakfast, talking and laughing until, before the
meal was finished, they had lost their shyness and were brother and
sister again.

After breakfast, Athelstan took a cigarette and an easy-chair. 'Now I am
going to devote the whole day to you. I have nothing to do for my paper
which cannot wait till to-morrow. All this morning we will talk--that
is, until we are tired. We will have lunch somewhere, and go to see the
pictures; George will come at about seven: we will have dinner, and go
to some exhibition, somewhere. Then we will get home, and have another
talk. To-morrow, I shall have to leave you to your own devices between
ten and six or so. I am very busy some days: on others, I can find time
for anything.--Now that's all cleared up. I am to be your banker and
everything.'

'Not my banker, Athelstan. Oh! you don't know. I am a great heiress.'

'Indeed? How is that?' he asked, a little twinkle in his eye.

'Mr. Dering told me when I was twenty-one, three weeks ago. Somebody has
given me an immense sum of money--thirteen thousand pounds.'

'That is a very handsome sum. Who gave it to you?'

'That is a secret. Mr. Dering refuses to tell me. I wish I knew.'

'I wouldn't wish if I were you. Gratitude is at all times a burden and a
worry. Besides, he might be a vulgar person without aspirates or
aspirations. Much better not inquire after him. Thirteen thousand pounds
at three and a half per cent. means four hundred and fifty pounds a
year. A nice little addition to your income. I congratulate you, Elsie;
and this evening we will drink the health of the unassuming benefactor;
the retiring and nameless recogniser of maidenly worth. Bless him!'

'And now, Athelstan, begin your adventures. Tell me everything: from the
day you left us till now. You cannot tell me too much or talk too long.
Before you begin, ask any questions about my mother and Hilda that you
want to ask. Then we can go on undisturbed.'

'I have no questions to ask about either. I have already ascertained
from George that both are in good health, and that Hilda has married a
man with an immense fortune. That is happiness enough for her, I
hope.--Now, Elsie, I shall be tedious, I am afraid; but you shall hear
everything.'

He began. It was such a narrative as thousands of young Englishmen have
been able to tell during the last five-and-twenty years. The story of
the young man with a few pounds in his pocket, no friends, no
recommendations, and no trade. Athelstan landed at New York in this
condition. He looked about for employment and found none. He hastened
out of the crowded city: he went West, and got work in the business open
to every sharp and clever man--that of journalism. He worked for one
paper after another, getting gradually more and more West, until he
found himself in San Francisco, where he was taken on by a great paper,
which had now sent him over here as its London correspondent. That was
all the story; but there were so many episodes in it, so many
adventures, so many men whom he remembered, so many anecdotes cropping
up, in this eight years' history of a man with an eye, a brain, and a
memory, that it was long past luncheon-time when Athelstan stopped and
said that he must carry on the next chapter at another time.

'That pile of dollars that you made over the silver mine,
Athelstan--what became of them?'

'What became of them? Well, you see, Elsie, in some parts of the United
States money vanishes as fast as it is made. All these dollars dropped
into a deep hole of the earth, and were hopelessly lost.'

She laughed. 'You will tell me some day--when you please--how you lost
that fortune. Oh! what a thing it is to be a man and to have all these
adventures!--Now, Athelstan, consider--if it had not been for your bad
fortune, you would never have had all this good fortune.'

'True. Yet the bad fortune came in such an ugly shape. There has been a
black side to my history. How was I to tell people why I left my own
country? I could make no friends. At the first appearance of friendship,
I had to become cold, lest they should ask me where I came from and why
I left home.'

Elsie was silent.

They carried out part of their programme. They went to see the
pictures--it was eight years since Athelstan had seen a picture--and
after the pictures they walked in the Park. Then they went home and
waited for George, who presently appeared. Then they went to one of the
Regent Street restaurants and made a little feast. After this, Elsie
asked them to come home and spend a quiet evening talking about things.

By common consent they avoided one topic. Edmund Gray was not so much as
mentioned, nor was the malignity of Checkley alluded to. They talked of
old days, when Athelstan was a big boy and George a little boy and Elsie
a child. They talked of the long engagement, and the hopeless time, when
it seemed as if they were going to marry on two hundred pounds a year:
and of that day of miracle and marvel when Mr. Dering gave to one of
them a fortune, and to the other a partnership. They talked of their
honeymoon and the tour they were going to make, and the beautiful places
they would see. Tours and Blois, Chenonceaux and Amboise; Angouleme and
Poitiers and La Rochelle; and of their return, and the lovely flat,
where the friends would be made so welcome. Athelstan was a person of
some sympathy. Elsie talked as freely to him as she could to George.
They talked till midnight.

Then Elsie got up. 'Whatever happens, Athelstan,' she said,
'mind--whatever happens, you shall give me away on the 12th.'

'Now she has left us,' said George, 'you may tell me why she refused to
stay at home.'

'Well--I suppose you ought to know. Much for the same reason that I
refused to stay at home. They then chose to jump at the conclusion that
at one step I had become, from a man of honour, a stupid and clumsy
forger. They now choose--I am ashamed to say--my mother and sister
choose--to believe that you and I together have devised and invented
this elaborate scheme of forgery. With this end in view, it has been
found necessary to contrive certain little fabrications--as that I have
been living in London on my wits--that is to say, by the exercise of
cheatery--for the last eight years; and that, being in rags and
penniless, I persuaded you to join me in this neat little buccaneering
job.'

'Oh! it is too absurd! But I suspected something. Well--it is perfectly
easy to put a stop to that.'

'Yes, it is easy. At the same time, it will be well to put a stop to it
as soon as possible, before the thing assumes serious proportions, and
becomes a horrid thing, that may stick to you all your life. You have
got to do with a malignant man--perhaps a desperate man. He will spread
abroad the suspicion as diligently as he can. Let us work, therefore.'

'Well--but what can we do, that we have not done? How can we fix the
thing upon Checkley?'

'I don't know. We must think--we must find out something, somehow. Let
us all three work together. Elsie will make the best detective in the
world. And let us work in secret. I am very glad--very glad indeed--that
Elsie came.'




CHAPTER XIX

THE WHISPER OF CALUMNY


Whispered words are ever more potent than words proclaimed aloud upon
the house-top. If the envious man from the house-top denounces a man of
reputation as a thief, a gambler, a patricide, a sororicide, amicocide,
no man regardeth his voice, though he call out with the voice of
Stentor: people only stare: these are the words of a madman or a
malignant. But whisper these charges in the ear of your neighbour:
whisper them with bated breath: say that, as yet, the thing is a
profound secret. Then that rumour swiftly flies abroad, until every
burgess in the town regards that man askance; and when the time for
voting comes, he votes for another man, and will not have him as beadle,
sexton, verger, schoolmaster, turncock, policeman, parish doctor,
workhouse chaplain, common-councilman, alderman, Mayor, or Member of
Parliament. And all for a whisper.

It was Checkley who set going the whisper, which at this moment was
running up and down the office, agitating all hearts, occupying all
minds, the basis of all conversation.

King Midas's servant, when he was irresistibly impelled to whisper, dug
a hole in the ground and placed his whisper at the bottom of that hole.
But the grasses grew up and sighed the words to the passing breeze, so
that the market women heard them on their way: 'The King's ears are the
ears of an Ass--the ears of an Ass--the ears of an Ass.' The old and
trusty servant of Dering and Son buried his secret in the leaves of his
Copying-book. Here it was found by the boy who worked the Copying-press.
As he turned over the pages, he became conscious of a sibilant,
malignant, revengeful murmur: 'Who stole the bonds? The new
Partner.--Who forged the letters? The new Partner.--Who robbed the safe?
The new Partner.' Here was a pretty thing for a pretty innocent office
boy to hear! Naturally, his very soul became aflame: when the dinner
hour arrived, he told another boy as a profound secret what he had
heard. That boy told an older boy, who told another still older, who
told another, and so up the long official ladder, until everybody in the
place knew that the new Partner--actually the new Partner--the most
fortunate of all young men that ever passed his Exam.--who had stepped
at a bound from two hundred to a thousand, at least--this young man, of
all young men in the world, had forged his partner's name, robbed his
partner's safe, made away with his partner's property. Who after this
can trust anybody?

But others there were who refused to believe this thing. They pointed
out that the new Partner continued--apparently--on the best of terms
with the old Partner: they argued that when such things are done,
friendships are killed and partnerships are dissolved. They even went so
far, though members of the great profession which believes in no man's
goodness, as to declare their belief that the new Partner could not
possibly by any temptation do such things. And there were others who
pointed to the fact that the whisper came from the boy of the
Copying-press: that he heard it whispered by the fluttering leaves: and
that it was imparted to those leaves by Checkley--old Checkley--whose
hatred towards the new Partner was notorious to all men: not on account
of any personal qualities or private injuries, but out of the jealousy
which made him regard the Chief as his own property: and because he had
been deprived of his power in the office--the power of appointment and
disappointment and the raising of screw, which he had previously
possessed. Checkley was dethroned. Therefore, Checkley spread this
rumour. Others, again, said that if the rumour was really started by
Checkley, which could not be proved, seeing that, like all whispers or
rumours, the origin was unknown, and perhaps supernatural, then Checkley
must have very strong grounds for starting such a thing.

Thus divided in opinion, the office looked on, expectant. Expectancy is
a thing which gets into the air: it fills every room with whispers: it
makes a conspirator or a partisan or a confederate of every one: it
divides a peaceful office into camps: it is the cause of inventions,
lies, and exaggerations. There were two parties in this office--one
which whispered accusations, and the other which whispered denials.
Between these hovered the wobblers or mugwumps, who whispered that while
on the one hand--on the other hand--and that while they readily
admitted--so they were free to confess----Everybody knows the wobbler.
He is really, if he knew it, the master of the situation; but, because
he is a wobbler, he cannot use his strength. When he is called upon to
act, he falls into two pieces, each of which begins to wobble and to
fall into other two pieces of its own accord. The whole process of a
Presidential Election--except the final voting--was going on in that
office of half-a-dozen rooms, but in whispers, without a single
procession, and not one German band. And all unconscious of the tumult
that raged about him--a tumult in whispers--a civil war in silence--the
object of this was going on his way unconscious and undisturbed.

Now, however, having learned that the old clerk was actually seeking to
fix this charge upon him, George perceived the whispering and understood
the charge. When he passed through the first or outer office in the
morning, he perceived that the clerks all looked at him curiously, and
that they pretended not to be looking at him, and plied their pens with
zeal. On the stairs he met an articled clerk, who blushed a rosy red
with consciousness of the thing: on his way to his own room through his
own clerks' room, he felt them looking after him curiously as he passed;
and he felt them, when his own door was closed, whispering about him.
This made him extremely angry. Yet, for a whisper, one cannot suffer
wrath to become visible. That would only please the whisperers. There
is only one thing worse than to be suspected rightly; it is to be
suspected wrongly; for the latter makes a man mad. What? That he--even
he--the man of principle and rule, should be suspected! Does nothing,
then--no amount of character, no blamelessness of record, avail? Is the
world coming to an end?

George then shut his door and sat down to his table in a very wrathful
and savage frame of mind. And while he was just beginning to nurse and
nourish this wrath, coaxing it from a red glow to a roaring flame, a
card was brought to him.

'I will see Sir Samuel at once,' he said.

It is as well that we do not hear the remarks of the clerks' room and
the servants' hall. The Service, in fact, is a body of critics whose
judgments would, if we only heard them, cause us to reconsider our
self-respect. Great Philanthropist, great Statesman, saintly
Preacher--if you only knew what they say of you--down below!

The clerks, as Sir Samuel Dering--his face composed to the solemnity of
a mute--walked into the new Partner's room, whispered to each other:
'He's going to finish him. There'll be a bolt to-night.--He won't dare
face it out.--He _have_ got a nerve!!!--The game's up at last.--They
won't prosecute; you see if they do. If it was one of us, now.--Sir
Samuel's come to warn him--now you'll see.' With other exchanges and
surmises.

Sir Samuel, big and important, coldly inclined his head and took a
chair. 'A few words,' he said--'a few serious words, if you please,
sir.'

'Pray, go on.' George sat up and listened, his upper lip stiffened. He
knew what was coming. The thing which Sir Samuel proposed to say,
apparently became difficult. He turned red and stammered. In fact, it is
very difficult to inform a highly respectable young man in a highly
respectable position that he is going to be charged with a crime of
peculiar atrocity.

'I am here,' he said, after two or three false starts, 'without my
brother's knowledge. This is a private and unofficial visit. I come to
advise. My visit must be regarded as without prejudice.'

'Is it not well to ask first of all if your advice is invited?'

'In such a case as this, I venture to obtrude advice,' Sir Samuel
replied with dignity. 'There are occasions on which a man should
speak--he is bound to speak. You will remember that I was to have been
your brother-in-law----'

'You are to be my brother-in-law. Well, Sir Samuel, go on. I will hear
what you have to say.'

'You are, as no doubt you suspect and fear, about to be charged in
company with another, with complicity in this long series of forgeries.'

'Really? I heard last night from Elsie that there was some talk of such
a charge. Now, Sir Samuel, a man of your experience must be aware that
it is not enough for a foolish old clerk to suggest a charge; but there
must be some connection between the accused person and the crime.'

'Connection? Good Heavens! There is a solid chain of evidence, without a
single weak point.'

'Is there indeed? Well, we will not ask for the production of your
chain. Let us take it for granted. Go on to the next point.'

'I wish, young gentleman, I wish most sincerely, for the credit
of yourself, and for the happiness of the unfortunate girl who
has given you her heart, that my chain was of glass, to fly into
a thousand fragments. But it is not. Everything is complete. The
motive: the tempter: the conspiracy: the working out: the apparent
success--everything complete. The motive--want of money.'

'Want of money? Well, I was pretty badly off. That cannot be denied. Go
on.'

'You wanted money--both of you--wanted money. In ninety cases out of a
hundred, this is the cause--wanted money. So you went and did it. Always
the way in the City--they want money--and so they go and do it--go and
do it.'

'I see. Well, we need not have the tempter and the rest of it. They can
wait. Let us go on to the advice.'

'Just so. What I came to say is this. You are in a devil of a mess,
young gentleman: the whole job is found out: there's no use in trying to
brazen it out. Best come down at once.'

George nodded with as much good humour as he could assume under the
circumstances.

'Down at once,' Sir Samuel repeated. 'It is always best in the long run.
In your case, there is every reason why a scandal should be avoided.
The thing hasn't got into the papers: we are only yet in the first stage
of finding out what has been actually stolen: it has not been a case in
which the police could help. Now my brother is not a vindictive man. I,
for my own part, don't want my wife's brother, to say nothing of you,
convicted of forgery. Eh? Beastly thing, to go down to the City in the
morning and to hear them whispering, "That's his wife's brother in the
papers to-day. Lagged for fifteen years." Fifteen years for certain, it
will be, my fine fellow.'

'Fifteen years for certain,' George repeated.

'Let me help you out of the mess. Don't make difficulties. Don't stick
out your chin. Think of Elsie!'

George nearly lost his self-control--not quite.

'Think of Elsie!' he cried. 'Best not mention her name, Sir Samuel, if
you please.'

'She would be heart-broken if it went so far. If it stops short of that,
she will soon get over the little disappointment.'

'Go on to the next point.'

'Well--it is just this. I'll help you both--Athelstan as well as
you--yes--I'll help Athelstan. Hang the fellow! Why couldn't he stay at
Camberwell? Who cares about him and his bad company, if he keeps himself
out of people's way? Now, then. Let me have back the money. You haven't
drawn anything out of the Bank. Give me the papers. Then I'll square it
with my brother. I will advance you a hundred or two: you shall go clear
out of the country, and never come back again. And then, though it's
compounding a felony, we'll just put everything back again, and say
nothing more about it.'

'Oh! That is very good of you.'

'Yes, I know. But I want to make things easy. I don't want a beastly row
and a scandal. As for Athelstan, I shouldn't know the fellow if I ever
saw him. I hardly remember him. But for you I've always had a liking,
until these little events happened.'

'Very good, indeed, of you.'

'When the thing came out, I said to Lady Dering. "My dear," I said, "I'm
very sorry for your sister, because it will vex her more than a bit. The
engagement, of course, will be broken off; but we must not have a
scandal. We cannot afford it. We can not"--he smiled--"we are positively
not rich enough. Only the very richest people can afford to have such a
scandal. I will try and get things squared," I said, "for all our
sakes." That is what I said to Lady Dering. Now, be persuaded. Do the
right thing. Tell Athelstan what I have told you. The warrant for the
arrest of the man Edmund Gray will be issued to-morrow, I suppose, or
next day. After that, nothing can save you.'

'Nothing can save me,' George repeated. 'Is that all you came to say,
Sir Samuel?'

'That is all. A clean breast is all we ask.'

'Then, Sir Samuel'--George rose and took a bundle of papers from the
table--'let us find my Partner. You shall hear what I have to say.'

'Ah! that's right--that's sensible. I knew that you would be open to
reason. Come. He is sure to be alone at this early hour. Come at once.'

They went out together. The clerks noted their faces full of 'business,'
as we poetically put it--matters of buying and selling being notoriously
of the highest importance conceivable. Evidently something very serious
indeed had passed. But the chief personage still held up his head.
'Game, sir, game to the last. But there will be a bolt.'

Mr. Dering was in his usual place, before the letters, which were still
unopened. He looked ill, worn, and worried.

'Brother,' said Sir Samuel, 'I bring you a young gentleman who has a
communication to make of great importance.'

'Is it about this case? Have you--at last found out something?' The
tone, the words, suggested extreme irritability.

'I fear not. You know, I believe, all that we have found out. But now,'
said Sir Samuel, rubbing his hands--'now comes the long-expected----'

George interrupted--'What I have to say will not take long. I hear from
Sir Samuel that he and Checkley between them have got up a case which
involves me in these forgeries.'

'Quite right,' said Sir Samuel. 'Involves you inextricably.'

'And that things have gone so far that I am about to be arrested, tried,
and convicted. Which he rightly thinks will be a great scandal. So it
will--so it certainly will. He therefore proposes that I should make a
clean breast of the whole business, and give back the stolen bonds. I am
sorry that I cannot do this, for a very simple reason--namely, that
there is nothing to confess. But there is one thing that I must do. You
placed the case in my hands----'

'I did. I asked you to find out. I have brought no charge against you.
Have you found out?'

Mr. Dering spoke like a schoolmaster in one of his least amiable moods.

'It is a very improper thing for a person accused of a crime to be
engaged in detecting it. So I resign the case--there are the papers. You
had better go to some solicitor accustomed to this kind of work.'

'Stuff and rubbish!' cried Mr. Dering.

'Sir, you have deceived me.' Sir Samuel's face was gradually resuming
its normal length. 'You promised to confess, and you have not. You as
good as confessed just now.--This man is clearly, unmistakably guilty,'
he added, turning to his brother.

'I have not asked you, my Partner,' Mr. Dering added, more softly, 'to
give up the case. I have heard what is said. I have observed that the
so-called case is built up entirely on conjecture.'

'No--no,' said Sir Samuel. 'It is a sound structure, complete in every
part.'

'And there is nothing as yet to connect any man with the thing--not even
the man Edmund Gray.'

'Quite wrong--quite wrong,' said Sir Samuel. 'In the City, we may not be
lawyers, but we understand evidence.'

'I cannot choose but give up the case,' George replied. 'Consider.
Already Mrs. Arundel has requested her daughter to break off her
engagement; I am forbidden the house; Elsie has left her mother and gone
to her brother. No, sir--take the papers, and give them to some other
person.'

Mr. Dering mechanically took the papers, and laid his hand upon them.

'Let me remind you,' George continued, 'how far we have got. We have
proved that Edmund Gray is a real person, known to many. We have not
proved the connection between him and the robberies committed in his
name. He is apparently a most respectable person. The problem before you
is still to fix the crime on someone. I shall be glad to hear that it
has been successfully solved.'

'Glad?' asked Sir Samuel. 'You will be glad? This is amazing!'

'Eight years ago, Mr. Dering, another man stood here, and was accused of
a similar crime. He refused to stay in the house under such a charge.
That was foolish. Time has established his innocence. I shall stay. I am
your Partner. The Partnership can only be dissolved by mutual consent. I
remain.'

Mr. Dering laid his head upon his hand and sighed. 'I believe I shall be
driven mad before long with this business,' he said querulously. He had
lost something of his decision of speech. 'Well, I will give the case to
somebody else. Meantime, look here. Tell me how these things came here.'

The 'things' were two envelopes containing letters. They were addressed
to Edmund Gray, and had been opened. One of them was George's own note
inviting him to call. The other was the letter from the Manager of the
Bank asking for other references.

'How did they get here?' asked Mr. Dering again.

'Had you not better ask Checkley?' George rang the bell.

'I found these on the top of my letters, Checkley,' said Mr. Dering.
'You were the first in the room. You put the letters on the table. I
found them on the top of the heap. Nobody had been in the room except
you and me. You must have put them there.'

Checkley looked at the envelopes, and began to tremble. 'I don't know,'
he said. 'I put the letters on the table. They were not among them.
Somebody must have put them there'--he looked at the new Partner--'some
friend of Mr. Edmund Gray, between the time that I left the room and the
time when you came.'

'I entered the room,' Mr. Dering replied, 'as you were leaving it.'

'Observe,' said George, 'that in the whole conduct of this business
there has been one man engaged who has control of the letters. That
man--the only man in the office--is, I believe, the man before us--your
clerk--Checkley.'

'How came the letters here?' Mr. Dering repeated angrily.

'I don't know,' answered Checkley. 'He'--indicating George--'must have
put them there.'

'The Devil is in the office, I believe. How do things come here? How do
they vanish? Who put the notes in the safe? Who took the certificates
out of the safe? All you can do is to stand and accuse each other. What
good are you--any of you? Find out. Find out. Yesterday, there was a
handbill about Edmund Gray in the safe. The day before there was a
handful of Socialist tracts on the letters. Find out, I say.'

'Give the things to detectives,' said George.

'Let me take the case in hand, brother.' Sir Samuel laid hands on the
papers. 'I flatter myself that I will very soon have the fellow under
lock and key. And then, sir'--he turned to George--'scandal or no
scandal, there shall be no pity--no mercy--none.'

George laughed. 'Well, Sir Samuel, in a fortnight or so I shall call
myself your brother-in-law. Till then, farewell.' He left the office and
returned to his own room, the ripple of the laughter still upon his lips
and in his eyes, so that the clerks marvelled, and the faith of those
who believed in him was strengthened.

'Before then, young crowing bantam,' cried Sir Samuel after him, 'I
shall have you under lock and key.'

'Ah!' This was Checkley. The little interjection expressed, far more
than any words could do, his satisfaction at the prospect. Then he left
the room grumbling and muttering.

'I believe that this business will finish me off.' Mr. Dering sighed
again, and passed his hand over his forehead. 'Night and day it worries
me. It makes my forgetfulness grow upon me. I am as good as gone. This
hour I cannot remember the last hour. See--I had breakfast at home as
usual. I remember that. I remember setting out. It is ten minutes walk
from Bedford Row to here. I have taken an hour and a half. How? I do not
know. What did I do last night? I do not know; and I am pursued by this
forger--robber--demon. He puts things in my safe--yesterday, a placard
that Edmund Gray was going to give a lecture on something or other--the
day before, a bundle of tracts by Edmund Gray. What do these things
mean? What can I do?'




CHAPTER XX

HE COMES FROM EDMUND GRAY


'Nothing,' said Athelstan, 'could possibly happen more fortunately. We
have turned whispering conspirators into declared enemies. Now you are
free to investigate in your own way without having to report progress
every day.'

'About this new business about the letters and the things in the safe,'
said Elsie. 'It looks to me like _diablerie_. Checkley couldn't do it.
No conjuror in the world could do it. There must be somebody else in the
office to do these things. They mean defiance. The forger says: "See--I
do what I please with you. I return your letters addressed to Edmund
Gray. I place placards about Edmund Gray in your safe--for which nobody
has a key except yourself. Find me, if you can."'

'Yes; it is very mysterious.'

'A Person on Two Sticks might manage it. Very likely, he is concerned in
the business. Or a boy under the table would be able to do it. Perhaps
there is a boy under the table. There must be. Mr. Dering's table is
like the big bed of Ware. I daresay fifty boys might creep under that
table and wait there for a chance. But perhaps there is only one--a
comic boy.'

'I should like to catch the joker,' said George. 'I would give him
something still more humorous to laugh at.'

'If there is no comic boy--and no Person on Two Sticks,' Elsie
continued, 'we are thrown back upon Checkley. He seems to be the only
man who receives the letters and goes in and out of the office all day.
Well--I don't think it is Checkley. I don't think it can be-- George,
you once saw Mr. Dering in a very strange condition, unconscious,
walking about with open eyes seeing nobody. Don't you think that he may
have done this more than once?'

'What do you mean, Elsie?'

'Don't you think that some of these things--things put in the safe, for
instance, may have been put there by Mr. Dering himself? You saw him
open the safe. Afterwards he knew nothing about it. Could he not do
this more than once--might it be a habit?'

'Well--but if he puts the things in the safe--things that belonged to
Edmund Gray, he must know Edmund Gray. For instance, how did he get my
note to Edmund Gray, left by me on his table in Gray's Inn? That must
have been given to him by Edmund Gray himself.'

'Or by some friend of Edmund Gray. Yes; that is quite certain.'

'Come,' said Athelstan. 'This infernal Edmund Gray is too much with us.
Let us leave off talking about him for a while. Let him rest for this
evening.--Elsie, put on your things. We will go and dine somewhere, and
go to the play afterwards.'

They did so. They had the quiet little restaurant dinner that girls have
learned of late to love so much--the little dinner, where everything
seems so much brighter and better served than one can get at home. After
the dinner they went to a theatre, taking places in the Dress Circle,
where, given good eyes, one sees quite as well as from the stalls at
half the money. After the theatre they went home and there was an
exhibition of tobacco and soda water. Those were very pleasant days in
the Piccadilly lodgings, even allowing for the troubles which brought
them about. Athelstan was the most delightful of brothers, and every
evening brought its feast of laughter and of delightful talk. But all
through the evening, all through the play, Elsie saw nothing but Mr.
Dering and him engaged in daylight somnambulism. She saw him as George
described him, opening the safe, closing it again, and afterwards wholly
forgetful of what he had done.

She thought about this all night. Now, when one has a gleam or glimmer
of an idea, when one wants to disengage a single thought from the
myriads which cross the brain, and to fix it and to make it clear, there
is nothing in the world so good as to talk about it. The effort of
finding words with which to drag it out makes it clearer. Every
story-teller knows that the mere telling of a story turns his
characters, who before were mere shadows, and shapeless shadows, into
creatures of flesh and blood. Therefore, in the morning she began upon
the thought which haunted her.

'Athelstan,' she said, 'do you know anything about somnambulism?'

'I knew a man once in California who shot a grizzly when he was
sleep-walking. At least, he said so. That's the sum of my knowledge on
the subject.'

'I want to know if people often walk about in the daytime unconscious?'

'They do. It is called wool-gathering.'

'Seriously, Athelstan. Consider. George saw Mr. Dering arrive in a state
of unconsciousness. He saw nobody in the room. He opened the safe and
placed some papers there. Then he locked the safe. Then he sat down at
the window. Presently he awoke, and became himself again. If he did that
once, he might do it again.'

'Well? And then?'

'You heard yesterday about the letters, and the placard and the
Socialist tracts. Now Checkley couldn't do that. He couldn't, and he
wouldn't.'

'Well?'

'But Mr. Dering could. If he had that attack once, he might have it
again and again. Why, he constantly complains of forgetting things.'

'But the letters yesterday were addressed to Edmund Gray. How do you
connect Edmund Gray with Edward Dering?'

'I don't know. But, my dear brother, the more I think of this business,
the more persuaded I am that Checkley is not the prime mover, or even a
confederate.'

'The same hand has doubtless been at work throughout. If not Checkley's
aid to make that hand possible and successful, who is there? And look at
the malignity with which he tries to fix it on some one else.'

'That may be because he is afraid of its being fixed upon him. Consider
that point about the control of the letters. The business could only be
done by some one through whose hands passed all the letters.'

'Checkley is the only person possible.'

'Yes; he understands that. It makes him horribly afraid. He therefore
lies with all his might in order to pass on suspicion to another person.
You and George think him guilty--well, I do not. If I were trying to
find out the man, I should try a different plan altogether.'

Her brother had work to do which took him out directly after an early
breakfast. When Elsie was left alone, she began again to think about
Mr. Dering's strange daylight somnambulism; about his continual fits of
forgetfulness; about the odd things found on his table and in his safe,
all connected with Edmund Gray. Checkley could not have placed those
letters on the table: he could not have put those things in the safe.

Elsie looked at the clock. It was only just after nine. She ran to her
room, put on her jacket and hat, and called a cab.

She arrived at half-past nine. Checkley was already in his master's
room, laying out the table for the day's work as usual. The girl was
touched at the sight of this old servant of sixty years' service doing
these offices zealously and jealously. She stood in the outer office
watching him through the open door. When he had finished, he came out
and saw her.

'Oh!' he grumbled. 'It's you, is it? Well--he hasn't come. If you want
to see Mr. Dering, it's full early. If you want to see the new partner,
he isn't come. He don't hurry himself. Perhaps you'll sit down a bit and
look at the paper. Here's the _Times_. He'll be here at a quarter to
ten.'

Checkley sat down at his desk and took up a pen. But he laid it down
again and began to talk. 'We're in trouble, Miss. No fault of yours-- I
don't say it is. We're in trouble. The trouble is going to be worse
before it's better. They're not content with robbing the master, but
they mock at him and jeer him. They jeer him. They put on his table
letters addressed to the man they call Edmund Gray. They open his safe
and put things in it belonging to Edmund Gray. We're not so young as we
was, and it tells upon us. We're not so regular as we should be.
Sometimes we're late--and sometimes we seem, just for a bit, not to know
exactly who we are nor what we are. Oh! it's nothing--nothing, but what
will pass away when the trouble's over. But think of the black
ingratitood, Miss--Oh! black--black. I'm not blamin' you; but I think
you ought to know the trouble we're in--considering who's done it and
all.'

Elsie made no reply. She had nothing to say. Certainly she could not
enter into a discussion with this man as to the part, if any, taken in
the business by the new partner. Then Checkley made a show of beginning
to write with zeal. The morning was hot: the place was quiet: the old
man's hand gradually slackened: the pen stopped: the eyes closed: his
head dropped back upon his chair: he was asleep. It is not uncommon for
an old man to drop off in this way.

Elsie sat perfectly still. At eleven o'clock she heard a step upon the
stairs. It mounted: it stopped: the private door was opened, and Mr.
Dering entered. He stood for a moment in the doorway, looking about the
room. Now, as the girl looked at him, she perceived that he was again in
the condition described by George--as a matter of fact, it was in this
condition that Mr. Dering generally arrived in the morning. His coat was
unbuttoned: his face wore the genial and benevolent look which we do not
generally associate with lawyers of fifty years' standing: the eyes were
Mr. Dering's eyes, but they were changed--not in colour or in form, but
in expression. Elsie was reminded of her portrait. That imaginary sketch
was no other than the Mr. Dering who now stood before her.

He closed the door behind him and walked across the room to the window.

Then Elsie, lightly, so as not to awaken the drowsy old clerk, stepped
into Mr. Dering's office and shut the door softly behind her.

The sleep-walker stood at the window, looking out. Elsie crept up and
stood beside him. Then she touched him on the arm. He started and
turned. 'Young lady,' he said, 'what can I do for you?' He showed no
sign of recognition at all in his eyes: he did not know her. 'Can I do
anything for you?' he repeated.

'I am afraid--nothing,' she replied.

He looked at her doubtfully. Then apparently remembering some duty as
yet unfulfilled, he left the window and unlocked the safe. He then drew
out of his pocket a manuscript tied up with red tape. Elsie looked into
the safe and read the title--'_The New Humanity_, by Edmund Gray,' which
was written in large letters on the outer page. Then he shut and locked
the safe and dropped the key in his own pocket. This done, he returned
to the window and sat down, taking no manner of notice of his visitor.
All this exactly as he had done before in presence of George and his old
clerk.

For ten minutes he sat there. Then he shivered, straightened himself,
stood up, and looked about the room, Mr. Dering again.

'Elsie!' he cried. 'I did not know you were here. How long have you been
here?'

'Not very long. A few minutes, perhaps.'

'I must have fallen asleep. It is a hot morning. You must forgive the
weakness of an old man, child. I had a bad night too. I was awake a long
time, thinking of all these troubles and worries. They can't find out,
Elsie, who has robbed me.' He spoke querulously and helplessly. 'They
accuse each other, instead of laying their heads together. Nonsense!
Checkley couldn't do it. George couldn't do it. The thing was done by
somebody else. My brother came here with a cock-and-bull case, all built
up of presumptions and conclusions. If they would only find out!'

'The trouble is mine as much as yours, Mr. Dering. I have had to leave
my mother's house, where I had to listen to agreeable prophecies about
my lover and my brother. I wish, with you, that they would find out!'

He took off his hat and hung it on its peg. He buttoned his frock-coat
and took his place at the table, upright and precise. Yet his eyes were
anxious.

'They tease me too. They mock me. Yesterday, they laid two letters
addressed to this man, Edmund Gray, on my letters. What for? To laugh at
me, to defy me to find them out. Checkley swears he didn't put them
there. I arrived at the moment when he was leaving the room. Are we
haunted? And the day before--and the day before that--there were things
put in the safe----'

'In the safe? Oh! but nobody has the key except yourself. How can
anything be put in the safe?'

'I don't know. I don't know anything. I don't know what may be taken
next. My houses--my mortgages, my lands, my very practice----'

'Nay,--they could not. Is there anything this morning?'

He turned over his letters. 'Apparently not. Stay; I have not looked in
the safe. He got up and threw open the safe. Then he took up a packet.
'Again!' he cried almost with a scream. 'Again! See this!' He tossed on
the table the packet which he had himself, only ten minutes before,
placed in the safe with his own hands. 'See this! Thus they laugh at
me--thus they torment me!' He hurled the packet to the other side of the
room, returned to his chair, and laid his head upon his hands, sighing
deeply.

Elsie took up the parcel. It was rather a bulky manuscript. The title
you have heard. She untied the tape and turned over the pages. The work,
she saw, was the Autobiography of Edmund Gray. _And it was in the
handwriting of Mr. Dering!_

She replaced it in the safe. 'Put everything there,' she said, 'which is
sent to you. Everything. Do you know anything at all about this man
Edmund Gray?'

'Nothing, my dear child, absolutely nothing. I never saw the man. I
never heard of him. Yet he has planted himself upon me. He holds his
Chambers on a letter of recommendation from me. I was his introducer to
the manager of the Bank--I--in my own handwriting--as they thought. He
drew a cheque of 720_l_. upon me eight years ago. And he has transferred
thirty-eight thousand pounds' worth of shares and stock to his own
address.'

'Added to which, he has been the cause of suspicion and vile accusation
against my lover and my brother, which it will cost a great deal of
patience to forgive. Dear Mr. Dering, I am so sorry for you. It is most
wonderful and most mysterious. Suppose,' she laid her hand upon
his--'suppose that I was to find out for you----'

'You, child? What can you do, when the others have failed?'

'I can but try.'

'Try, in Heaven's name. Try, my dear. If you find out, you shall be
burned for a witch.'

'No. If I find out, you shall be present at my wedding. You were to have
given me away. But now--now--Athelstan shall give me away, and you will
be there to see. And it will be a tearful wedding'--the tears came into
her own eyes just to illustrate the remark--'because everyone will be so
ashamed of the wicked things they have said. Sir Samuel will remain on
his knees the whole service, and Checkley will be fain to get under the
seat.--Good-bye, Mr. Dering. I am a Prophetess. I can foretell. You
shall hear in a very few days all about Edmund Gray.'

She ran away without any further explanation. Mr. Dering shook his head
and smiled. He did not believe in contemporary Prophecy. That young
people should place their own affairs--their love-makings and
weddings--before the affairs of their elders, was not surprising. For
himself, as he sometimes remembered--and always when this girl, with
her pretty ways and soft voice, was with him--her visit had cheered him.
He opened his letters and went on with the day's work.

As for Elsie, the smile in her eyes died out as she descended the
stairs. If she had been herself a lawyer, she could not have worn a
graver face as she walked across the courts of the venerable Inn.

She had established the connection between Mr. Dering and Edmund Gray.
It was he, and nobody else, who laid those letters on the table--placed
those things in the safe. This being so, it must be he himself, and
nobody else, who wrote all the letters, signed the cheques, and did all
the mischief. He himself! But how? Elsie had read of hypnotism.
Wonderful things are done daily by mesmerists and magnetisms under their
new name. Mr. Dering was hypnotised by this man Edmund Gray--as he
called himself--for his own base ends. Well--she would find out this
Edmund Gray. She would beard this villain in his own den.

She walked resolutely to Gray's Inn. She found No. 22--she mounted the
stairs. The outer door was closed. She knocked, but there was no answer.
She remembered how George had found his laundress, and visited her at
her lodgings--she thought she would do the same. But on the stairs she
went down she met an old woman so dirty, so ancient, so feeble, that she
seemed to correspond with George's account of her.

'You are Mr. Gray's laundress?' she asked.

'Yes, Miss; I am.' The woman looked astonished to see such a visitor.

'I want to see him. I want to see him on very important business. Most
important to himself. When can I see him?'

'I don't know, Miss. He is uncertain. He was here yesterday evening. He
said he should not be here this evening. But I don't know.'

'Look here.' Elsie drew out her purse. 'Tell me when you think he will
be here, and if I find him I will give you two pounds--two golden
sovereigns. If you tell me right I will give you two sovereigns.'

She showed them. The old woman looked hungrily at the coins. 'Well,
Miss, he's been here every Saturday afternoon for the last six months. I
know it by the litter of papers that he makes. Every Saturday
afternoon.'

'Very good. You shall have your money if I find him.'

In the evening, Elsie said nothing about Mr. Dering and her strange
discovery. The two young men talked about trying this way and that way,
always with the view of implicating Checkley. But she said nothing.




CHAPTER XXI

I AM EDMUND GRAY


On Saturday afternoon, the policeman on day-duty at Gray's Inn was
standing near the southern portals of that venerable Foundation in
conversation with the boy who dispenses the newspapers, from a warehouse
constructed in the eastern wall of the archway. It was half-past three
by the clock and a fine day, which was remarkable for the
season--August--and the year. The sun poured upon the dingy old courts,
making them dingier instead of brighter. Where the paint of the windows
and door-posts is faded and dirty--where the panes are mostly in want of
cleaning--where there are no flowers in the windows--where there are no
trees or leaves in the Square--where the bricks want painting, and where
the soot has gathered in every chink and blackens every cranny--then the
sunshine of summer only makes a dingy court shabbier. Gray's Inn in July
and August, unless these months are as the August of the year of grace
1891, looks old, but not venerable. Age should be clean and nicely
dressed: age should wear a front to conceal her baldness: age should
assume false teeth to disguise those gums stripped of their ivory. It
was felt by the policeman. 'We want a washin' and a brightenin' in this
old place,' he remarked to the journalist. We want somethin' younger
than them old laundresses,' said the newspaper boy. Great is the Goddess
Coincidence. Even while he uttered this aspiration, a young lady entered
the gate and passed into the Inn.

'Ha!' breathed the policeman, softly.

'Ah!' sighed the journalist.

She was a young lady of adorable face and form, surpassing the wildest
dreams either of policeman or of paper-man--both of whom possessed the
true poetic temperament. She was clothed in raiment mystic, wonderful,
such as seldom indeed gets as far east as Gray's Inn, something in gray
or silver gray with an open front and a kind of jacket. She passed them
rapidly, and walked through the passage into the Square.

'No. 22,' said the policeman. 'Now, who does she want at No. 22? Who's
on the ground-floor of 22?'

'Right hand--Architects and Surveyors. Left hand--Universal
Translators.'

'Perhaps she's a Universal Translator. They must be all gone by this
time. The first floor is lawyers. They're all gone too. I saw the clerks
march out at two o'clock. Second floor--there's Mr. Carstone on the
left, and Mr. Edmund Gray on the right. Perhaps it's Mr. Carstone she's
after. I hope it isn't him. He's a gentleman with fine manners, and they
do say a great scholar, but he's a Lushington, and a sweet young thing
like that ought not to marry a man who is brought home every other night
too tipsy to stand. Or there's Mr. Gray--the old gent--perhaps she's his
daughter. What's Mr. Edmund Gray by calling, Joe?'

'Nobody knows. He don't often come. An old gentleman--been in the Inn a
long time--for years. Lives in the country, I suppose, and does no work.
Lives on other people's work--my work--honest working men's work,' said
the boy, who was a Socialist and advanced.

'Ah! There's something up about Mr. Gray. People are coming to inquire
for him. First, it was a young gentleman: very affable he was--and free
with his money--most likely other people's money. He wanted to know a
good deal about Mr. Gray--more than I could tell him--wanted to know how
often he came, and what he was like when he did come--and would I tell
him all I knew. He went to the old laundress afterwards.--Then it was a
little old man--I know him by sight--uses the _Salutation_ Parlour of an
evening--he wanted to know all about Mr. Gray too. No half-crown in that
quarter, though. He's been spying and watching for him--goes and hides
up the passage on the other side of the Square. Kind of a spider he is.
He's watching him for no good, I'll bet. Perhaps the young lady wants to
find out about him too.--Joe, there's something up at No. 22. The old
gentleman isn't in his chambers, I believe. She'll come out again
presently, and it'll be: "Oh, Mr. Policeman, could you very kindly tell
me how I can find Mr. Edmund Gray?" With a shilling perhaps, and
perhaps not. I wonder what she wants with Mr. Edmund Gray? Sometimes
these old chaps break out in the most surprising manner. Joe, if you
ever go into the Service, you'll find the work hard and the pay small.
But there's compensation in learnin' things. If you want to know human
nature, go into the Force.'

'There's old Mr. Langhorne, up at the top.'

'So there is. But no young lady wants to see that poor old chap. He's
got no friends, young nor old--no friends and no money. Just now, he's
terrible hard up. Took a shillin' off o' me last Sunday to get a bit of
dinner with. Fine thing--isn't it, Joe?--to be a gentleman and a
barrister all your life, isn't it--and to end like that? Starvation in a
garret--eh?-- Look out. She will be coming down directly.'

But she did not come down. Two hours and more passed, and she did not
come down.

The visitor was Elsie Arundel. She walked up the stairs to the second
floor. Here she stopped. There was a black door, closed, on the right of
her, and another black door, closed, on the left of her. On the lintel
of one was the name of Mr. F. W. Carstone. On the lintel of the other
was that of Mr. Edmund Gray. Elsie knocked with her parasol at the
latter door. There was no reply. 'The old laundress,' she murmured,
'told me that Saturday afternoon was my best chance of finding him. I
will wait.' She sat down with hesitation on the stairs leading to the
third floor--they were not too clean--and waited.

She was going to do a very plucky thing--a dangerous thing. She had made
a discovery connecting Mr. Dering directly with this Edmund Gray. She
had learned that he came to the office in a strange condition, perhaps
hypnotic, bringing things from Edmund Gray. She now suspected that the
only person who carried on the forgeries on Mr. Dering was Mr. Dering
himself, acted on and perhaps mesmerised by Edmund Gray--and she wanted
to find out who this Edmund Gray was. She would confront him and tax him
with the crime. It was dangerous, but he could not kill her. Besides, he
was described as quite an elderly man. He was also described as a
benevolent man, a charitable man, a kindly man: and he wrote letters
brimful of the most cheerful optimism. Yet he was carrying on a series
of complicated forgeries. She resolved to wait for him. She would wait
till sundown, if necessary, for him.

The place was very quiet. All the offices were closed and the clerks
gone. Most of the men who lived in the chambers were away, out of town,
gone on holiday, gone away from Saturday till Monday. Everything was
quite quiet and still: the traffic in Holborn was only heard as a
continuous murmur which formed part of the stillness: the policeman, who
had now said all he had to say to the newspaper boy, was walking slowly
and with heavy tread round the Court. The Inn was quite empty and
deserted and still. Only, overhead there was the footfall of a man who
walked up and down his room steadily, never stopping or ceasing or
changing the time, like the beat of a pendulum. Elsie began to wonder,
presently, who this man could be, and if he had nothing better to do
than to pace his chamber all day long, when the sun was bright and the
leaves on the trees and the flowers in full bloom.

The clock struck four: Elsie had been waiting half an hour: still Mr.
Edmund Gray did not arrive: still the steady beat of the footstep
continued overhead.

The clock struck five. Still that steady footfall. Still Elsie sat upon
the stairs waiting in patience.

When the clock struck six, the footsteps stopped--or changed. Then a
door overhead opened and shut and the steps came down the stairs. Elsie
rose and stood on one side. An old man came down--tall and thin,
close-shaven, pale, dressed in a black frock-coat, worn to a shiny
polish in all those parts which take a polish--a shabby old man whose
hat seemed hardly able to stand upright: and a gentleman--which was
perfectly clear from his bearing--a gentleman in the last stage of
poverty and decay.

He started, surprised to see a young lady on the stairs.

'You are waiting for Mr. Carstone?' he asked. 'He is out of town. He
will not be back till Monday. Nobody ever comes back before Monday. From
Saturday to Monday I have the Inn to myself. All that time there are no
slammers and no strangers. It is an agreeable retreat, if only----' He
shook his head and stopped short.

'I am not waiting for Mr. Carstone. I am waiting for Mr. Edmund Gray.'

'He is very uncertain. No one knows when he comes or whither he goeth. I
would not wait if I were you. He may come to-day, or to-morrow, or at
any time. He comes on Sunday morning, often. I hear him coming up-stairs
after the chapel bell stops. He is a quiet neighbour--no slammer or
tramper. I would not wait, I say, if I were you.'

'I will wait a little longer. I am very anxious to see Mr. Gray.'

'He should wait for you,' Mr. Langhorne replied, politely. 'The stairs
are not a fit resting-place for you. This old Inn is too quiet for such
as you. Mirth and joy belong to you-- Silence and rest to such as me.
Even slamming does not, I daresay, greatly displease youth and beauty.
Chambers are not for young ladies. Beauty looks for life and love and
admiration. They do not exist here. Run away, young lady--leave the Inn
to the poor old men, like me, who cannot get away if they would.'

'Thank you.--I must see Mr. Edmund Gray, if I can. It will not hurt me
to wait a little longer.'

'You wish to see Edmund Gray. So do I. So do I. You are a friend of his.
Perhaps, therefore, you will do as well. Those who are his friends are
like unto him for kindness of heart. Those who wish to be his friends
must try to be like unto him. Young lady, I will treat you as the friend
of that good man. You can act for him.'

'What can I do if I do act for him?' But there was a hungry eagerness in
the man's eyes which made her divine what she could do.

'It is Saturday.' He replied without looking at her. He turned away his
head. He spoke to the stair-window. 'To-morrow is Sunday. I have before
this, on one or two occasions, found myself as I do now--without money.
I have borrowed of Mr. Carstone and of Mr. Edmund Gray. Sometimes, I
have paid it back--not always. Lend me--for Mr. Edmund Gray--if you are
not rich, he will give it back to you--the sum of five shillings--say,
five shillings. Otherwise, I shall have nothing to eat until Monday,
when Mr. Carstone returns.'

'Nothing to eat? Nothing at all to eat?' Beggars in the street often
make the same confession, but somehow their words fail to carry
conviction. Mr. Langhorne, however, did carry conviction.

The old man shook his head. 'I had some food yesterday at this time.
Since then I have had nothing. There was neither tea nor bread in my
rooms for breakfast. When the clock struck six, my dinner hour, I
thought I would walk along the street and look at the things to eat
which are placed in the shop windows. That relieves a little. But
to-morrow will be a bad time--a very bad time. I shall lie in bed. Oh! I
have gone through it before. Sometimes'--he dropped his voice--'I have
been sore tempted to take something---- No--no; don't think I have given
way. No--no. Why--I should be--disbarred. Not yet--not yet.'

Elsie opened her purse. It contained two sovereigns and a shilling or
two. 'Take all,' she said eagerly. 'Take all the gold, and leave me the
silver. Take it instantly.' She stamped her foot.

He hesitated. 'All?' he asked. 'All? Can you spare it? I can never
repay----'

'Take it!' she said again, imperiously.

He obeyed: he took the gold out of the purse with trembling fingers.
Then he raised his rickety old hat--was that a tear that stole into his
eyes, or the rheum of old age?--and slowly walked down the stairs,
holding by the banisters. He was weak, poor wretch! with hunger. But it
was his dinner hour, and he was going to have his dinner.

Elsie sat down again.

It was half-past six--she had been waiting for three hours--when other
footsteps entered the house. Elsie sprang to her feet: she turned pale:
her heart stood still; for now she realised that if this step was truly
that of the man she expected, she was about to confront a person
certainly of the deepest criminality, and possibly capable of villainy
in any other direction. The steps mounted the stairs. I really think
that the bravest persons in the world are those who before the event
look forward to it with the utmost apprehension. They know, you see,
what the dangers are. Elsie was going to face a great danger. She was
going to find out, alone and unaided, who this man was, and why and how
he worked these deeds of darkness.

The footsteps mounted higher: from the door to the top of the stairs it
took but a single minute, yet to Elsie it seemed half an hour, so rapid
were her thoughts. Then the man mounted the last flight of steps.
Heavens! Elsie was fain to cry out for sheer amazement. She cried out:
she caught at the banisters. For, before her, taking the key of Mr.
Edmund Gray's Chambers from his waistcoat pocket, was none other than
Mr. Dering himself!

Yes. An elderly man, of truly benevolent aspect, his coat open flying
all abroad, his face soft, gracious, smiling, and full of sunshine, his
hat just the least bit pushed back, his left hand in his pocket. Elsie
thought again of her portrait at home, in which she had transformed her
guardian--and here he was in the flesh--transformed according to her
portrait.

She stared at him with an amazement that bereft her of speech and of
motion. She could only stare. Even if her mother's voice were suddenly
to call out to her that it is rude for little girls to stare, she could
not choose but stare. For Mr. Dering looked at her with that kind of
surprise in his eyes which means, 'What have we here to do with
beautiful young ladies?' There was not the least sign of any knowledge
of her. He looked at her as one suffers the eyes to rest for a moment
without interest upon a stranger and a casual passenger in the street.

He opened his outer door, and was about to walk in, when she recovered
some presence of mind--not much. She stepped forward. 'Can you tell me,
please, how I could find Mr. Edmund Gray?'

'Certainly,' he smiled--'nothing easier. 'I am Edmund Gray.'

'You!--you--Edmund Gray? Oh! No--no. You cannot be Edmund Gray--you
yourself!' All her beautiful theory of hypnotic influence vanished. No
mesmerism or magnetic influence at all. 'You yourself?' she repeated,
'you--Edmund Gray?'

'Assuredly. Why not? Why should a man not be himself?'

'Oh! I don't understand. The world is going upside down. I took
you--took you for another person.'

He laughed gently. 'Truly, I am none other than Edmund Gray--always
Edmund Gray. My first name I can never change if I wished, because it is
my baptismal name. The latter I do not wish to change, because it is my
name ancestral.'

'I asked because--because--I fancied a resemblance to another person.
Were you ever told that you are much like a certain other person?'

'No; I think not. Resemblances, however, are extremely superficial. No
two living creatures are alike. We are alone, each living out his life
in the great Cosmos, quite alone--unlike any other living creature.
However, I am Edmund Gray, young lady. It isn't often that I receive a
visit from a young lady in these Chambers. If you have no other doubt
upon that point, will you let me ask you, once more, how I can help you?
And will you come in and sit down?'

'Oh! it is wonderful,' she cried--'wonderful! most wonderful!' Again she
controlled herself. 'Are you,' she asked again, 'the same Mr. Edmund
Gray who wrote the letter to the _Times_ the other day?'

'Certainly. There is no other person, I believe, of the name in this
Inn. Have you read that letter?'

'Yes--oh, yes.'

'And you have come here to talk to me about that letter?'

'Yes--yes.' She caught at the hint. 'That is why I came--to talk about
that letter. I came in the hope of finding the author of that letter at
home.'

He threw open the door of his sitting-room.

'Will you step in? We can talk quite quietly here. The Inn at this
hour on Saturday is almost deserted.' He closed the outer door and
followed his visitor into the sitting-room. 'This,' he went on, 'is
the quietest place in the whole of London. We have not, in this
Square, the stately elms of the old garden, but still we have our little
advantages--spacious rooms--quiet always in the evening and on Sundays.
A few rackety young men, perhaps; but for one who reads and meditates,
no better place in London.--Now, young lady, take the easy-chair and sit
down. We will talk. There are very few people who talk to me about my
theories. That is because I am old, so that I have lost my friends, and
because my views are in advance of the world. No man is so lonely as the
man born before his time. He is the prophet, you know, who must be
stoned because he prophesies things unintelligible and therefore
uncomfortable--even terrifying. I shall be very glad to talk a little
with you.--Now, allow me first to open these letters.'

Elsie sat down and looked about her. She was in a large low wainscoted
room, with two windows looking upon the Square. The room was quite
plainly but quite well furnished. There was a good-sized study table
with drawers: a small table between the windows: a few chairs, a couch
and an easy-chair; and a large bookcase filled with books--books on
Socialism, George had told her. A door opened upon a smaller room: there
was probably a bedroom at the back. A plain carpet covered the floor.
Above the high old-fashioned mantel were two or three portraits of
Socialist leaders. The room, if everything had not been covered with
dust, would have been coldly neat: the chairs were all in their places:
the window-blinds were half-way down as the laundress thought was
proper--millions of Londoners always keep their blinds half-way down--a
subject which must some day be investigated by the Folklore Society: the
curtains were neatly looped: it wanted only a Bible on a table at a
window to make it the Front Parlour of a Dalston Villa. There were no
flowers, no ornaments of any kind.

Mr. Edmund Gray opened half-a-dozen letters lying on his table and
glanced at them. There were a great many more waiting to be opened.

'All are from people who have read my letter,' he said. 'They share with
me in the new Faith of a new Humanity. Happy is the man who strikes the
note of leading at the right moment. Happy he who lights the lamp just
when the darkness is beginning to be felt.--Yes, young lady, you are not
the only one who has been drawn towards the doctrines of that letter.
But I have no time to write to all of them. A letter makes one
convert--a paragraph may make a thousand.'

Elsie rose from her chair. She had decided on her line. You have heard
that her voice was curiously soft and winning--a voice that charms--a
voice which would soothe a wild creature, and fill a young man's heart
with whatever passion she chose to awaken. She had, besides, those soft
eyes which make men surrender their secrets, part with their power and
their strength. Did she know that she possessed all this power?--the
girl who had no experience save of one man's love, and that the most
natural, easy, and unromantic love in the world, when two who are
brought up side by side and see each other every day, presently catch
each other by the hand and walk for the future hand in hand without a
word. Yet Delilah herself, the experienced, the crafty, the trained and
taught--could not--did not--act more cleverly and craftily than this
artless damsel. To be sure, she possessed great advantages over
Delilah--by some esteemed attractive--in the matter of personal charm.

'Oh!' she murmured softly, 'it is a shame that you should be expected to
waste your valuable time in writing letters to these people. You must
not do it. Your time is wanted for the world, not for individuals.'

'It is,' he replied--'it is. You have said it.'

'You are a Master--a Leader--a Prince in Israel--a Preacher--a Prophet.'

'I am--I am. You have said it. I should not myself have dared to say it.
But I am.'

'No one can doubt it who has read that letter. Be my Master--too--as
well as the Master of--of all these people who write to you.'

'Be your Master?' He blushed like a boy. 'Could I desire anything
better?'

'My Father and my Master,' she added with a little change of colour.
Girls take fright very easily, and perhaps this old gentleman might
interpret the invitation--well--into something other than was meant.

'Yes--yes.' He held out his hand. She took it in her own--both her own
soft hands, and bowed her head--her comely head--over it.

'I came to-day thinking only'--Oh, Delilah!--'to thank you for your
great and generous and noble words, which have put fresh heart into me.
And now that I have thanked you, I am emboldened to ask a favour----'

'Anything, anything.'

'You will be my Master--you will teach me. Let me, in return, relieve
you of this work.' She laid her hand on the pile of letters. 'Let me
answer them for you. Let me be your Private Secretary. I have nothing to
do. Let me work for you.' She looked into his face with the sweetest
eyes and the most winning smile, and her voice warmed the old man's ear
like soft music. Ah, Circe!--'Now that I have seen you--let me be your
disciple, your most humble disciple, and'--Ah, Siren!--'let me be more,
Edmund Gray--I cannot say Mr. Gray--let me be more, Edmund Gray.' She
laid her hand, her soft-gloved, dainty, delicate hand, upon his, and it
produced the effect of an electric battery gently handled. 'Let me be
your Secretary.'

It was ten o'clock before Elsie reached home that evening, and she
refused to tell them, even her own brother and her lover, where she had
been or how she had spent her evening.




CHAPTER XXII

MASTER AND DISCIPLE


It was Sunday afternoon in Gray's Inn. The new Disciple sat at the feet
of the Master, her Gamaliel: one does not know exactly the attitude
adopted by a young Rabbi of old, but in this case the disciple sat in a
low chair, her hands folded in her lap, curiously and earnestly watching
the Master as he walked up and down the room preaching and teaching.

'Master,' she asked, 'have you always preached and held these
doctrines?'

'Not always. There was a time when I dwelt in darkness--like the rest of
the world.'

'How did you learn these things? By reading books?'

'No. I discovered them. I worked them out for myself by logic, by
reason, and by observation. Everything good and true must be discovered
by a man for himself.'

'What did you believe in that old time? Was it, with the rest of the
world, the sacredness of Property?'

'Perhaps.' He stood in front of her, laying his right forefinger in his
left forefinger and inclining his head. 'My dear young scholar, one who
believes as I believe, not with half a heart, but wholly, and without
reserve, willingly forgets the time when he was as yet groping blindly
in darkness or walking in artificial light. He wishes to forget that
time. There is no profit in remembering that time. I have so far drilled
and trained myself not to remember that time, that I have in fact clean
forgotten it. I do not remember what I thought or what I said, or with
whom I associated in that time. It is a most blessed forgetfulness. I
daresay I could recover the memory of it if I wished, but the effort
would be painful. Spare me. The recovery of that Part would be
humiliating. Spare me, scholar. Yet, if you wish--if you command----'

'Oh, no, no! Forgive me.' Elsie touched his hand. He took hers and held
it. Was it with a little joy or a little fear that the girl observed the
power she already had over him? 'I would not cause you pain.
Besides--what does it matter?'

'You know, my child, when the monk assumes the tonsure and the triple
cord, he leaves behind him, outside the cell, all the things of the
world--ambition, love, luxury, the pride of the eye--all--all. He
forgets everything. He casts away everything. He abandons
everything--for meditation and prayer. The monk,' added the Sage, 'is a
foolish person, because his meditation advances not the world a whit. I
am like the monk, save that I think for the world instead of myself. And
so, spending days and nights in meditation, I know not what went
before--nor do I care. It is a second birth when the new faith takes you
and holds you together, so that you care for nothing else. Oh,
child!--upon you also this shall come--this obsession--this
possession--so that your spirit shall know of no time but that spent in
the service of the Cause. Nay, I go so far that I forget from day to day
what passed, except when I was actively engaged for the Cause. Yesterday
I was here in the afternoon. You came. We talked. You offered yourself
as my disciple. I remember every word you said. Could I ever forget a
disciple so trustful and so humble? But--before you came. Where was I?
Doubtless here--meditating. But I know not. Then there are things which
one must do to live--breakfast, dinner--of these I remember nothing. Why
should I? It is a great gift and reward to me that I should not remember
unnecessary things--low and common things. Why should I try to do so?

'No--no,' murmured the catechumen, carried away by his earnestness.
'Best forget them. Best live altogether in and for the Cause.' Yet--she
wondered--how was she to bring things home to him unless he could be
made to remember? He was mad one hour and sane the next. How should she
bridge the gulf and make the mad man cross over to _the other side_?

The Master took her hand in his and held it paternally. 'We needed such
a disciple as you,' he went on, slightly bending his head over her.
'Among my followers there is earnestness without understanding. They
believe in the good time, but they are impatient. They want revolution,
which is terrific and destroys. I want conviction. There are times when
a great idea flies abroad like the flame through the stubble. But men's
minds must first be so prepared that they are ready for it. The world is
not yet ready for my idea, and I am old, and may die too soon to see the
sudden rise of the mighty flood, when that doctrine shall suddenly
cease in all mankind. We need disciples. Above all, we need women. Why
do women, I wonder, throw themselves away in imitating man, when there
are a thousand things that they can do better than any man? I want
women--young, beautiful, faithful. I can find work for hundreds of
women. Hypatia would be worth to me--to us--far more than he of the
Golden Mouth. Child--your sweet voice, your sweet face, your sweet
eyes--I want them. I will take them and use them--expend them--for the
great Cause. It may be that you will be called upon to become the first
martyr of the Cause. Hypatia was murdered by a raging mob. You will have
against you a mob worse than any of Alexandria. You will have a mob
composed of all those who are rich, and all who want to be rich, and all
the servile crews at their command. Happy girl! You will be torn to
pieces for the cause of humanity. Happy girl! I see the roaring,
shrieking mob. I see your slender figure on the steps--what steps?
Where? I hear your voice, clear and high. You are preaching to them;
they close in round you: you disappear--they have dragged you down: they
trample the life out of you. You are dead--dead--dead--and a name for
ever. And the Cause has had its martyr.'

It was strange. She who had offered herself as a disciple with deception
in her heart, thinking only to watch and wait and spy until she could
see her way plain before her, who knew that she was listening to the
voice and the dreams of a madman. Yet she was carried away: he made her
see the mob: she saw herself dragged down and trampled under their
heels. She shuddered, yet she was exultant: her eyes glowed with a new
light: she murmured: 'Yes--yes. Do with me what you please. I am your
disciple, and I will be your martyr, if you please.'

Great and wonderful is the power of Enthusiasm. You see, it matters
nothing--nothing in the world--what a man has to preach and
teach--whether he advocates Obi, or telepathy, or rapping, or spirits
who hide teacups in coat pockets--it matters nothing that there is
neither common sense nor evidence, nor common reason to back him: if he
only possess the magnetic power, he will create a following: he will
have disciples who will follow him to the death. What is it--this power?
It makes the orator, the poet, the painter, the novelist, the
dramatist: it makes the leader of men: it made the first King, the first
Priest, the first Conqueror.

'Come,' said Mr. Edmund Gray; 'the time passes. I must take you to my
Place.'

They walked out together, Master and Scholar. The man who was mad walked
carelessly and buoyantly, his coat flying open, one hand in his pocket,
the other brandishing his walking-stick, his head thrown back, his face
full of light, and, though his words were sometimes strong, always full
of kindness. Now the sane man, the man of Lincoln's Inn, wore his coat
tightly buttoned, walked with a firm precise step, looked straight
before him, and showed the face of one wholly occupied with his own
thoughts. There was a man who was mad and a man who was sane: and
certainly the madman was the more interesting of the two.

'This place,' said the Master, meaning Gray's Inn, 'is entirely filled
with those who live by and for the defence of Property. They absorb and
devour a vast portion of it while they defend it. No one, you see,
defends it unless he is paid for it. Your country, your family, your
honour--you will defend for nothing; but not another man's Property--no.
For that you must be paid. Every year it becomes more necessary to
defend Property; every year the hordes of mercenaries increase. Here
they are lawyers and lawyers' clerks--a vast multitude. Outside there
are agents, brokers, insurers, financiers--I know not what--all
defending Property. They produce nothing, these armies: they take their
toll: they devour a part of what other people have produced before they
hand on the residue to the man who says it is his Property.'

'Oh!'--but Elsie did not say this aloud--'if these words could only be
heard in Lincoln's Inn! If they could be repeated to a certain lawyer.'
From time to time she looked at him curiously. How if he should suddenly
return to his senses? What would he think? How should she explain? 'Mr.
Dering, you have been off your head. You have been talking the most
blasphemous things about Property. You would never believe that even in
madness you could say such things.' No; he never would believe
it--never. He could not believe it. What if his brother, Sir Samuel,
were to hear those words? Meantime, the Apostle walked along
unconscious, filled with his great Mission. Oh, heavens! that Mr.
Dering--Mr. Dering--should believe he had a Mission!

The Master stopped a passing tramcar. 'Let us climb up to the roof,' he
said. 'There we can talk and breathe and look about us, and sometimes we
can listen.'

On the seat in front of them sat two young men, almost boys, talking
together eagerly. Mr. Edmund Gray leaned forward and listened
shamelessly. 'They are two young atheists,' he said. 'They are cursing
religion. There is to be a discussion this evening at Battle Arches
between a Christian and an Atheist, and they are going to assist. They
should be occupied with the question of the day; they can not, because
they, too, are paid defenders of Property. They are lawyers' clerks.
They are poor and they are slaves: all their lives they will be slaves
and they will be poor. Instead of fighting against slavery and poverty,
which they know and feel, they fight against the Unknown and the
Unintelligible. Pity! Pity!'

They passed two great Railway Termini, covering an immense area with
immense buildings.

'Now,' said the Sage, 'there are millions of Property invested in
railways. Whenever the railway servants please, they can destroy all
that Property at a stroke. Perhaps you will live to see this done.'

'But,' said Elsie timidly, 'we must have things carried up and down the
country.'

'Certainly. We shall go carrying things up and down the country, but not
in the interests of Property.'

The tram ran past the stations and under broad railway arches, called
Battle Arches--where the two young atheists got down, eager for the
fray, always renewed every Sunday afternoon, with the display of much
intellectual skill and much ignorance. It is a duel from which both
combatants retire, breathed and flushed, proud of having displayed so
much smartness, both claiming the victory, surrounded by admiring
followers, and neither of them killed, neither of them hurt, neither of
them a bit the worse, and both ready to begin again the following Sunday
with exactly the same attack and exactly the same defence. There are
some institutions--Christianity, the Church of England, the House of
Lords, for instance--which invite and receive perpetual attacks, from
which they emerge without the least hurt, so far as one can perceive. If
they were all abolished to-morrow, what would the spouters do?

The car stopped again, and two girls mounted--two work girls of the
better sort--not, that is to say, the sort which wears an ulster and a
large hat with a flaming feather in it: working-girl dressed quietly and
neatly. They ought to have been cheerful and even gay, for they were
both young, both good-looking, both nicely dressed, and it was Sunday
afternoon, warm and sunny. Yet they were not cheerful at all. One of
them was in a rage royal, and the other, her friend, was in a rage
sympathetic--quite a real rage. They were talking loudly on the kerb
while they waited for the tram: they carried on their conversation as
they climbed the stair: they continued it while they chose a seat, and
before they sat down, without the least regard to those who sat near
them, whether they overheard or wished not to hear--or anything. They
were wholly occupied with themselves and their rage and their narrative.
They neither saw nor heeded anyone else--which is the way that the angry
woman has.

'So I told her--I up and told her, I did. "Yes," I sez, "you and your
fifteen hours a day and overtime," I sez--"and your fines--so as to rob
the poor girls of their money, and your stinkin' little room, as isn't
fit for two, let alone a dozen--and your flarin' gas," I sez, "to choke
us and poison us--and your dinners--yah! your dinners," I sez--"fit for
pigs; and your beast of a husband comin' round with his looks and his
leers"--"You let my husband alone," she sez--"His looks and his leers,"
I sez. "Some day the girls'll take him out and drownd him head first, in
the gutter," I sez. "And a good job too!"'

'You didn't say all that, Liz?' asked the other, admiringly. 'My! What's
she say to that? "Her beast of a husband"? And "his looks and his
leers"? Did you really, Liz, and her that jealous?'

'I did. Oh! I let her have it. For once she did have it. Then I took my
money and I went off.--Never mind what she called me; that don't matter.
She got the truth for once.'

'What do you make of this, disciple?' asked the Master.

'It seems a quarrel between the girl and her employer.'

'These are the makers of Property. They are not the soldiers who defend
it. They are those who create it. The girls are employed by the sweater,
who stands on the lowest rung of the ladder of Property, and steals the
things as fast as they are made.'

'One of them has been turned out. What will she do? Will she find
another place?'

'I don't know. What becomes of the young? It is a difficult question. No
one knows. Some say this and some say that. We know what becomes of the
old when they are turned out. They die. But as for the young, I know
not. You are young, and you are a woman. Go among the young women who
have been turned out and find for yourself--for the world--what does
become of them.'

They passed an immense churchyard, with an ancient church standing in
the midst--the churchyard now cleared of its headstones and converted
into a beautiful garden, after the modern fashion, in which we have
abandoned the pretence of remembering the dead, and plant flowers and
turf above their graves for the solace of the living. Why not? Let the
nameless dead be remembered by the nameless dead. Their virtues, if they
had any, may live after them in their descendants.

'See,' said Mr. Edmund Gray, moralising. 'Here they lie, those who were
soldiers of Property and those who were slaves of Property. They are
mostly the poor of their parish who lie in that garden. No headstones
mark their grave. They were born: they toiled for others to enjoy: and
they died. Is this the life that men should most desire?'

'Nay,' said the disciple. 'But there must be the strong and weak--clever
and dull: there must be inequalities.'

'Yes, inequalities of gifts. One man is stronger, one is sharper, one is
cleverer than another. Formerly, those gifts were used to make their
possessor richer and more powerful. The strong man got followers and
made slaves. The clever man cheated the dull man out of his land and his
liberty. Henceforth, these gifts will be used for the general good.
Patience! You shall understand all in good time.'

He stopped the tram and they descended.

Lying east of the Hampstead Road and Camden High Street, and bounded on
that side by the canal--the great space occupied by the Midland and
Great Northern Goods Depot, by gas-works, wharfs, and railway
arches--there is a network of streets very little known to any but the
parish clergy. No part of London is less interesting than this district.
It used to be called Somers Town, but I think that the old name has
almost died out. It is about a hundred years old, regarded as a
settlement: it possesses three churches at least, two work-houses, one
almshouse, and three burial-grounds turned into gardens. It is also
cheered by the presence of a coal depot. Many small industries are
carried on in this quarter: there are many lodging-houses: the streets
are rather grimy, the houses are rather shabby, the people are rather
slipshod. They are not criminals: they are, in a way, respectable--that
is to say, tolerably respectable. It is not a picturesque suburb:
dulness reigns: it is a dull, a dull, a dismally dull quarter. There are
children, but they lack mirth: and young girls, but they lack the spring
of youth: one would say that there was a low standard in everything,
even in the brightness of dress: the place looks better in winter than
in summer. To-day, the bright sunshine only made the shabbiness of the
streets more shabby.

'Is your place here?' asked Elsie.

'Yes; it is here.--You wonder why I came here. Because the people here
are not all working-people. Some of them are small employers--those of
whom I spoke--who stand on the lowest rung of the ladder and steal the
things as fast as they are made, and take toll, and hoard up savings.
The working-man is generous and open to others, compared with these
people. I planted my place down in the midst of them. But you shall
see--you shall see.'

It was like a dream. Elsie walked beside her conductor. Yesterday she
made the acquaintance of this man for the first time; she had never seen
him before except in his sane condition; he was a madman--a real
dangerous madman--stark staring mad; he was taking her she knew not
where--to some place among strange people: she walked beside him without
the least fear. She who would have fled before the most harmless
lunatic; and she was going with him as his disciple.

'George,' she said afterwards, 'I do not know how it happened. I could
not choose but go with him. I could not choose but to become his
disciple: he compelled me. I lost my will. I even forgot that he was a
madman: I gave up my reason and all: I followed him, and I believed all
that he told me. How did he get that power? Directly I left him, I
became myself again. I perceived the mad enthusiast. I saw Mr. Dering
caricatured and proclaiming foolishness. But in his presence I was his
servant and his slave.'



'Here we are,' he said. 'This is my Place. Let us go in.'




CHAPTER XXIII

THE HALL OF THE NEW FAITH


The Place, as Mr. Edmund Gray modestly called it, was a meek and
unpretending Structure. The word is used advisedly, because no one could
call it anything else. Not an Edifice; not a Building--a Structure. It
turned its gabled front to the street, with a door below and a window
above. It was of gray brick with a slate roof--a very plain and simple
Structure. It might have been a Primitive Methodist Chapel--the
Connexion are fond of such neat and unpretending places: or a room
belonging to the Salvation Army: or one of those queer lecture halls
affected by Secularists and generally called the Hall of Science. On the
doorpost was affixed a small handbill, announcing that every Sunday
evening at seven o'clock an address would be pronounced by Edmund Gray,
on the subject of 'Property.' On the same bill, below the line of the
principal title, were suggestive sub-titles. Thus:

  'PROPERTY AND ITS ORIGIN.'
  'PROPERTY AND ITS EVILS.'
  'PROPERTY AND ITS DANGERS.'
  'PROPERTY AND LIBERTY.'
  'PROPERTY AND PROGRESS.'
  'PROPERTY AND ITS DECAY.'

The Master pointed to the Bill. 'Read it,' he said. 'There you have my
mission clearly announced. No mistake about it. A bold pronouncement,
which cannot be mistaken. I make war against Property--I am the enemy
irreconcilable--the enemy to the death--of Property. I am almost alone
against the world, for my followers are a feeble folk and without power.
All the interests, all the prejudices, all the powers, all the
intellect, of the whole world are against me. I stand alone. But I
fear nothing, because the future is given over to me and to
mine--yea--though I do not live to see the day of Victory.'

He opened the door, and Elsie entered. She found herself in a room about
sixty feet long by twenty broad, and lofty--a fine and goodly room. It
was furnished with a long and narrow table running down the middle, and
a few benches. Nothing else. The table was laid with a white cloth, and
provided with plates of ham and beef, cold sausages, hard-boiled eggs,
cakes, toast, muffins, bread and butter, marmalade, jam, shrimps,
water-cresses, and teacups. In fact, there was spread out a Tea of
generous proportions.

The room was half filled with thirty or forty people, mostly young,
though there were some elderly men. Among them Elsie remarked, without
surprise, the decayed Barrister of Gray's Inn. Perhaps he was attracted
as much by the loaves as by the sermon. Three-quarters of them were
young men. Elsie noticed that they were young men of a curious
type--their faces keen, their eyes hard, their manner aggressive. They
belonged to a Church Militant. They longed to be fighting. On the
appearance of their preacher they flocked about him, shaking hands and
inquiring after his health. At least, therefore, he had the affection of
his followers.

'My friends,' said the Prophet, 'I bring you a new Disciple. She comes
to us from the very stronghold of Property. Her friends'--yet he had
shown no sign of recognition--'are either those who pillage the
producer, or those who rob the possessor on pretence of defending him.
She is at present only a recruit. She comes to listen and to learn. She
will go home to remember and to meditate. She is a recruit now who will
be hereafter a Leader.'

The people received her with curiosity. They were not of the higher
classes, to put it mildly, and they had never had a young lady among
them before. Two or three girls who were present--girls from the
dressmaker's workrooms--looked at her frock with envy, and at her bonnet
and her gloves with a yearning, helpless, heart-sinking admiration. To
the young men she seemed a goddess, unapproachable. They stood at a
distance: men of the rank above them would have worshipped. These young
men only gaped. Such a girl had nothing to do with their lives.

Apparently they had been waiting for the Master, for at the moment a
stout woman and a girl appeared bearing trays with teapots and jugs of
hot water, which they placed upon the board. Mr. Edmund Gray took the
chair. Elsie began to feel like Alice in Wonderland. She came to see a
'Place': she expected to hear a sermon or a lecture; and behold a Tea!

'Sit beside me,' said the Master. 'We begin our evening on Sunday with a
simple feast, which I provide. It is a sign of brotherhood. Every Sunday
we begin with this renewal of fraternity. Those who break bread together
are brothers and sisters. In the good time to come every meal shall be
in common, and every evening meal shall be a Feast. Eat and drink with
us, my daughter. So you will understand that you belong to a
Brotherhood.'

'Try some shrimps, Miss,' said her neighbour on the right, an elderly
man, who was a builder's foreman.

History does not concern itself with what Elsie took. She found the meal
very much to the purpose after a long afternoon of talk, argument, and
emotion. She was young and she was hungry. The tea was good: the things
to eat were good: the cake and toast were admirable. Elsie ate and drank
and wondered what was coming next.

After a little, she began to look round her and to watch the company.
There were now, she counted, forty-five of them--forty-five disciples of
Mr. Edmund Gray. What had he to teach them? The destruction of Property.
Out of the four millions of London, forty-five were found who wanted to
destroy Property--only forty-five. But perhaps all who advocated that
step were not present. Her ancient prejudices whispered that this was a
reassuring fact, considering that the Preacher had preached his doctrine
for nine long years. Only forty-five. Next to her the foreman began to
talk to her of Fourier and Owen, and a dozen half-forgotten leaders in
the old experiments. He had been a Chartist in the Forties: he was a
Socialist in these, the Nineties: but he confessed that before any real
reform was attempted, Property must first be destroyed.

'It's the selfishness,' he whispered earnestly, 'that's got to be torn
out by the roots. Take that away, and there's a chance for the world. It
never can be taken away till a man finds that he can't work no longer
for himself, and that he must work for all, whether he likes it or lumps
it. Don't give him the choice nor the chance, I say. Take away Property,
and there's neither choice nor chance left. You hear Mr. Gray upon
that. Oh, he's powerful! What do they say? Naked we came into the world.
Naked we enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. There's a wonderful lot of
fine things hangin' to that. You must wait till you hear Mr. Gray upon
that theme.--Kingdom of Heaven! To hear the parsons talk, it's away
above the clouds. Not so. It's here--close beside us--on this earth. All
we've got to do is to put out our hands and reach it.'

'You may put out your hands as much as you like,' said one of the
younger men; 'but you won't reach it, all the same. Property stands
between.'

'At our place,' said a girl sitting opposite--a girl of intelligent
face, pale and thin,--'we work from eight till eight, and sometimes
longer, for twelve shillings a week. I know what things cost and what
they sell for. I could produce enough to keep me--ah! a good deal better
than I live now--if I could sell what I made myself--for four hours'
work a day. So I work eight hours a day, not counting the dinner hour,
just to keep the boss and to make Property for him. My Property it
is--well--I know--in here, we say, _our_ Property: outside we say, _my_
Property. Where's your Kingdom of Heaven, then, if you reach out your
hand ever so far, so long as I've got to work to make somebody else
rich? Let's destroy Property, and then we shall see.'

A desire--a foolish concealed desire, born of prejudice, seized Elsie to
argue. For she perceived in the girl's reasoning certain confusions and
intricacies. But she had the courage to suppress the inclination: she
refrained. She was a disciple. She must listen.

'I am a slave, like all the rest of us,' another young man remarked
cheerfully. 'My Master owns me. He can sell me if he likes, only he
calls it by another name; he can't take a whip and lash me, though he'd
like to, because, if he did, I'd break every bone in his body for him,
but he can cut down the work and the money. I do editing and reporting
for a local paper. Thirty shillings a week. The proprietor makes ten
pounds a week out of it. And I'm not allowed to tell the truth for fear
of advertisers.' He added a few words not commonly heard in a place that
looks like a chapel on a Sunday evening.

Elsie observed that their faces showed two variations of
expression--only two. The majority of the company had the eyes of the
dreamer, the theorist, the enthusiast. They are soft eyes, and in repose
are heavy, and they look through stone walls into space, far away--space
where their dreams are realised and men and women live according to
their theories. In moments of enthusiasm and passion they become flaming
fires. These eyes belonged to most of those present. The rest--the
minority--were those who are angry and restless and eager for the
practical application of the doctrine. These want revolution: they are
impatient: they feel for themselves the injustices and impressions which
enthusiasts feel for others: these are always resentful: the others are
always hopeful: these want to convert the world at once with bludgeon
and with gun: the others are certain that before long the world will be
converted by reason. The one despairs of anything but force: the other
will have no force: the one hates his enemy: he would kill him if he
could: he has no words too bad for him: the enthusiast, on the other
hand, regards his enemy with pity, and would at any moment welcome him,
forgive him, and--well--invite him to a Fraternal Tea if he would only
desert his ranks and come over. And these are the two divisions in every
party, and such is the nature of man that there must always be these two
divisions.

The Fraternal Tea finished, the company cleared the tables, everybody
lending a hand, perhaps as another sign or pledge of fraternity. It was
then nearly seven o'clock, the hour appointed for the address. The door
was thrown wide open for the admission of the world; but there was no
sign that the world took the least interest in the subject of Property.
No one came at all. Elsie learned afterwards that the world outside the
Hall had long since grown tired of the subject on which Mr. Gray had
been preaching for nine years. Those who came to the Tea were the inner
circle of believers or disciples, a small but faithful company, to whose
members there was rarely any addition.

At seven Mr. Edmund Gray rose to commence his address, standing at the
head of the table, so that it was like an after-dinner speech. Outside,
the sun was hot and bright and the air clear. Within the Hall, there
were the mingled odours and steams of long-protracted and hearty
Fraternal Tea: the air was heavy and the room dark. When the Master
began to speak, a young man--one of the ardent and wrathful kind--drew
out a note-book and took everything down: all listened with respect,
some with rapt interest. Some nodded--some groaned--some said 'Hear'
softly--to encourage the preacher and to show their adhesion to
principle.

Elsie sat at the right hand of the speaker. His discourses moved her
much less in this public place than in his chambers. The persuasive
voice was there, but it did not persuade her--moreover, she could not
meet his eyes. Their magnetism failed to touch her. So much the better,
because she could listen with cold judgment and watch the people.

'My friends,' he began, 'my brothers and my sisters--we are all long
since agreed that the root of all evil, the first form of disease, the
first fatal step that was leading to so many other mischiefs, was the
beginning of Property. We have proved that so often--we are all so
entirely agreed upon this vital principle, that we seldom, and only on
rare occasions, find it necessary to do more than assume its truth. That
occasion, however, is the present, when we have among us one who comes
as a stranger, yet a disciple: one who has a mind open to the influence
of reason: one who is anxious to clear herself of the prejudices and
absurdities in which she has been from infancy brought up. Let us,
therefore, briefly, for her instruction and for the strengthening of our
own faith, point out some of the arguments which support this position.
It is to us an axiom. To the world it still requires proof. And the
world refuses to accept the proof, because it is given over to the Chase
of the Abominable Thing.'

He proceeded to parade the reasons which made his School regard Property
as the root of all evil. The line which lie pursued was not new: many
men have pointed out before Mr. Edmund Gray the selfishness of mankind
as illustrated by the universal game of Grab: others, with equal force,
have shown that the protection of Things causes an immense expenditure
and a great shrinkage in Things: others have shown that it is the
continual efforts of men to get without working the Things for which
others have worked, that fill our jails and keep up an army of police.

'We start with a false principle,' the Master went on, 'which has ruined
the world and still keeps it down. If there are to be rich men, they
must become rich at the expense of the rest: they must be few and the
poor must be many. Therefore, the protection of Property is the robbery
of the poor by law. We all know that: in this place we have agreed, so
far a thousand times: the rich can only become rich by robbing the poor:
they rob their land: they rob their work: they rob their whole
lives--and they are permitted and encouraged by the Law. Shall we, then,
change the Law? No: it would be a work too vast. Shall we change the
minds of men? Not by reason: it is impossible by any argument so long as
by law and custom they can still rob the producer of his work. The only
way is to destroy all Property. When men can no longer by any kind of
thought get richer than their neighbours, then they will cease to think
for themselves, and think for the whole community. You will say--some
one may object--that some are not the same in strength of mind or of
body: there will be many, then, who will refuse to work at all, and
become burdens on the community. We have thought of that objection. At
first, there would be many such; but not for long. Because we should
kill them. Yes, my friends,' he added with a smile of the sweetest
benevolence. 'For the good of the community it will be necessary,
without any sentimental considerations, to kill all those who refuse to
work, all those who shirk their work, all those who persistently do
scamped and bad work. They must die. So the commonwealth shall contain
none but those who are vigorous, loyal, and true. For the
rest--Death--if it means the death of a million who were once
rich--Death is the only escape from the difficulty which is so often
objected.

'It has been asked again how we differ from the Socialists. In this. We
would begin with no theories, no constitution, no code. Only let every
man give all his strength, all his heart, all his mind, to the good of
the commonwealth, without the least power of enriching himself, saving
money--of course there would be no money--without the chance of getting
better food and better clothes than the rest--and we may safely leave
the world to take care of itself. Why--my brothers--why--my
sisters--should we poor purblind creatures, unable to comprehend more
than a glimpse of that glorious future which awaits the world when
Property shall be destroyed--why--I say--should we dare to lay down
schemes and invent systems for that glorified humanity? Let us leave
them to themselves. They will be as far above us, my brothers, as we are
already above the holders and the defenders of Property.'

Elsie looked at the little gathering--five-and-forty--with a little
smile. They were then already far above the holders and the defenders of
Property, and again she thought, 'What if these words were heard in
Lincoln's Inn?'

'How, then, can Property be destroyed?'

At this practical question every one sat upright, coughed, and looked
interested. Their Preacher had often enough declaimed upon the evils of
Property. He seldom spoke of a practical way. Perhaps the time had come.

'There are, my friends, several ways. They are already beginning to be
understood and to be worked. The Irish and the politicians who wanted
the Irish vote have shown the world how to destroy property in land.
Believe me, that example will be followed. It was an evil day for the
holders of Property when the Government interfered between the landlord
and his tenant. That example will bear fruit elsewhere. We shall see
everywhere the owners of the land turned out and their places taken by
those who work the land. The next step is from land to houses. Why not
with houses as with land? Since a beginning has been made, it must be
carried on. But there is other property besides lands and houses. There
are companies with shares, railways, and so forth. We have only begun to
see what united labour can effect--since union of labour is, in fact,
not yet begun. When it is fairly started it will pay small respect to
shareholders and to dividends. When wages are paid, there will be
perhaps no dividend left at all. In a single year--nay, a single
week--the whole capital invested in all the companies will lose its
value: it will be so much waste-paper. My friends, we need not stir hand
or foot to bring about this end: it will be done for us by the
working-man, and by those who follow the example of Ireland. They will
do it for their own selfish ends first--but--Property once destroyed, we
shall never again allow it to be created.

'Oh!'--he warmed with his subject, his voice grew more musical, his face
glowed--'I see a splendid--a noble sight. I see the great houses in the
country fallen to ruin and decay: their contents are stored in museums:
the great palaces of the towns are pulled down: the towns themselves are
decayed and shrunk: there is no Property: there is no one working for
himself: the man of science works his laboratory for the community--but
he has the honour of his discoveries: the medical man pursues his work
with no thought of getting rich: there is plenty to go the round of
everything--oh! plenty of the best. We can have what we like, do what we
like, dress as we like, teach what we please--provided we work for the
State. If we refuse--Death! If we give bad work--Death! It is the only
Law. We shall have no lawyers--no power--no magistrates. Oh! great and
glorious time--you shall see it, you who are young--yes, you shall see
it--while I--I--I--who have dreamed of the time so long--I shall lie low
in the grave. What matter--so the time come and so the world rises free
at last to follow out the destiny of a new and glorified humanity!'

He sat down and laid his head upon his hand, as one in prayer. They
remained in silence till he raised his head. Then the young man who had
called attention to his slavery spoke.

'There is perhaps another way,' he said, 'which might do the job for us.
Suppose the chemists were to find out how to produce food--food of any
kind--artificially--just as good and as nourishing as if it was
butcher-meat or bread. Suppose it could be produced dirt cheap--most
chemists' things cost nothing. Then no one would need to work: because
he'd have his food found for him. If no one would need to work, no one
could get rich any more. And if no one wanted to buy anything, nobody
could sell. Then riches wouldn't count, and there you are. Let's get a
chemist to take the thing up.'

The conversation that followed struck out new ideas. Presently it
flagged, and one by one the people stole away.

The Master and the Disciple returned in the tram as far as Gray's Inn.

The Master fell into profound silence a quarter of an hour before the
end of the journey. When they got down, Elsie observed first, that he
buttoned his coat; next, that he put on gloves; thirdly, that he pulled
his hat forwards: and lastly, that he ignored her presence. He drew
himself erect, and walked away with firm and precise step in the
direction of Bedford Row, which is on the other side of Gray's Inn. He
was once more Mr. Edward Dering.

'I wonder,' said Elsie, 'how much, to-morrow, he will recollect?'




CHAPTER XXIV

CAN HE REMEMBER?


It was past ten o'clock that Sunday evening when Elsie arrived home.
Athelstan and George were waiting up for her. 'Again the mysterious
appointment?' asked the former. 'Are we to know anything yet?'--Elsie
shook her head.--'Not to-night? Very good. You look tired, Elsie.'

'I am tired, thank you. And--and I think I would rather not talk
to-night. I will go to my own room.--Have patience, both of you, for a
day or two longer. Believe me, everything is going well. The only reason
why I cannot tell you what I have been doing is that it is so
strange--so wonderful--that I have not been able even to shape it into
words in my own mind.--What is to-day? The 1st of August.'

'Only eleven days yet--eleven long days,' said George, 'but also eleven
short days.'

'I do not forget. Well--you may both of you sit down--go about your
business--you need do nothing more. As for me, I think you will have to
get on without me every evening this week. But be quite easy. The thing
is done.' And with that, nodding and laughing, she ran out of the room.

'It is done,' repeated George. 'The thing is done. Which thing?'

'It is done,' repeated Athelstan. 'What is done? How was it done? Who
did it? When was it done?'

'Since Elsie says it is done, I am bound to accept her assurance.
Presumably, she has caught old Checkley at South Square, in the very
act. Never mind; I am quite sure that Elsie knows what she says.'

In her own retreat Elsie sat down to consider.

If you think of it, she had a good deal to consider. She had, in fact, a
tremendous weapon, an eighty-ton Woolwich, in her possession; a thing
which had to be handled so that when it was fired it should not produce
a general massacre. All those who had maligned and spoken and thought
evil of her brother and her lover should, she thought, be laid
prostrate by the mere puff and whiff of the discharge. Checkley should
fall backwards, and raise a bump at the back of his head as big as an
egg. Sir Samuel and Hilda should be tumbled down in the most ignominious
fashion, just as if they had no money at all. And her mother should be
forced to cry out that she had been wrong and hasty.

She held in her own hands nothing less than the complete demolition of
all this erection of suspicion and malignity. Nothing less. She could
restore to her brother that which he had never lost, save in the eyes of
his own people, who should have been the most jealous to preserve it. No
greater service could be rendered to him. And she could clear from her
lover's name whatever shreds and mists had been gathered round it by the
industrious breath of Checkley--that humble Cloud Compeller. You see, we
all have this much of Zeus in us, even in the compelling of Clouds:
every man by the exercise of a little malignity, a little insinuation
and a few falsehoods, can raise quite a considerable mist about the head
or the name or the figure or the reputation of anyone. Women--some
women, that is--are constantly engaged in this occupation; and after
they have been at their work, it is sometimes hard for the brightest
sunshine to melt those mists away.

To be able to clear away clouds is a great thing. Besides this, Elsie
had found out what the rest had failed to find out--and by the simplest
method. She had learned from the only person who knew at what hour she
should be most likely to find the mysterious Edmund Gray, and she had
then waited on the stairs until he came. No method more direct--yet
nobody thought of it except herself. She had done it. As the result,
there was no longer any mystery. The man who forged the first cheque:
the man who wrote those letters and conducted their transfer: was, as
they all thought at first, Edmund Gray. No other. And Edmund Gray was
Edward Dering, one and the same person--and Edward Dering was a Madman,
and this discovery it was which so profoundly impressed her. There were
no confederates: there was no one wanted to intercept the post: no one
had tampered with the safe: the Chief himself had received the letters
and conducted the correspondence alternately as Edmund Gray himself, or
Edmund Gray acting unconsciously for Edward Dering.

Perfectly impossible-- Perfectly simple-- Perfectly intelligible. As for
the impossibility, a fact may remain when its impossibility is
established. Elsie was not a psychologist or a student of the brain. She
knew nothing about mental maladies. She only said after what she had
seen and heard: 'The man is mad.'

Then she thought how she should best act. To establish the identity of
Mr. Dering and Edmund Gray must be done. It was the one thing necessary.
Very well. That could easily be done, and in a simple way. She had only
to march into his office at the head of a small band of witnesses and
say: 'You wanted us to find out Edmund Gray! I have found him. And thou
art the man!'

He would deny it. He certainly knew nothing about it. Then she would
call upon her witnesses. First, Athelstan's commissionaire, who declared
that he should remember, even after eight years or eighty years, the
gentleman who sent him to cash that cheque. 'Who is this man,
commissionaire?'

'That is Mr. Edmund Gray.'

Next the landlord of his chambers. 'Who is this man?'

'That is Mr. Edmund Gray, my tenant for nine years.'

Then she would call the eminent Barrister, Mr. Langhorne. 'Do you know
this man?'

'He is my neighbour, Mr. Edmund Gray.'

And Freddy Carstone the Coach.

'He is my neighbour, Mr. Edmund Gray.'

And the laundress, and she would say: 'I have done for the gentleman for
nine years. He's a very good gentleman, and generous--and his name is
Mr. Edmund Gray.'

And the people from the Hall--and they would make answer, with one
consent: 'That is Mr. Edmund Gray, our preacher and our teacher.'

And she herself would give her testimony: 'I have sat with you in your
Chambers. I have heard you lecture in your Hall, surrounded by these
good people, and you are Edmund Gray.'

The thing was quite easy to do. She could bring forward all this
evidence at once, and it would be unanswerable and convincing even to
Sir Samuel.

Except for one thing which made it difficult.

The discovery would be a most dreadful--a most terrible--revelation to
one who believed himself to be the most respectable solicitor in the
whole of London; the most trustworthy; the clearest in mind; the keenest
in vision; the coldest in judgment. He would learn without the least
previous suspicion or preparation, or any softening of the blow, that
for many years he had been---- What? Is there any other word--any kinder
word--any word less terrifying or less humiliating by which the news
could be conveyed to him that he had been Mad--Mad--Mad? Heavens! what a
word it is! How terrible to look at with its three little letters which
mean so much! All the words that mean much are monosyllables:
God--Love--Joy--Hate--Fear--Glad--Sad--Mad--Bad--Hell--Home--Wife--
Child--House--Song--Feast--Wine--Kiss--everything--they are the oldest
words, you see; they have been used from time immemorial by prehistoric
man as well as by ourselves.

Mr. Dering had to be told that he was Mad. Somehow or other, he must be
told that. It seemed at first the only way out of the difficulty. How
could this girl communicate the dreadful news to her guardian, who had
always been to her considerate, and even affectionate? She shrank from
the task. Then she thought she would hand it over to her brother
Athelstan. But he was far more concerned about clearing up the hateful
business than about softening the blow for Mr. Dering. Or of
communicating it to George. What should she do? Mr. Dering was mad. Not
mad all the time, but mad now and then, sometimes every day, sometimes
with intervals. This kind of madness, I believe, takes many forms--a
fact which should make the strongest men tremble. Sometimes it lasts a
long time before it is found out. Sometimes even it is never found out
at all. Solicitors and doctors tell queer stories about it. For
instance, that story--quite a common story--of an old gentleman of
irreproachable reputation, a speaker and leader in religious circles, a
man enormously respected by all classes, concerning whom not his
bitterest enemy had a word of scandal--yet, after his death, things
deplorable, things incredible, things to be suppressed at any cost, were
brought to the knowledge of his lawyers. At certain times he went mad,
you see. Then he forgot who he was: he forgot his reputation, his place
in the world, and the awful penalties of being found out: he went down:
he lived among people of the baser sort, and became an inferior man with
another name, and died without ever knowing his own dreadful record.
Another of whom I have heard was mad for fifteen years, yet the Chief of
a great House, who all the time conducted the business with great
ability. He was found out at last because he began to buy things. Once
he sent home six grand pianos: another time he bought all the cricket
bats that were in stock in a certain shop; and another time he bought
all the hats that fitted him at all the hatters' shops within a circle
whose centre was Piccadilly Circus and the radius a mile long. After
this they gave him a cheerful companion, who took walks abroad with him,
and he retired from active business.

Some philosophers maintain that we are all gone mad on certain points.
In that case, if one does not know it or suspect it, and if our friends
neither know nor suspect it, what does it matter? There are also, we all
know, points on which some of us are mad, and everybody knows it. There
is the man who believes that he is a great poet, and publishes volume
after volume, all at his own expense, to prove it: there is the man--but
he ought to be taken away and put on a treadmill--who writes letters to
the papers on every conceivable subject with the day before yesterday's
wisdom: there is the man who thinks he can paint--we all know plenty of
men mad like unto these, and we are for the most part willing to
tolerate them. Considerations, however, on the universality of the
complaint fail to bring consolation to any except those who have it not.
In the same way, nobody who dies of any disease is comforted with the
thought of the rarity or the frequency of that disease; its interesting
character has no charm for him. Nor is the man on his way to be hanged
consoled by the reminder that thousands have trodden that flowery way
before him. To Mr. Dering, proud of his own intellect, self-sufficient
and strong, the discovery of these things would certainly bring
humiliation intolerable, perhaps--even--shame unto Death itself.
How--oh! how could things be managed so as to spare him this pain?

Elsie's difficulties grew greater the more she pondered over them. It
was past midnight when she closed the volume of thought and her eyes at
the same moment.

In the morning, Athelstan kissed her gravely.

'Do you remember what you said last night, Elsie? You said that we could
rest at peace because the thing was done.'

'Well, Athelstan, the words could only have one meaning, could they? I
mean, if you want me to be more explicit, that the thing is actually
done. My dear brother, I know all about it now. I know who signed that
first cheque--who sent the commissionaire to the Bank--who received the
notes--who placed them in the safe--who wrote about the transfers--who
received the letters and carried on the whole business. I can place my
hand upon him to-day if necessary.'

'Without doubt? With proofs, ample proofs?'

'Without the least doubt--with a cloud of witnesses. My dear brother, do
not doubt me. I have done it. Yet--for a reason--to spare one most
deeply concerned--for the pity of it--if you knew--give me a few days--a
week, perhaps, to find a way if I can. If I cannot, then the cruel truth
must be told bluntly, whatever happens.'

'Remember all the mischief the old villain has done.'

'The old villain? Oh! you mean Checkley?'

'Of course; whom should I mean?'

'Nobody--nothing. Brother, if you bid me speak to-day, I will speak. No
one has a better right to command. But if this--this person--were to die
to-day, my proofs are so ample that there could be no doubt possible.
Yes--even my mother--it is dreadful to say it--but she is so hard and so
obstinate--even my mother would acknowledge that there is no doubt
possible.'

Athelstan stooped and kissed her. 'Order it exactly as you please, my
child. If I have waited eight long years, I can wait another week.
Another week. Then I shall at last be able to speak of my people at
home. I shall go back to California with belongings like other men. I
shall be able to make friends; I can even, if it comes in my way, make
love, Elsie. Do you think you understand quite what this means to me?'

He left her presently to go about his work.

In the corner of the room stood her easel with the portrait, the fancy
portrait, of Mr. Dering the Benevolent--Mr. Dering the Optimist--Mr.
Dering as he might be with the same features and the least little change
in their habitual setting.

Elsie stood before this picture, looking at it curiously.

'Yes,' she murmured, 'you are a dear, tender-hearted, kindly,
benevolent, simple old Thing. You believe in human nature: you think
that everybody is longing for the Kingdom of Heaven. You think that
everybody would be comfortable in it: that everybody longs for honesty.
Before I altered you and improved your face, you were Justice without
mercy: you were Law without leniency: you were Experience which knows
that all men are wicked by choice when they get the chance: you had no
soft place anywhere: you held that Society exists only for the
preservation of Property. Oh! you are so much more lovable now, if you
would only think so--if you only knew. You believe in men and women:
that is a wonderful advance--and you have done well to change your old
name to your new name. I think I should like you always to be Edmund
Gray. But how am I to tell you? How, in the name of wonder, am I to tell
you that you are Edmund Gray? First of all, I must see you-- I must
break the thing gently-- I must force you somehow to recollect, as soon
as possible. I must make you somehow understand what has happened.'

She had promised to meet Mr. Edmund Gray at his Chambers that evening at
five. He showed his confidence in her by giving her a latch-key, so that
she might let herself in if he happened not to be in the Chambers when
she called, at five. She would try, then, to bring him back to himself.
She pictured his amazement--his shame--at finding himself in strange
rooms under another name, preaching wild doctrines. It would be too much
for him. Better go to Mr. Dering, the real Mr. Dering, and try to move
him in his own office, to recollect what had happened. Because, you see,
Elsie, unacquainted with these obscure forms of brain disease, imagined
that she might by artful question and suggestion clear that clouded
memory, and show the lawyer his double figuring as a Socialist.

She waited till the afternoon. She arrived at New Square about three,
two hours before her engagement at Gray's Inn.

Mr. Dering received her with his usual kindness. He was austerely
benignant.

'I tried to see you last night,' she said, untruthfully, because the
words conveyed the impression that she had called upon him.

'No--no. I was-- I suppose I was out. I went out----' His face clouded,
and he stopped.

'Yes--you were saying, Mr. Dering, that you went out.'

'Last night was Sunday, wasn't it? Yes; I went out.--Where did I go?' He
drummed the table with his fingers irritably. 'Where did I go?
Where?--What does it matter?'

'Nothing at all. Only it is strange that you should not remember.'

'I told you once before, Elsie,' he said, 'I suffer--I labour--under
curious fits of forgetfulness. Now, at this moment, I--it really is
absurd--I cannot remember where I was last night. I am an old man. It is
the privilege of age to forget yesterday, and to remember fifty years
ago.'

'I was talking last night to an old gentleman who said much the same. He
has Chambers where he goes to write: he has a Lecture Hall--where he
preaches to the people----'

Mr. Dering looked at her in mild surprise. What did she mean? Elsie
coloured.

'Of course,' she said, 'this has nothing to do with you.'

'How I spent the evening I know very well,' Mr. Dering went on. 'Yet I
forget. That is the trouble with me. My housekeeper will not give me
dinner on Sunday evening, and on that day I go to my Club. I get there
about five or six: I read the magazines till seven. Sometimes I drop off
to sleep--we old fellows will drop off, you know--about seven I have
dinner. After dinner I take my coffee, and read or talk if there is any
one I know. About nine I walk home. That has been my custom for many
years. Therefore, that is how I spent the evening of yesterday.--But,
you see, I cannot remember it. Breakfast I remember, and the Church
service afterwards. Luncheon I remember: getting home at ten I remember.
But the interval between I cannot remember.'

'Do you forget other things? Do you remember Saturday afternoon, for
instance?'

'Yes--perfectly. I left the office about five. I walked straight
home.--No--no--that isn't right. It was nearly eight when I got home. I
remember. The dinner was spoiled.--No--I did not go straight home.'

'Perhaps you stayed here till past seven?'

'No--no. I remember looking at the clock as I put on my hat. It was
half-past five when I went out-- Five. What did I do between half-past
five o'clock and eight? I forget. You see, my trouble, Elsie--I forget.
Perhaps I went to the Club: perhaps I strolled about: perhaps I came
back here. There are three hours to account for--and I have forgotten
them all.'




CHAPTER XXV

WILL HE REMEMBER?


Should she tell him? She could not. The way must somehow be prepared.
No--she could not tell him just so--in cold blood. How would he look if
she were to begin: 'I have found out the mystery. You are Edmund Gray.
During the hours that you cannot recall, you are playing the part of a
Socialist teacher and leader: you are actively propagating the doctrines
that you hold to be dangerous and misleading'? What would he say? What
would he feel when he realised the truth?

On the table lay a copy of the _Times_--a fortnight-old copy--open at
the place where there was a certain letter from a certain Edmund Gray.
Elsie pointed to it. Mr. Dering sighed. 'Again,' he said, 'they
persecute me. Now it is a letter addressed to Edmund Gray, lying on my
table: now it is the bill of a pernicious lecture by Edmund Gray: to-day
it is this paper with the letter that appeared a week or two ago. Who
brought it here? Checkley says he didn't. Who put it on my table?'

Elsie made no reply. It was useless to test her former theory of the boy
under the table.

'As for the man who wrote this letter,' Mr. Dering went on, 'he bears
the name of our forger and writes from the same address. Yet he is not
the man. Of that I am convinced. This man is a fool because he believes
in the honesty of mankind: he is a generous fool, because he believes
that people would rather be good than bad. Nonsense! They would rather
be stealing from each other's plates, like the monkeys, than dividing
openly. He has what they call a good heart--that is, he is a soft
creature--and he is full of pity for the poor. Now, in my young days, I
was taught--what after-experience has only brought more home to
me--that the poor are poor in consequence of their vices. We used to say
to them: "Go away--practise thrift. Be sober--work hard. By exercising
these virtues we rose out of your ranks. By continuing to exercise them
we remain on these levels. Go away. There is no remedy for disease
contracted by vice. Go away and suffer." That's what we said formerly.
What they say now is: "Victims of greed! You are filled with every
virtue possible to humanity. You are down-trodden by the Capitalist. You
are oppressed. Make and produce for others to enjoy. We will change all
this. We will put the fruits--the harvest--of your labour in your own
hands, and you shall show the world your justice, your noble
disinterestedness, your generosity, your love of the common weal."
That's the new gospel, Elsie, and I prefer the old.'

Strange that a man should at one time hold and preach with so much
fervour and earnestness the very creed which at another time he
denounced as fiercely!

'This man, and such as he,' continued Mr. Dering, lifted out of his
anxieties by that subject, 'would destroy Property in order to make the
workman rich. Wonderful doctrine! He would advance the world by
destroying the only true incentive and stimulant for work, invention,
civilisation, association, and every good and useful thing. He would
destroy Property. And then? Can he not see what would follow? Why, these
people do not know the very alphabet of the thing. By Property they mean
the possession by individuals of land or money. But that is only a part
of Property. Take that away, and the individual remains. And he has
got--what you cannot take away--the rest of his Property, by which he
will speedily repair the temporary loss. Consider, child, if you can,
what does a man possess? He has, I say, Property--all his own--which
cannot be taken from him or shared with another--Property in his brain,
his trade, his wit, his craft, his art, his skill, his invention, his
enterprise, his quickness to grip an opportunity. Again, he has his wife
and children--sometimes a very valuable Property: he has, besides, his
memories, his knowledge, his experience, his thoughts, his hopes, his
projects, and intentions: he has his past and he has his future: he has,
or thinks he has, his inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven. Take away
all these things bit by bit, what is left? Nothing. Not even the shadow
of a man. Not even a naked figure. This, Elsie, is Property. These
things separate the individual from the mass, and each man from his
neighbour. A shallow fanatic, like this Edmund Gray, thinks that wealth
is the whole of Property. Why, I say, it is only a part of Property: it
is the external and visible side of certain forms of Property. Take all
the wealth away to-day--even if you make ten thousand laws, the same
qualities--the same forms of Property--the same lack of those qualities
will produce like results to-morrow.--Do you now understand, child, what
is meant by Property? It is everything which makes humanity. Wealth is
only the symbol or proof of society so organised that all these
qualities--the whole Property of a man, can be exercised freely and
without injustice.'

'I see,' said Elsie, gazing with wonder undisguised. Was this last
night's Prophet? Could the same brain hold two such diverse views'?

'You are surprised, child. That is because you have never taken or
understood this larger view of Property. It is new to you. Confess,
however, that it lends sacredness to things which we are becoming
accustomed to have derided. Believe me, it is not without reason that
some of us venerate the laws which have been slowly, very slowly,
framed: and the forms which have been slowly, very slowly, framed: as
experience has taught us wisdom for the protection of man--working man,
not loafing, lazy man. It is wise and right of us to maintain all those
institutions which encourage the best among us to work and invent and
distribute. By these forms alone is industry protected and enterprise
encouraged. Then such as this Edmund Gray'--he laid his hand again upon
the letter--'will tell you that Property--Property--causes certain
crimes--ergo, Property must be destroyed. Everything desirable causes
its own peculiar class of crime. Consider the universal passion of Love.
It daily causes crimes innumerable. Yet no one has yet proposed the
abolition of Love--eh?'

'I believe not,' Elsie replied, smiling. 'I hope no one will--yet.'

'No. But the desire for Property, which is equally universal--which is
the most potent factor in the cause of Law and Order--they desire and
propose to destroy. I have shown you that it is impossible. Let the
companies pay no dividends, let all go to the working men: let the
lands pay no rent: the houses no rent: let the merchants' capital yield
no profit: to-morrow the clever man will be to the front again, using
for his own purposes the dull and the stupid and the lazy. That is my
opinion.--Forgive this sermon, Elsie. You started me on the subject. It
is one on which I have felt very strongly for a long time. In fact, the
more I think upon it the more I am convinced that the most important
thing in any social system is the protection of the individual--personal
liberty: freedom of contract: right to enjoy in safety what his ability,
his enterprise, and his dexterity may gain for him.'

Elsie made no reply for a moment. The conversation had taken an
unexpected turn. The vehemence of the upholder of Property overwhelmed
her as much as the earnestness of its destroyer. Besides, what chance
has a girl of one-and-twenty on a subject of which she knows nothing
with a man who has thought upon it for fifty years? Besides, she was
thinking all the time of the other man. And now there was no doubt--none
whatever--that Mr. Dering knew nothing of Mr. Edmund Gray--nothing at
all. He knew nothing and suspected nothing of the truth. And which
should she believe? The man who was filled with pity for the poor and
saw nothing but their sufferings, or the man who was full of sympathy
with the rich, and saw in the poor nothing but their vices? Are all men
who work oppressed? Or are there no oppressed at all, but only some lazy
and stupid and some clever?

'Tell me more another time,' she said, with a sigh. 'Come back to the
case--the robbery. Is anything discovered yet?'

'I have heard nothing. George refuses to go on with the case out of some
scruple because----'

'Oh! I know the cause. Very cruel things have been said about him. Do
you not intend to stand by your own partner, Mr. Dering?'

'To stand by him? Why, what can I do?'

'You know what has been said of him--what is said of him--why I have had
to leave home----'

'I know what is said, certainly. It matters nothing what is said. The
only important thing is to find out--and that they cannot do.'

'They want to connect Edmund Gray with the forgeries, and they are
trying the wrong way. Checkley is not the connecting link--nor is
George.'

'You talk in riddles, child.'

'Perhaps. Do you think, yourself, that George has had anything whatever
to do with the business?'

'If you put it so, I do not. If you ask me what I have a right to
think--it is that everything is possible.'

'That is what you said about Athelstan. Yet now his innocence is
established.'

'That is to say, his guilt is not proved. Find me the man who forged
that cheque, and I will acknowledge that he is innocent. Until then, he
is as guilty as the other man--Checkley--who was also named in
connection with the matter. Mind, I say, I do not believe that my
Partner could do this thing. I will tell him so. I have told him so. If
it had to be done over again, I would ask him to become my partner. But
all things are possible. My brother is hot upon it. Well--let him search
as he pleases. In such a case the solution is always the simplest and
the most unexpected. I told him only this morning--he had lunch with
me--that he was on a wrong scent--but he is obstinate. Let him go on.'

'Yes--let him divide a family--keep up bitterness between mother and
son--make a lifelong separation between those who ought to love each
other most---- Oh! it is shameful! It is shameful! And you make no
effort--none at all--to stop it.'

'What can I do? What can I say, more than I have said? If they would
only not accuse each other--but find out something!'

'Mr. Dering--forgive me--what I am going to say'--she began with jerks.
'The honour of my brother--of my lover--are at stake.'

'Say, child, what you please.'

'I think that perhaps'--she did not dare to look at him--'if you could
remember sometimes those dropped and forgotten evenings--those hours
when you do not know what you have said and done--if you could only
remember a little--we might find out more.'

He watched her face blushing, and her eyes confused, and her voice
stammering, and he saw that there was something behind--something that
she hinted, but would not or could not express. He sat upright,
suspicious and disquieted.

'Tell me what you mean, child.'

'I cannot--if you do not remember anything. You come late in the
morning--sometimes two hours late. You think it is only ten o'clock when
it is twelve. You do not know where you have been for the last two
hours. Try to remember that. You were late on Saturday morning. Perhaps
this morning. Where were you?'

His face was quite white. He understood that something was
going--soon--to happen.

'I know not, Elsie--indeed--I cannot remember. Where was I?'

'You leave here at five. You have ordered dinner, and your housekeeper
tells me that you come home at ten or eleven. Where are you all that
time?'

'I am at the Club.'

'Can you remember? Think--were you at the Club last night? George went
there to find you, but you were not there--and you were not at home.
Where were you?'

He tried to speak--but he could not. He shook his head--he gasped twice.

'You cannot remember? Oh! try--Mr. Dering--try--for the sake of
everybody--to put an end to this miserable condition--try.'

'I cannot remember,' he said again feebly.

'Is it possible--just possible--that while you are away--during these
intervals--you yourself may be actually--in the company--of this
Socialist--this Edmund Gray?'

'Elsie--what do you mean?'

'I mean--can you not remember?'

'You mean more, child! Do you know what you mean? If what you suggest is
true, then I must be mad--mad. Do you mean it? Do you mean it? Do you
understand what you say?'

'Try--try to remember,' she replied. 'That is all I mean. My dear
guardian, is there any one to whom I am more grateful than yourself? You
have given me a fortune and my lover an income. Try--try to remember.'

She left him without more words.

He sat looking straight before him--the horror of the most awful thing
that can befall a man upon him. Presently, he touched his bell, and his
old clerk appeared.

'Checkley,' he said, 'tell me the truth.'

'I always do,' he replied surlily.

'I have been suffering from fits of forgetfulness. Have you observed
any impairing of the faculties? When a man's mental powers are decaying,
he forgets things: he loses the power of work: his old skill leaves him:
he cannot distinguish between good work and bad. He shows his mental
decay, I believe, in physical ways--he shuffles as he walks; he stoops
and shambles--and in his speech--he wanders and he repeats--and in his
food and manner of eating. Have you observed any of these symptoms upon
me, Checkley?'

'Not one. You are as upright as a lance: you eat like five-and-twenty:
your talk is as good and your work is as good as when you were
forty.--Don't think such things. To be sure you do forget a bit. But not
your work. You only forget sometimes what you did out of the office--as
if that matters. Do you remember the case you tackled yesterday
afternoon?'

'Certainly.'

'Do you tell me that any man--forty years younger than you--could have
tackled that case more neatly? Garn! Go 'long!'

Checkley went back to his office.

'What did she mean by it, then?' Mr. Dering murmured. 'Who put her on to
such a suspicion? What did she mean by it? Of course it's nonsense.' So
reassuring himself, he yet remained disquieted. For he could not
remember.

At half-past five or so, Mr. Edmund Gray arrived at his Chambers. The
outer door was closed, but he found his disciple waiting for him. She
had been there an hour or more, she said. She was reading one of the
books he had recommended to her. With the words of Mr. Dering in her
ears, she read as if two voices were speaking to her--talking to each
other across her.

She laid down the book and rose to greet him. 'Master,' she said, 'I
have come from Mr. Dering. He is your solicitor, you told me.'

'Assuredly. He manages my affairs.'

'It is curious--I asked him if he knew you--and he said that he knew
nothing about you.'

'That is curious, certainly. My solicitor for--for many years. He must
have mistaken the name. Or--he grows old--perhaps he forgets people.'

'Do you often see him?'

'I saw him this morning. I took him my letter to the _Times_. He is
narrow--very narrow, in his views. We argued the thing for a bit. But,
really, one might as well argue with a stick as with Dering when
Property is concerned. So he forgets, does he? Poor old chap! He
forgets--well--we all grow old together!' He sighed. 'It is his time
to-day and mine to-morrow.--My Scholar, let us talk.'

The Scholar left her Master at seven. On her way out she ran against
Checkley, who was prowling round the court. 'You!' he cried. 'You! Ah!
I've caught you, have I? On Saturday afternoon I thought I see you going
into No. 22. Now I've caught you coming out, have I?'

'Checkley,' she said, 'if you are insolent, I shall have to speak to Mr.
Dering;' and walked away.

'There's another of 'em,' Checkley murmured, looking after her--'a
hardened one, if ever there was. All for her lover and her brother! A
pretty nest of 'em. And calls herself a lady!'




CHAPTER XXVI

THE LESSON OF THE STREET


'Child,' said the Master, 'it is time that you should take another
lesson.'

'I am ready. Let us begin.' She crossed her hands in her lap and looked
up obedient.

'Not a lesson this time from books. A practical lesson from men and
women, boys and girls, children and infants in arms. Let us go forth and
hear the teaching of the wrecks and the slaves. I will show you
creatures who are men and women mutilated in body and mind--mutilated by
the social order. Come, I will show you, not by words, but by sight, why
Property must be destroyed.'

It was seven o'clock, when Mr. Dering ought to have been thinking of his
dinner, that Mr. Edmund Gray proposed this expedition. Now, since that
other discourse on the sacredness of Property, a strange thing had
fallen upon Elsie. Whenever her Master spoke and taught, she seemed to
hear, following him, the other voice speaking and teaching exactly the
opposite. Sometimes--this is absurd, but many true things are
absurd--she seemed to hear both voices speaking together: yet she heard
them distinctly and apart. Looking at Mr. Dering, she knew what he was
saying: looking at Mr. Edmund Gray, she heard what he was saying. So
that no sooner had these words been spoken, than, like a response in
church, there arose the voice of Mr. Dering. And it said: 'Come. You
shall see the wretched lives and the sufferings of those who are
punished because their fathers or themselves have refused to work and
save. Not to be able to get Property is the real curse of labour. It is
no evil to work provided one chooses the work and creates for one's self
Property. The curse is to have to work for starvation wages at what can
never create property, if the worker should live for a thousand years.'

Of the two voices she preferred the one which promised the abolition of
poverty and crime. She was young: she was generous: any hope of a return
of the Saturnian reign made her heart glow. Of the two old men--the mad
man and the sane man--she loved the mad man. Who would not love such a
man? Why, he knew how to make the whole world happy! Ever since the time
of Adam we have been looking and calling out and praying for such a man.
Every year the world runs after such a man. He promises, but he does not
perform. The world tries his patent medicine, and is no better. Then,
the year after, the world runs after another man.

Elsie rose and followed the Master. It was always with a certain anxiety
that she sat or talked with him. Always she dreaded lest, by some
unlucky accident, he should awaken and be restored to himself suddenly
and without warning--say in his Lecture Hall. How would he look? What
should she say? 'See--in this place for many years past you have in
course of madness preached the very doctrines which in hours of sanity
you have most reprobated. These people around you are your disciples.
You have taught them by reason and by illustration with vehemence and
earnestness to regard the destruction of property as the one thing
needful for the salvation of the world. What will you say now? Will you
begin to teach the contrary? They will chase you out of the Hall for a
madman. Will you go on with your present teaching? You will despise
yourself for a madman.' Truly a difficult position. Habit, however, was
too strong. There was little chance that Edmund Gray among his own
people, and at work upon his own hobby, would become Edward Dering.

They went out together. He led her--whither? It mattered not. North and
South and East and West you may find everywhere the streets and houses
of the very poor hidden away behind the streets of the working people
and the well-to-do.

The Master stopped at the entrance of one of those streets--it seemed to
Elsie as if she was standing between two men both alike, with different
eyes. At the corner was a public-house with swinging doors. It was
filled with men talking, but not loudly. Now and then a woman went in or
came out, but they were mostly men. It was a street long and narrow,
squalid to the last degree, with small two-storied houses on either
side. The bricks were grimy; the mortar was constantly falling out
between them: the woodwork of doors and windows was insufferably grimy:
many of the panes were broken in the windows. It was full of children:
they swarmed: they ran about in the road, they danced on the pavement,
they ran and jumped and laughed as if their lot was the happiest in the
world and their future the brightest. Moreover, most of them, though
their parents were steeped in poverty, looked well fed and even rosy.
'All these children,' said Mr. Edmund Gray, 'will grow up without a
trade: they will enter life with nothing but their hands and their legs
and their time. That is the whole of their inheritance. They go to
school, and they like school: but as for the things they learn, they
will forget them, or they will have no use for them. Hewers of wood and
drawers of water shall they be: they are condemned already. That is the
system: we take thousands of children every year, and we condemn them to
servitude--whatever genius may be lying among them. It is like throwing
treasures into the sea, or burying the fruits of the earth. Waste!
Waste! Yet, if the system is to be bolstered up, what help?'

Said the other Voice: 'The world must have servants. These are our
servants. If they are good at their work, they will rise and become
upper servants. If they are good upper servants, they may rise higher.
Their children can rise higher still, and their grandchildren may join
us. Service is best for them. Good service, hard service, will keep them
in health and out of temptation. To lament because they are servants is
foolish and sentimental.'

Standing in the doorways, sitting on the door-steps, talking together,
were women--about four times as many women as there were houses. This
was because there were as many families as rooms, and there were four
rooms for every house. As they stood at the end of the street and looked
down, Elsie observed that nearly every woman had a baby in her arms, and
that there were a great many types or kinds of women. That which does
not surprise one in a drawing-room, where every woman is expected to
have her individual points, is noticed in a crowd, where, one thinks,
the people should be like sheep--all alike.

'A splendid place, this street, for such a student as you should be, my
Scholar.' The Master looked up and down--he sniffed the air, which was
stuffy, with peculiar satisfaction: he smiled upon the grubby houses.
'You should come often; you should make the acquaintance of the people:
you will find them so human, so desperately human, that you will
presently understand that these women are your sisters. Change dresses
with one of them: let your hair fall wild: take off your bonnet----'

'Shall I then be quite like them?' asked Elsie. 'Like them, Master? Oh!
not quite like them.'

'Not quite like them,' he said. 'No; you could never talk like them.'

He walked about among the people, who evidently knew him, because they
made way for him, nodded to him, and pretended, such was their
politeness, to pay no attention to the young lady who accompanied him.

'Every one of them is a study,' he continued. 'I could preach to you on
every one as a text. Here is my young friend Alice Parden, for
instance'--he stopped before a pale girl of seventeen or so, tall and
slender, but of drooping figure, who carried a baby in her arms. 'Look
at her. Consider. Alice is foolish, like all the Alices of this street.
Alice must needs marry her chap a year ago, when she was sixteen and he
was eighteen. Alice should be still at her club in the evening and her
work in the daytime. But she must marry, and she is a child mother.--Is
he out of work still?' Alice nodded, and hugged her baby closer. Mr.
Edmund Gray shook his head in admonition, but gave her a coin, and went
on. 'Now look at this good woman'--he stopped before a door where an
Amazon was leaning--a woman five feet eight in height, with brawny arms
and broad shoulders and a fiery furnace for a face--a most terrible and
fearful woman.--'How are you this evening, Mrs. Moss? And how is your
husband?'

Long is the arm of coincidence. Mrs. Moss was just beginning to repose
after a row royal; she was slowly simmering and slowly calming. There
had been a row royal, a dispute, an argument, a quarrel, and a fight
with her husband. All four were only just concluded. All four had been
conducted on the pavement, for the sake of coolness and air and space.
The residents stood around: the controversy was sharp and animated: the
lady bore signs of its vehemence in a bruise, rapidly blackening, over
one eye, and abrasions on her knuckles. The husband had been conducted
by his friends from the spot to the public-house at the corner, where he
was at present pulling himself together, and forgetting the weight of
his consort's fists, and solacing his spirit with strong drink.

'How is my husband?' the lady repeated. 'Oh! I'll tell you. I'll tell
you, Mr. Gray, how my husband is. Oh! how is he? Go, look for him in the
public-house. You shall see how he is and what he looks like.' She
descended two steps, still retaining the advantage of the lowest. Then,
describing a semicircle with her right arm, she began an impassioned
harangue. The residents fled, right and left, not knowing whether in her
wrath she might not mistake the whole of them, collectively, for her
husband. The men in the public-house hearing her voice, trembled, and
looked apprehensively at the door. But Mr. Gray stood before her without
fear. He knew her better than to run away. The lady respected his
courage, and rejoiced in a sympathetic listener. Presently she ran down:
she paused: she gasped: she caught at her heart: she choked: she wept.
She sat down on the doorstep, this great strong woman, with the brawny
arms and the fiery face, and she wept. The residents crept timidly back
again and gathered round her, murmuring sympathy: the men in the
public-house trembled again. Mr. Gray grasped her by the hand and
murmured a few words of consolation; for indeed there were great wrongs,
such as few wives even in this street expect, and undeniable
provocations. Then he led his Scholar away.

At the next house he entered, taking Elsie with him to a room at the
back where a woman sat making garments. She was a middle-aged woman, and
though very poorly dressed, not in rags: the room was neat except for
the garments lying about. She looked up cheerfully--her eyes were
bright, her face was fine--and smiled. 'You here, Mr. Gray?' she said.
'Well, I was only thinking yesterday how long it is since you came to
see me last. I mustn't stop working, but you can talk.'

'This is a very special friend of mine,' said the Master. 'I have known
her for ten years, ever since I began to visit the street. She is always
cheerful: though she has to live on sweating work and sweating pay. She
never complains. She lives like the sparrows, and eats about as much as
a sparrow: she is always respectable. She goes to church on Sundays: she
is always neat in her dress. Yet she must be always hungry.'

'Ah!' said the woman, 'you'd wonder. Miss, if you knew how little a
woman can live upon.'

'Oh! but,' said Elsie, 'to have always to live on that little!'

'She is the daughter of a man once thought well to do.'--'He was most
respectable,' said the woman.--'He died, and left nothing but debts. The
family were soon scattered, and--you see--this street contains some of
those who have fallen low down as well as those who are born low down.
It is Misfortune Lane as well as Poverty Lane. To the third and fourth
generation, misfortune, when it begins--the reason of its beginning is
the wickedness of one man--still persecutes and follows the family.'

'Thank you, Miss,' said the woman. 'And if you will come again
sometimes---- Oh! you needn't be afraid. No one would hurt a friend of
Mr. Gray.' So they went out.

On the next doorstep and the next and the next, there sat women old and
young, but all of these had the same look and almost the same
features--they were heavy-faced, dull-eyed, thick-lipped, unwashed, and
unbrushed. 'These,' said the Master, 'are the women who know of nothing
better than the life they lead here. They have no hope of rising: they
would be unhappy out of this street. They bear children: they bring them
up, and they die. It is womanhood at its lowest. They want warmth, food,
and drink, and that is nearly all. They are the children and
grandchildren of women like themselves, and they are the mothers of
women like themselves. Savage lands have no such savagery as this, for
the worst savages have some knowledge, and these women have none. They
are mutilated by our system. We have deprived them of their souls. They
are the products of our system. In a better order these people could not
exist: they would not be allowed parents or birth. The boy would still
be learning his trade, and the girl would be working at hers. That
little woman who meets her troubles with so brave a heart has been
sweated all her life--ever since her misfortunes began: she takes it as
part of the thing they call life: she believes that it will be made up
to her somehow in another world. I hope it will.'

'All these people,' said the other Voice, 'are what they are because of
the follies and the vices of themselves and their fathers. The
boy-husband has no trade. Whose fault is that? The rickety boy and the
rickety girl bring into the world a rickety baby. Whose fault is that?
Let them grow worse instead of better until they learn by sharper
suffering that vice and folly bring their punishment.'

'You see the children,' continued the Master, 'and the mothers. You do
not see any old men, because this sort mostly die before they reach the
age of sixty. Those who are past work and yet continue to live go into
the House. The girls you do not see, because those who are not forced to
work all the evening as well as all the day are out walking with their
sweethearts. Nor the men, because they are mostly in the public-house.
They are all hand-to-mouth working men: they live by the job when they
can get any. When they are out of work, they live upon each other. We
hide this kind of thing away in back streets like this, and we think it
isn't dangerous. But it is. Formerly, the wreckage huddled together bred
plagues and pestilences, which carried off rich and poor with equal
hand, and so revenged itself. In other ways, the wreckage revenges
itself still.'

'This kind of people,' said the other Voice, 'may be dangerous. We have
a Police on purpose to meet the danger. They would be quite as dangerous
if you were to give them free dinners and house them without rent. The
class represents the untameable element. They are always a danger. To
cry over them is silly and useless.'

They walked down the street. Everybody knew Mr. Edmund Gray. He had a
word for all. It was evident that he had been a visitor in the street
for a long time: he had the air of a proprietor: he entered the houses
and opened doors and sat down and talked, his disciple standing beside
him and looking on. He asked questions and gave advice--not of a
subversive Socialistic kind, but sound advice, recognising the order
that is, not the order that should be.

All the rooms in this street were tenanted, mostly a family to each. In
many of them work was going on still, though it was already eight
o'clock. Sometimes it would be a woman sitting alone in her room like a
prisoner in a cell, stitching for dear life: sometimes three or four
women or girls sitting all together, stitching for dear life: sometimes
a whole family, little children and all, making matches, making canvas
bags, making paper bags, making card-boxes, all making--making--making
for dear life. And the fingers did not stop and the eyes were not
lifted, though the visitors opened the door and came in and asked
questions, to which one replied in the name of all the rest.

It is an old, old story--everybody knows the slum: people go to gaze
upon it; it is one of the chief sights of Victorian London, just as a
hundred and fifty years ago it was one of the sights to see the women
flogged at Bridewell. Not such a very great advance in civilisation,
perhaps, after all.

'It is a hive--the place is swarming with life,' said the girl, who had
never before seen such a street.

'Life means Humanity. All these people are so like you, my Scholar, that
you would be surprised. You would not be like them if you were dressed
in these things, but they are like you. They want the same things as
you--they have the same desires--they suffer the same pains. What makes
your happiness? Food--warmth, sufficiency, not too much work. These are
the elements for you as well as for them. In my system they will have
all these--and then perhaps they will build up, as you have done, an
edifice of Knowledge, Art, and Sweet Thoughts. But they are all like
you. And most in one thing. For all women of all classes, there is one
thing needful. These girls, like you, want love. They all want love. Oh,
child! they are so like you, so very like you--these poor women of the
lowest class. So very like their proud sisters.' He paused for a moment.
Elsie made no reply. 'You see,' he continued, 'they are so hard at work
that they cannot even lift their eyes to look at you--not even at you,
though they seldom see a girl among them so lovely and so well dressed.
One would have thought--but there is the Whip that drives--that
dreadful Whip--it hangs over them and drives them all day long without
rest or pause. Their work pays their rent and keeps them alive. It just
keeps them alive, and that is all. No more. It must be hard to work all
day long for another person--if you come to think of it. Happily, they
do not think. And all this grinding poverty--this terrible work, that
one family may be able to live in a great house and to do nothing.'

'They are working,' said the other Voice, 'because one man has had the
wit to create a market for their work. His thrift, his enterprise, his
clearness of sight, have made it possible for these girls to find the
work that keeps them. If they would have the sense not to marry
recklessly, there would be fewer working girls, and wages would go up.
If their employer raised their wages only a penny a day, he would
benefit them but little and would ruin himself. They must learn--if they
can--the lesson of forethought by their own sufferings. No one can help
them.'

As Mr. Edmund Gray walked into the houses and out again Elsie went with
him, or she waited outside while he went in. Sometimes she heard the
chink of coin: sometimes she heard words of thanks. The Socialist,
whatever he taught, practised the elementary form of charity possible
only for those who have money. Elsie remarked this little point, but
said nothing.

'What you see here,' said the Master, 'is the lowest class of all--if
one ever gets to the lowest level. For my own part, I have seen men and
women so wretched that you would have called them _miserrimi_--of all
created beings the most wretched. Yet have I afterwards found others
more wretched still. In this street are those who make the lowest
things: those who can make nothing, and have no trade, and live on odd
jobs: and those who can neither make nor work, but thieve and lie
about.'

'I see all that; but, dear Master, what will your new order do for such
people? Will it make those who will not work industrious?'

'It will give every producer the fruits of his own labour: it will teach
a trade to every man, and find men work. And those who cannot work, it
will kill, or lock up until they die. They shall have no children.
Perhaps it will kill them all. It might be better. We will have no human
failures in our midst. That street is full of lessons, all calling
aloud for the destruction of Property.'

Then the other Voice spoke: 'The presence of the human failure is a
lesson always before us--a warning and a lesson to rich and poor alike.
As he is, so all may be. None are so rich but they may be brought to
poverty: none so poor but they may be poorer. So far from hiding away
the wreckage, it is always in our sight. It prowls about the streets: we
can never escape it. And it fills all hearts with terror: it spurs all
men to industry and invention and perseverance. The human failure
inspires a never-ending hymn in praise of Property.'

Elsie's guide stopped to greet a woman whom he knew. She had the usual
baby on her arm. She was a sad-faced woman, with some refinement in her
looks: she was wretchedly dressed, thin, pale, and dejected.

'The same story?'

'Yes, sir. It's always the same,' she sighed hopelessly. 'But he would
work if he could get anything to do. Nobody will employ a man who's had
a misfortune. It's hard--because such a thing may happen to anybody.
It's like measles, my husband says. He can't get drunk because there's
no money. That's my only comfort.'

He gave her some money, and she passed on her way.

'Her husband was a clerk,' Mr. Gray explained, 'who took to drink and
robbed his employer. His father was a barrister, who died young. His
grandfather was a well-known--almost a great lawyer. I know the whole
family history. I learned it----' He stopped for a moment, as if his
memory suddenly failed him--'somehow--a long time ago. It is a story
which shows how our sins and follies fall upon our own children. This
family sprang from the gutter. First, the working man: then his son the
shopkeeper: then his grandson, who became a great lawyer: then his
great-grandson, not so great a lawyer. He, you see, is the first of the
family who begins life as a gentleman and is brought up among gentlemen:
he inherited money: he had a practice: he married in the class called
gentle, and had children. But he lost all his money, and in despair he
killed himself. Cousinly affection is a cold thing at best. It helped
the widow to a pittance, and sent her boys to a cheap school. At fifteen
they had to take whatever employment they could get. Observe that this
branch of the family was now going downhill very fast. The future of a
boy who has been taught no trade and has entered no profession is black
indeed. One of the boys went out to New Zealand, which has little to
give a friendless boy: another enlisted, served three years, and has
never got any work since. I believe he carries boards about the street.
Another became a tenth-rate actor, and now starves on fifteen shillings
a week, paid irregularly. Another--the youngest--was put into a
merchant's office. He rose to a hundred and twenty pounds a year: he
married a girl of the clerkly class--that woman you saw: he took to
drink: he embezzled his master's money: he went to prison: he is now
hopelessly ruined. He cannot get any lower in the social scale. What
will his children do? They have no friends. They will grow up like the
children around them: they will join the hopeless casuals: they will be
hewers of wood. Property, my child, Property--has done this. He stole.
In our society nobody will be tempted to steal. He drank--with us he
would be kept judiciously under control until he could be trusted again.
That would be the care of the State. He is another victim of Property.
When his grandfather was framing Acts of Parliament for the protection
of Property, he did not dream that he was making another engine for the
oppression of his grandchildren.'

Said the other Voice: 'We rise by our virtues. We sink by our vices. Let
these people suffer. Their sufferings should make the rest of us wiser.
Teach the children to rise again as their great-grandfather rose. Do not
contend against the great Law which metes out suffering in return for
vice.'

'Those,' continued the Socialist Professor, 'who do most to make a few
men rich are the real enemies of what they suppose themselves to be
defending. Given a thousand women sweated for one man, and there
presently arises indignation either among the women or among the
bystanders. From indignation we get revolution, because the employer
never gives way. He cannot. He would lose, if he did, his wealth, which
is his Heaven. If you divide the thousand women into companies of ten,
each company under its own sweater, and all the sweaters under other
sweaters, you make a hierarchy of sweaters, culminating in one at the
top. That was the old state of things. The man at the top was a Chief,
a Patriarch: he knew his people: he sweated them, but kindly: he tossed
them crumbs: he looked after the sick and the old. Now all this is
changing. The old family tie--such as it was--is dissolved. The man at
the top has disappeared: a Board of Directors has taken his place: there
is nothing left but the Board and its employees. The men who work are no
longer interested in the business of the firm, except so far as their
pay is concerned. Their pay will go up and the dividends will go down.
And with every increase of wages so much Property is destroyed. Let
every thing--everything--be turned into Companies to help the
destruction of Property.'

Said the other Voice: 'Property is strengthened by being diffused.
Companies organise labour: they give capital its proper power: they are
not easily intimidated: they interest all who can save anything. Let us
turn into Companies every industrial and distributive business in the
country.'

'All times of change,' the Master went on, 'are times of interest. We
are living at a time when great changes are impending--the greatest
changes possible. Before great changes there is always a period of
unconscious preparation. The minds of people are being trained. Without
any perception of the fact, old ideas are dying out and new ones are
coming into existence. When the Revolution actually arrives, everybody
is ready for it and nobody is surprised. It was so with the Reformation.
For a hundred years and more the idea of the Great Revolt had been
slowly growing in men's minds. When it came at last, there was no
surprise and there were few regrets. For a hundred years and more the
ideas of the French Revolution had been talked about by philosophers:
these ideas sank down among the people. Nobody was surprised, not even
the nobles themselves, when the end came. So with our Revolution. It is
coming--it is coming--its ideas are no longer timidly advanced--here and
there--by a fanatic here or a philosopher there: they are lying in the
hearts of the people ready to spur them into action: they are helping on
the cause by successive steps, every one of which means nothing less
than the abolition of Property. These things are new to you, child. You
were only born yesterday or the day before. I was born a hundred years
ago or thereabouts. Consider again'--he leaned against a lamp-post for
greater ease, and discoursed as one addressing an audience--'Consider, I
say, this great question of Companies and their results. Formerly, one
man made things which he took to market--sold or exchanged, and went
home again. He, by himself, did everything. Then one man made and
another man sold. The next improvement was for twenty men to work, for
one to receive and to collect their work, and for another to sell it. In
this way the twenty remained poor, and the two became rich. So they went
on, and trade flourished, and the twenty producers more and more fell
into the power of the two, who were now very rich and strong. Now the
merchants are forming themselves into companies, and the companies are
amalgamating with each other, and the small people may contemplate ruin.
For these--now merchants, shopkeepers, manufacturers, workmen--there
will be nothing but service in the companies; no possibility of
acquiring Property, nothing but service all their lives. Now do you see
how that helps the cause? They will become accustomed to work, but not
for themselves: they will grow accustomed to work for a bare living and
no more: they won't like either: but they will ask why the second should
go with the first: the two great obstacles to Socialism will be removed.
Then--either the step I spoke of just now--the abolition of the
dividends--or, which is just as likely, a revolution, when the servants
of the companies shall make the State take over all and work them for
the good of all. Some there are who think that the workman will have
hope and power for union crushed out of him. I think not; but if so--woe
to the rich! The Jacquerie and the French Revolution will be spoken of
as mild ebullitions of popular feeling compared with what will happen
then. But I think not. I do not believe that the working man will sink
again. He has got up so far. But he needs must climb higher.

'You think it would be impossible'--by this time a small crowd had got
round them, but the speaker still addressed his disciple as if no one
else at all was listening--'for the State to take over the great
producing and distributing companies. But it has been done already. The
State has the Post and the Telegraph Services. They will deal with
railways, steamers, coaches, cabs, omnibuses, trams, canals, water, gas,
electric light, breweries, bakeries, factories, shops, just as they have
dealt with these two. The State can take it all. The State will take the
management of all. But, you say, the shares of the company will become
Funds. They will, and the Funds will pay interest--but the interest
will become rapidly lower and lower, so that what was once five per
cent. is now but two and a half, and before long shall be two--one and a
half--one--and nothing at all. There will be no cry of spoliation,
because the holders of stock will be forced gradually into looking more
and more to their own efforts, and because widows and sick people and
old people, to whom the stocks were once so useful, will be all provided
for by the State as a matter of right, and without any of the old
humiliation of pauperdom. Pauper! Oh, heavenly word! Child, in the world
of the future--the world which you will help to mould, we shall all be
paupers,--every one.'

He spoke with fine enthusiasm, his face lit up, his eyes bright. The
girl was almost carried away, until the other Voice began coldly and
judicially:

'Nothing is so good for man as to be ruled and kept in discipline,
service, and subjection. It is a foolish and a mischievous dream which
supposes all men eager for advance. The mass of mankind asks for no
advancement. It loves nothing and desires nothing but the gratification
of the animal. Give it plenty of animalism and it is satisfied. That
condition of society which keeps the mass down and provides for the rise
of the ambitious few is the only condition which is reasonable and
stable. Base your social order on the inertness of the mass. Make the
workman do a good day's work: pay him enough, so that he shall have some
of the comforts he desires: educate the clever boy and make him foreman,
headman, manager, or artist, journalist, dramatist, novelist. Give him
the taste for wealth. Let him have some. Then he, too, will be ready to
fight if necessary in the army of order.'

While the other Voice was speaking, there came slouching around the
corner into the street where he held the fifth--perhaps the tenth part
of a room, a really excellent specimen of the common or London thief,
the habitual criminal. He was a young man--the habitual criminal is
generally young, because in middle and elderly life he is doing long
sentences--he had a furtive look, such as that with which the jackal
sallies forth on nocturnal adventures: he had a short slight figure, a
stooping and slouching gait, and narrow shoulders. His eyes were bright,
but too close together: his mouth was too large and his jowl too heavy:
his face was pale, his hair was still short, though growing rapidly: his
hands were pendulous: his round hat was too big for his little head: he
wore a long loose overcoat. His face, his figure, his look proclaimed
aloud what he was.

He stopped at the corner and looked at the little crowd. Everybody, for
different reasons, is attracted by a crowd. Professionals sometimes find
in crowds golden opportunities. This crowd, however, was already
dispersing. The speaker had stopped. Perhaps they had heard other and
more fervid orators on the Socialist side. Perhaps they were not in the
least interested in the subject. You see, it is very difficult to get
the hand-to-mouth class interested in anything except those two organs.

'This street,' said the Master, observing him with professional
interest, 'is full--really full--of wealth for the observer. Here is a
case now--an instructive though a common case.' The fellow was turning
away disappointed, perhaps, at the melting of the crowd and any little
hope he might have based upon their pockets. 'My friend'--he heard
himself called, and looked round suspiciously--'you would like, perhaps,
to earn a shilling honestly, for once.'

He turned slowly: at the sight of the coin held up before him, his sharp
eyes darted right and left to see what chance there might be of a grab
and a bolt. Apparently, he decided against this method of earning the
shilling. 'What for?' he asked.

'By answering a few questions. Where were you born?'

'I dunno.'

'Where were you brought up? Here?--In this street? Very well. You went
to school with the other children: you were taught certain subjects up
to a certain standard. What trade were you taught?'

'I wasn't taught no trade.'

'Your father was, I believe, a thief?'--The lad nodded--'And your
mother, too?'--He nodded again, and grinned.--'And you yourself and your
brothers and sisters are all in the same line, I suppose?'--He nodded
and grinned again.--'Here is your shilling.' The fellow took it, and
shambled away.

'Father--mother--the whole family, live by stealing. Where there is no
Property there can be no theft. In our world, such a creature would be
impossible. He could not be born: such parents as his could not exist
with us: he could not be developed: there would be no surroundings that
would make such a development possible. He would be what, I believe, men
of science call a Sport: he would be a deformity. We should put him in a
hospital and keep him there until he died.'

'In that world,' said the other Voice, 'there would be deformities of
even a worse kind than this--the deformities of hypocrisy and shams. By
a thousand shifts and lies and dishonesties the work of the world would
be shifted on the shoulders of the weak. The strong man has always used
his strength to make the weak man work for him, and he always will. The
destruction of Property would be followed by the birth of Property on
the very self-same day. There is the power of creation--of
invention--which is also a kind of Property. Laws cannot destroy that
power. Laws cannot make men industrious. Laws cannot make the strong man
work for the weak. Laws cannot prevent the clever man from taking
advantage of the stupid man. When all the failures--all the
deformities--have been killed off, the able man will still prey upon the
dull-witted. Better let the poor wretch live out his miserable life,
driven from prison to prison, an example for all the world to see.'

It was at this point that Elsie discovered the loss of her purse. Her
pocket had been picked by one of the intelligent listeners in the crowd.
She cried out on finding what had happened, in the unphilosophic
surprise and indignation with which this quite common accident is always
received.

'Child,' said the Master, 'when there is no longer any Property, money
will vanish: there will be no purses; even the pocket will disappear,
because there will no longer be any use for a pocket.--Did the purse
contain much? Suppose you had nothing to lose and nothing to gain. Think
of the lightness of heart, the sunshine on all faces, which would
follow. I fear you are rich, child. I have observed little signs about
you which denote riches. Your gloves are neat and good; your dress seems
costly. Better far if you had nothing.'

'Master, if I were like that girl on the other side, would you like me
better? Could I be more useful to the cause if I dressed like her?'

The girl was of the common type--they really do seem, at first, all
alike--who had on an ulster and a hat with a feather and broken boots.

'If I were like her,' Elsie went on, 'I should be ignorant--and obliged
to give the whole day to work, so that I should be useless to you--and
my manners would be rough and my language coarse. It is because I am not
poor that I am what I am. The day for poverty is not come yet, dear
Master.'

'In the future, dear child, there shall be no poverty and no riches. To
have nothing will be the common lot. To have all will be the common
inheritance. Oh! there will be differences: men shall be as unlike then
as now: we shall not all desire the same things. You and such as you
will desire Art of every kind. You shall have what you desire. In our
world, as in this, like will to like. You shall have the use for
yourselves of pictures, of musical instruments, of everything that you
want. The rest of the world will not want these things. If they do, more
can be made. You shall have dainty food--the rest of the world will
always like coarse and common fare. Think not that we shall level up or
level down. All will be left to rise or to sink. Only they shall not
starve, they shall not thieve, they shall not be sweated. Oh! I know
they paint our society as attempts to make all equal. And they think
that we expect men no longer to desire the good things in the world.
They will desire them--they will hunger after them--but there will be
enough for all. The man who is contented with a dinner of herbs may go
to a Carthusian convent, which is his place, for we shall have no place
for him in a world which recognises all good gifts and assigns to every
man his share.'

Then spoke the other Voice, but sadly: 'Dreams! Dreams! There are not
enough of the good things to go round--good things would become less
instead of more. Without the spur there is no work. Without the desire
of creating Property, all that is worth anything in life will
perish--all but the things that are lowest and the meanest and the
commonest. Men will not work unless they must. By necessity alone can
the finest work be ordered and executed. As men have been, so will men
always be. The thing that hath been, that shall be again.'

'You have learned some of the lessons of Poverty Lane, Scholar,' said
the Master.--'Let us now go home.'




CHAPTER XXVII

'I KNOW THE MAN'


'Another evening of mystery, Elsie?' said Athelstan.

'Yes. Another, and perhaps another. But we are getting to an end. I
shall be able to tell you all to-day or to-morrow. The thing is becoming
too great for me alone.'

'You shall tell us when you please. Meantime, nothing new has been found
out, I believe. Checkley still glares, George tells me. But the opinion
of the clerks seems on the whole more favourable, he believes, than it
was. Of that, however, he is not perhaps a good judge.'

'They shall all be turned out,' cried Elsie. 'How dare they so much as
to discuss----'

'My sister, it is a very remarkable thing, and a thing little
understood, but it is a true thing. People, people--clerks and _le
Service_ generally--are distinctly a branch of the great human tribe.
They are anthropoid. Therefore, they are curious and prying and
suspicious. They have our own faults, my dear.'

All day Elsie felt drawn as with ropes to Mr. Dering's office. Was it
possible that after that long evening among the lessons of Poverty Lane
he should remember nothing? How was she to get at him--how was she to
make him understand or believe what he had done? Could she make the sane
man remember the actions and words of the insane man? Could she make the
insane man do something which would absolutely identify him with the
sane man? She could always array her witnesses: but she wanted more: she
wanted to bring Mr. Dering himself to understand that he was Mr. Edmund
Gray.

She made an excuse for calling upon him. It was in the afternoon, about
four, that she called. She found him looking aged, his face lined, his
cheek pale, his eyes anxious.

'This business worries me,' he said. 'Day and night it is with me. I am
persecuted and haunted with this Edmund Gray. His tracts are put into my
pockets; his papers into my safe: he laughs at me: he defies me to find
him. And they do nothing. They only accuse each other. They find
nothing.'

'Patience,' said Elsie softly. 'Only a few days--a day or
two--then--with your help--we will unravel all this trouble. You shall
lose nothing.'

'Shall I escape this mocking devil--this Edmund Gray?'

'I cannot promise. Perhaps.--Now, my dear guardian, I am to be married
next Wednesday. I want you to be present at my wedding.'

'Why not?'

'Because things have been said about George: and because your presence
will effectually prove that you do not believe them.'

'Oh! Believe them? I believe nothing. It is, however, my experience that
there is no act, however base, that any man may not be tempted to do.'

'Happily, it is my experience,' said the girl of twenty-one, 'that there
is no act of baseness, however small, that certain men could possibly
commit. You will come to my wedding, then. Athelstan will give me away.'

'Athelstan? Yes; I remember. We found those notes, didn't we? I wonder
who put them into the safe? Athelstan! Yes. He has been living in low
company, I heard--Camberwell.--Rags and tatters.'

'Oh!' Elsie stamped impatiently. 'You will believe anything--anything,
and you a lawyer! Athelstan is in the service of a great American
journal.--Rags and tatters!'

'American? Oh! yes.' Mr. Dering sat up and looked interested. 'Why, of
course. How could I forget it? Had it been yesterday evening, I should
have forgot. But it is four years ago. He wrote to me from somewhere in
America. Where was it? I've got the letter. It is in the safe. Bring me
the bottom right-hand drawer. It is there, I know.' He took the drawer
which Elsie brought him, and turned over the papers. 'Here it is among
the papers of that forgery. Here is the letter.' He gave it to Elsie.
'Read it. He writes from America, you see. He was in the States four
years ago--and--and----What is it?'

'Oh!' cried Elsie, suddenly springing from her chair--'Oh! Do you know
what you have given me? Oh! do you know what you have told me? It is the
secret--the secret--of my fortune. Oh! Athelstan gave it to
me--Athelstan--my brother!'

Mr. Dering took the letter from her and glanced at the contents. 'I
ought not to have shown you the letter,' he said. 'I have violated
confidence. I forgot. I was thinking of the trouble--I forgot. I forget
everything now--the things of yesterday as well as the things of to-day.
Yes; it is true, child: your little fortune came to you from your
brother. But it was a secret that he alone had the right to reveal.'

'And now I know it-- I know it. Oh! what shall I say to him?' The tears
came in her eyes. 'He gave me all he had--all he had--because--oh! for
such a simple thing--because I would not believe him to be a villain.
Oh! my brother--my poor brother! He went back into poverty again. He
gave me all because--oh! for such a little thing!--Mr. Dering!' She
turned almost fiercely upon him. 'After such a letter, _could_ you
believe that man to be a villain? Could you? Tell me! After such a deed
and such a letter!'

'I believe nothing. My experience, however, tells me that any man,
whoever he is, may be led to commit----'

'NO! I won't have it said again.--Now, listen, Mr. Dering. These
suspicions must cease. There must be an end. Athelstan returned six
weeks ago--or thereabouts. That can be proved. Before that time, he was
working in San Francisco on the journal. That can be proved. While these
forgeries, with which he is now so freely charged, were carried on here,
he was abroad. I don't ask you to believe or to disbelieve or to bring
up your experience--oh! such experience--one would think you had been a
police magistrate all your life.'

'No, Elsie.' Mr. Dering smiled grimly. 'There was no need to sit upon
the bench; the police magistrate does not hear so much as the family
solicitor. My dear, prove your brother's innocence by finding out who
did the thing. That is, after all, the only thing. It matters nothing
what I believe--he is not proved innocent--all the world may be
suspected of it--until the criminal is found. Remove the suspicions
which have gathered about your lover by finding the criminal. There is
no other way.'

'Very well, then. I will find the criminal, since no one else can.'

Mr. Dering went on without heeding her words.

'They want to get out a warrant against Edmund Gray. I think, for my own
part, that the man Edmund Gray has nothing to do with the business. He
is said to be an elderly man and a respectable man--a gentleman--who has
held his Chambers for ten years.'

'They need not worry about a warrant,' Elsie replied. 'Tell your
brother, Mr. Dering, that it will be perfectly useless. Meantime--I
doubt if it is any good asking you--but--if we want your help, will you
give me all the help you can?'

'Assuredly. All the help I can. Why not? I am the principal person
concerned.'

'You are, indeed,' said Elsie gravely--'the principal person concerned.
Very well, Mr. Dering--now I will tell you more. I know the--the
criminal. I can put my hand upon him at any moment. It is one man who
has done the whole, beginning with the cheque for which Athelstan was
suspected--one man alone.'

'Why, child, what can you know about it? What can you do?'

'You were never in love, Mr. Dering--else you would understand that a
girl will do a great deal--oh! a great deal more than you would
think--for her lover. It is not much to think for him and to watch for
him--and for her brother--the brother who has stripped himself of
everything to give his sister!' She was fain to pause, for the tears
which rose again and choked her voice.

'But, Elsie--what does this mean? How can you know what no one else has
been able to find out?'

'That is my affair, Mr. Dering. Perhaps I dreamed it.'

'Do you mean that you will get back all the papers--all the
transfers--the dividends that have been diverted--everything?'

'Everything is safe. Everything shall be restored.--My dear guardian,
it is a long and a sad story. I cannot tell you now. Presently,
perhaps. Or to-morrow. I do not know how I shall be able to tell
you. But for your property, rest easy. Everything will come back to
you--everything--except that which cannot be stored in the vaults of the
Bank.'

The last words he heard not, or understood not.

'I shall get back everything!' The eyes of the Individualist lit up and
his pale cheek glowed--old age has still some pleasures. 'It is not
until one loses Property that one finds out how precious it has become.
Elsie, you remember what I told you, a day or two ago. Ah! I don't
forget quite everything--a man is not the shivering naked soul only, but
the complete figure, equipped and clothed, armed and decorated, bearing
with him his skill, his wit, his ingenuity, his learning, his past, and
his present, his memories and his rejoicings, his sorrows and his
trials, his successes and his failures, and his Property--yes--his
Property. Take away from him any of these things, and he is mutilated:
he is not the perfect soul. Why, you tell me that my Property is coming
back-- I awake again. I feel stronger already; the shadows are flying
before me: even the terror of that strange forgetfulness recedes: and
the haunting of Edmund Gray. I can bear all, if I get my Property back
again. As for this forger--this miscreant--this criminal--you will hale
him before the judge------'

'Yes--yes. We will see about the miscreant afterwards. The first thing
is to find the man and recover your Property, and to dispel the
suspicions resting on innocent persons. If I do the former, you must aid
me in the latter.'

'Assuredly. I shall not shrink from that duty.'

'Very well.--Now tell me about yourself. Sometimes it does good to talk
about our own troubles. Tell me more about these forgetful fits. Do they
trouble you still?' Her eyes and her voice were soft and winning. One
must be of granite to resist such a voice and such eyes.

'My dear'--Mr. Dering softened. 'You are good to interest yourself in an
old man's ailments. It is Anno Domini that is the matter with me. The
forgetful fits are only symptoms--and the disease is incurable. Ask the
oak why the leaves are yellow.--It is the hand of winter. That is my
complaint. First the hand of winter, then the hand of Death. Meantime,
the voice of the grasshopper sings loud and shrill.' In presence of the
simple things of age and death, even a hard old lawyer grows poetic.

'Tell me the symptoms, then. Do you still forget things?'

'Constantly. More and more. I forget everything.'

'Where were you yesterday evening, for instance?'

'I don't know. I cannot remember. I have left off even trying to
remember. At one time I racked my brain for hours, to find out, and
failed. Now I remember nothing. I never know when this forgetfulness may
fall upon me. At any hour.--For instance--you ask me about yesterday
evening. I ordered dinner at home. My housekeeper this morning reminded
me that I did not get home last night till eleven. Where was I? Where
did I spend the evening?'

'At the Club?'

'No-- I took a cab this morning and drove there under pretence of asking
for letters. I asked if I was there last night. The hall porter stared.
But I was not there. I thought that I might have fallen asleep there. I
have done so before. Checkley tells me that I went away before him.
Where was I?-- Child!'--he leaned forward and whispered, with white
cheeks--'I have read of men going about with disordered brains doing
what they afterwards forget. Am I one of these unfortunates? Do I go
about with my wits wandering? Oh! horrible! I picture to myself an old
man--such as myself--of unblemished reputation and blameless
life--wandering about the streets demented--without conscience--without
dignity--without self-respect--committing follies--things
disgraceful--even things which bring men before the law----' He
shuddered. He turned pale.

'No--no,' murmured Elsie. 'You could not. You could never----'

'Such things are on record. They have happened. They may happen again. I
have read of such cases. There was a man once--he was like myself--a
Solicitor--who would go out and do things, not knowing what he did. They
found him out at last doing something so incredibly foolish that there
was but one explanation. In another man and a younger man it would have
been worse than foolish, it would have been criminal. Then they gave him
a companion, and he discovered what he had done. The shame and the shock
of it killed him. I have thought of that man of late. Good Heavens!
Think, if you can, of any worse disaster. Let me die--let me die, I say,
rather than suffer such a fate--such an affliction. I see myself brought
before the magistrate--me--myself--at my age, charged with this and with
that. What defence? None, save that I did not remember.'

'That could never be,' said Elsie confidently, because she knew the
facts. 'If such a thing were to befall, your character would never be
changed. You might talk and think differently, but you could never be
otherwise than a good man. You to haunt low company? Oh! you could not
even in a waking dream. People who dream, I am sure, always remain
themselves, however strangely they may act. How could you--you--after
such a life as yours, become a haunter of low company? One might perhaps
suppose that Athelstan had been living among profligates because he is
young and untried--but you?--you? Oh! no. If you had these waking
dreams--perhaps you have them--you would become--you would become--I
really think you would become'--she watched his face--'such--such a man
as--as--Mr. Edmund Gray, who is so like yourself, and yet so different.'

He started. 'Edmund Gray again? Good Heavens! It is always Edmund Gray!'

'He is now a friend of mine. I have only known him for a week or two. He
does not think quite as you do. But he is a good man. Since, in dreams,
we do strange things, you might act and speak and think as Edmund Gray.'

'I speak and think as---- But--am I dreaming? Am I forgetting again? Am
I awake? Edmund Gray is the man whom we want to find.'

'I have found him,' said Elsie quietly.

'The forger--if he is the forger----'

'No--no. Do not make more mistakes. You shall have the truth in a day or
two. Would you like to see Edmund Gray? Will you come with me to his
Chambers? Whenever you call, you--you, I say--will find him at home.'

'No--no. I know his doctrines--futile doctrines--mischievous doctrines.
I do not wish to meet him. What do you mean by mistakes? There are the
letters--there are the forgeries. Are there two Edmund Grays?'

'No--only one. He is the man they cannot find. I will show you, if you
like, what manner of man he is.'

'No. I do not want to see a Socialist. I should insult him.--You are
mysterious, Elsie. You know this man, this mischievous doctrinaire--this
leveller--this spoliator. You tell me that he is a good man--you want me
to see him. What, I ask, do these things mean?'

'They mean many things, my dear guardian. Chiefly they mean that you
shall get back your Property, and that suspicion shall be removed from
innocent persons--and all this, I hope, before next Wednesday, when I am
to be married. We must all be happy on my wedding day.'

'Will--will Mr. Edmund Gray be there as well?'

'He has promised.--And now, my dear guardian, if you will come round to
Gray's Inn with me, I will show you the Chambers of Mr. Edmund Gray.'

'No--no. Thank you, Elsie-- I do not wish to make the personal
acquaintance of a Socialist.'

'He has Chambers on the second floor. The principal room is large and
well furnished. It is a wainscoted room with two windows looking on the
Square. It is not a very pretty Square, because they have not made a
garden or laid down grass in the middle--and the houses are rather
dingy. He sits there in the evening. He writes and meditates. Sometimes
he teaches me, but that is a new thing. In the morning he is sometimes
there between nine o'clock and twelve. He has an old laundress, who
pretends to keep his rooms clean.'

She murmured these words softly, thinking to turn his memory back and
make him understand what had happened.

'They are pleasant rooms, are they not?' He made no reply--his eyes
betrayed trouble. She thought it was the trouble of struggling
memory.--'He sits here alone and works. He thinks he is working for the
advancement of the world. There is no one so good, I think, as Edmund
Gray.'

He suddenly pushed back the chair and sprang to his feet.

'My Scholar! You speak of me?'

It was so sudden that Elsie cried out and fell backwards in her chair.
She had brought on the thing by her own words, by conjuring up a vision
of the Chambers. But--the trouble was not the struggle of the memory
getting hold of evasive facts.

'Why, child,' he remonstrated, 'you look pale. Is it the heat? Come, it
is cooler outside. Let us go to the Chambers in Gray's Inn. This old
fellow--this Dering--here he sits all day long. It is Tom Tiddler's
ground. It is paved with gold, which he picks up. The place--let us
whisper--because he must be in the outer office--it reeks of
Property--reeks of Property.'

He took his hat and gloves. 'My Scholar, let us go.' By force of habit,
he shut and locked the safe and dropped the bunch of keys in his
pocket.




CHAPTER XXVIII

ATHELSTAN'S DISCOVERY


On the evening of that same day the same discovery was made by another
of the persons chiefly concerned.

You have seen that Athelstan on his return made haste to find out the
commissionaire who had presented the forged cheque. Happily, the man
remembered not only the circumstance itself but also his employer on
that occasion. A generosity far above what is commonly found among those
who employ the services of that corps endeared and preserved the memory
of the day. He had received, in fact, half a sovereign for an
eighteenpenny job; and the commissionaire is not like the cabby, to whom
such windfalls are common. Not at all. With the former we observe the
letter of the law.

After eight years this man's memory was rewarded. This thrice blessed
job produced yet more golden fruit. Heard one ever of a more prolific
job?

After breakfast, Athelstan was informed that a commissionaire desired to
speak with him. It was his one-armed friend.

'Beg your pardon, sir,' he said, saluting after the military
manner--'you said I was to come and tell you, first thing, if I found
your man for you.'

'Certainly. I told you also that I would give you a five-pound reward
for finding my man, as you call him. Well--I will be as good as my word
if you have found him.'

'I saw him yesterday. The very same old gentleman that sent me to the
Bank that day. He's older, and he doesn't look so jolly, and he walks
slower; but I knew him at once.'

'Oh! are you quite sure? Because a resemblance, you know----'

'Well, sir, I can swear to him. I remember him as well as I remember
anybody. He sat in the chair, and he laughed, and he said: "You've been
quick over the job, my man. There's something extra, because you might
have dropped the money down a grating, or run away with it, or
something," he says. "Here's half a sovereign for you, my man," says he;
"and I daresay you can do with it." "I can so, sir," I says, "and with
as many more like them as I can pick up." Then he laughed, and I
laughed, and we both laughed.--And that's the same man that I saw
yesterday evening.'

'Oh! this is very curious. Are you quite sure?'

'I'd swear to him anywhere. A man can't say fairer.'

'No--as you say--a man can hardly say fairer, can he? Now, then, when
did you see him?'

'It was between six and seven. I'd been doing a message for a gentleman
in the Strand--a gentleman in the dining-room line to a gentleman in
Holborn in the sausage and tripe line--and I was going back with a
letter, and going through Lincoln's Inn for a short cut. Just as I was
getting near the gate to the Fields, I saw coming out of the door at No.
12 the very man you want to find. I wasn't thinking about him, not a
bit-- I was thinking of nothing at all, when he come out of the door and
walked down the steps. Then I knew him. Lord! I knew him at once.
"You're the man," I says to myself, "as give me the half-sov. instead of
eighteenpence." Well, I stood at the corner and waited to see if he
would remember me. Not a bit of it. He stared at me hard, but he never
recollected me a bit--I could see that. Why should he? Nobody remembers
the servant any more than they remember the private in the ranks. The
very same old gentleman; but he's grown older, and he didn't look jolly
any more. P'raps he's lost his money.'

'Came out of No. 12, did he? Why, Dering & Son's office is there. What
does this mean?'

'I thought I'd like to find out something more about him; and I thought
that a five-pound note was better worth looking after than
eighteenpence--so I let the letter from the tripe and sausage man lay a
bit, and I followed my old gentleman at a good distance.'

'Oh! you followed him. Very good. Did you find out where he lived? I can
tell you that. He went to No. 22 South Square, Gray's Inn.'

'No; he didn't, sir.--But you are not very far wrong. He went through
Great Turnstile; then he crossed Holborn and turned into Featherstone
Buildings, which is all lodging-houses. But he doesn't live there. He
walked through the Buildings, and so into Bedford Row, and he stopped at
a house there----'

'What! In Bedford Row?'

'Yes; in Bedford Row--and he pulls out a latch-key and lets himself in.
That's where he lives. No. 49 Bedford Row, on the west side, very near
the bottom. He lives in Bedford Row.--Well, sir, I like to do things
proper, and so, to make the job complete, I went to the _Salutation_,
Holborn, where they keep a Directory, and I looked out his name. The
gentleman that lives at No. 49 Bedford Row is named Edward Dering--and
among the names of No. 12 New Square, Lincoln's Inn, is the name of
Dering & Son.--So, sir, I don't think it is too much to say that your
man is Mr. Dering, who belongs both to Bedford Row and Lincoln's Inn.
He's the man who sent me to the Bank eight years ago.'

Athelstan stared at him. 'He the man?' he cried. 'You are talking
impossibilities. He can't be the man.'

'Nobody else, sir. If that was Mr. Dering that I saw yesterday walking
home from New Square to Bedford Row--he's the man who sent me for the
money.'

To this statement the man stuck firm. Nor could he be moved by any
assertion that his position was impossible. 'For, my friend,' said
Athelstan, 'the man who sent you with the cheque was the man who robbed
Mr. Dering.'

'Can't help that, sir. If the gentleman I saw yesterday walking from
Lincoln's Inn to Bedford Row was Mr. Dering--then he robbed hisself.'

'That's foolishness. Oh! there must be some explanation. Look here! Mr.
Edward Dering leaves his office every evening between six and seven. I
will be in New Square on the west side this evening at six. You be
there, as well. Try not to seem as if you were watching for anybody.
Stand about at your ease.'

'I'll make it sentry-go, sir,' said the old soldier. 'I'll walk up and
down in front of the door same as some of our chaps got to do in front
of shops. You trust me, sir, and I won't take no notice of you.'

This little plot, in fact, was faithfully carried out. At six o'clock
Athelstan began to walk up and down outside the gate which opens upon
Lincoln's Inn Fields--the commissionaire at the same time was doing
sentry-go in front of No. 12 in New Square. When the clock struck six
there was a rush and a tramp of hurrying feet; these were the clerks set
free for the day. There are not many solicitors' offices in New Square,
and these once gone, the place becomes perfectly quiet. At half-past
six there was the footfall as of one man on the stairs, and he descended
slowly. He came out of the door presently, an old bent figure with white
hair and shrivelled face. Paying no heed to the sentry, he walked away
with feeble step in the direction of Chancery Lane. Checkley this was,
on his way to look after his tenants and his property.

Athelstan looked after him, through the gate. Then he called his old
soldier. 'See that man?' he asked. 'That's the man who sent you to the
Bank.'

'No--he isn't.' The man was stout on that point. 'Not a bit like him.
That old man's a servant, not a gentleman. See the way he holds his
hands. Never a gentleman yet carried his hands that way. You can always
tell 'em by their hands. The other day I met an old pal--seemed to
forget me, he did. Wanted to make out that he'd never been in the army
at all. So I lay by for a bit. Then I gets up--and he gets up too.
"'Tention," says I, and he stood to 'tention like a good old Tommy
Atkins. You watch their hands whatever they say. Always tell 'em by
their hands. That old man he's a servant. He isn't a gentleman. He can't
sit among the swells and order about the waiters. He hasn't learned that
way. He'd get up himself, if you asked him, and put the napkin under his
arm and bring you a glass of sherry wine. He's not my man. You wait a
bit.'

At a quarter to seven another footstep was heard echoing up and down the
empty building. Then an old man, erect, thin, tightly buttoned, wearing
neat gloves and carrying an umbrella, came out of the door. His face was
hard, even austere. His walk was firm. The Sentry, as this person walked
out of the gate, followed at a distance. When he was beside Athelstan,
he whispered: 'That's the man. I'd swear to him anywhere. That's the man
that sent me to the Bank.'

Athelstan heard in unbounded astonishment. That the man? Why--it was Mr.
Dering himself!

'Let us follow him,' he whispered. 'Not together. On opposite sides of
the road. Good Heavens! This is most wonderful. Do not lose sight of
him.'

To follow him was perfectly easy, because Mr. Dering turned neither to
the right nor to the left, but marched straight on through Great
Turnstile, across Holborn, through Featherstone Buildings, and into
Bedford Row. At No. 49, his own house. Where else should he stop?

Athelstan took out his purse and gave the man the five pounds. 'I don't
know what it means,' he said. 'I can't understand a word. But I suppose
you have told me the truth. I don't know why you should make up a
lie----'

'It's Gauspel Truth,' said the man.

'And therefore again--I don't understand it. Well--I've got your name
and your number. If I want you again I will send for you.'

The man saluted and walked away. Half a sovereign for an eighteenpenny
job, and eight years afterwards five pounds on account of the same job.
Robbery, was it? Robbery--and the old man pretending to rob himself. Now
what did that mean? Laying it on to some poor harmless innocent cove,
the soldier guessed: laying it on to some one as he had a spite
against--the old villain--very likely this young governor--most likely--
Donation on account of that same job, very likely--the old villain!

As for Athelstan, he returned to Lincoln's Inn Fields, where, the
evening being fine and the sun warm and the place quiet except for the
children at play, he walked up and down the east or sunny side for half
an hour turning the thing over in his mind.

For, you see, if Mr. Dering went through the form of robbing himself and
finding out the robbery and coldly suffering the blame to fall upon
himself--then Mr. Dering must be one of the most phenomenally wicked of
living men. Or, if Mr. Dering robbed himself, and did not know it--then
Mr. Dering must be mad.

Again, if such a thing could be done on a small scale, it might be done
on a larger scale with the same result--namely, suspicion to fall upon a
blameless person; obloquy to gather round his name--for in some cases
simply to be charged is almost as fatal as to be convicted: and perfect
impunity for himself. 'This is not my own writing, but a forgery,' said
the man who had been robbed. Then, who is the forger? You--you. None but
you. The bare suspicion becomes a certainty in the minds of those who
were once that man's friends.--And his life is cankered at the outset.
He thought of his own life; the bitterness of alienation and exile.
Never any time for eight years when he could explain the reasons of his
exile. Debt, the cultivation of wild oats, failure to pass
examinations--anything would do for such a reason except suspicion of
forgery. Athelstan was a cheerful young man. He seldom allowed himself
to be cast down by the blows of fate. Nevertheless, during his whole
time of exile, the drop of bitterness that poisoned his cup was that he
could not tell the whole story because the world would believe no more
than half--that half, namely, which contained the accusation. When one
walks about thinking, there comes a time when it seems no good to think
any longer. The mind can only get a certain amount out of a case at one
sitting. That amount absorbed, the best thing is to go on to something
else. Athelstan went on to dinner. He left his sister to the care of her
young man, and dined by himself. He took a steak at a Holborn restaurant
with an evening paper, which he considered professionally. After dinner
he returned to his subject. Perhaps he should get a step farther.
No--perhaps on account of the sweet influence of dinner he got no
farther at all. Here was an astonishing fact. How to account for it? You
have seen--by one of two ways--malignity unspeakable: or
madness--madness of a very curious kind--the madness of a man whose calm
cold judgment had made him appear to his friends as one with an
intellect far above any ordinary weaknesses of humanity. Mr. Dering mad?
Then the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Speaker of the House of
Commons, the President of the Royal Society, the President of the
Institute of Civil Engineers, the Cambridge Professors of
Mathematics--all these men might be mad as well. And nobody to know it
or to suspect it. Mr. Dering mad! and yet, if not, what was he?

There was one way. He had tried it already once. He left the restaurant
and turned eastwards. He was going to try South Square, Gray's Inn,
again. Perhaps Mr. Edmund Gray would be in his rooms.

He was not. The door was shut. But the opposite door stood open, that of
Freddy Carstone. Athelstan knocked, and was admitted with eloquence
almost tumultuous.

'Just in time,' said the coach. 'I've got a new brand of whisky,
straight from Glasgow. You shall sample it. Have you had dinner yet? So
have I. Sit down. Let us talk and smoke tobacco and drink whisky and
soda.'

'I will do the talking and the tobacco at any rate.'

'I love Virtue,' said Freddy. 'She is a lovely goddess--for "if Virtue
feeble were, Heaven itself would stoop to her." She has only one fault.
There is reproach in her voice, reproach in her eye, and reproach in her
attitude. She is an uncomfortable goddess. Fortunately, she dwells not
in this venerable foundation. Do not imitate Virtue, old boy. Let me----
That's right. We shall then start fair upon the primrose path--the broad
and flowery way--though I may get farther down than you. Athelstan the
Wanderer--Melmoth the Wanderer--Childe Harold the Pilgrim--drink and be
human.' He set the example. 'Good whisky--very good whisky. Athelstan,
there's a poor devil up-stairs, starving for the most part--let's have
him down. It's a charity.' He ran up-stairs, and immediately returned
with the decayed Advocate, who looked less hungry than usual, and a
shade less shabby--you have seen how he borrowed of Mr. Edmund Gray
through Elsie.

'Now,' said the host, 'I call this comfortable; a warm August evening;
the window open; a suspicion of fresh air from the gardens; soda and
whisky; and two men for talk. Most evenings one has to sit alone. Then
there's a temptation to--to close the evening too quickly.'

'Freddy, I want to hear more about your neighbour. You told me
something, if you remember, a week or two ago.'

'Very odd thing. Old Checkley at the _Salutation_ is always pestering
about Mr. Edmund Gray. What has he to do with Mr. Edmund Gray? Wanted me
to answer his questions.'

'And me,' said Mr. Langhorne. 'I did answer them.'

'Well--Mr. Edmund Gray is---- What is he? An old gentleman of cheerful
aspect, who is apparently a Socialist. We must all be allowed our little
weaknesses. All I ask for is----' He reached his hand for the whisky.
'This old gentleman carries his hobbies so far as to believe in them
seriously. I've talked to him about them.'

'I have heard him lecture at Camden Town,' said the Barrister. 'I go
there sometimes on Sunday evening. They have a tea-feast with him and
cake and toast. It is a pleasant gathering. It reminds one of the Early
Church.'

'Well, Athelstan, what else can I tell you? Hark!' There was a step
heard ascending the stairs. 'I believe that is the old man himself. If
it is, you shall see him. I will bring him in.'

He went out to meet the unknown footstep on the landing. He greeted the
owner of that footstep: he stopped him: he persuaded him to step into
the opposite room. 'You must be lonely, Mr. Gray, sitting by yourself.
Come in and have an hour's talk. Come in. This way. The room is rather
dark. Here is Mr. Langhorne, your overhead neighbour, whom you know; and
here is Mr. Athelstan Arundel, whom you don't know. Those who do know
him like him, except for his Virtue, which is ostentatious in one so
young.'

It was now nearly nine o'clock. The lamp was not lit, and the room lay
in twilight. It is the favourite shade for ghosts. A ghost stood before
Athelstan, and shook hands with him--the ghost of Mr. Dering.

'I am happy'--the ghost held out his hand--'to make your acquaintance,
Mr. Arundel. An old man, like myself, makes acquaintances, but not
friends. His time for new friendships is gone. Still, the world may be
full of pleasant acquaintances.'

He sat down, taking a chair in the window: the shade of the curtain fell
upon his face so that nothing could be seen but a white circle.

'Let us have candles, Freddy,' said Athelstan.

'By all means.' Freddy lit a lamp on the table and two candles on the
mantel-shelf. By their light the lineaments and figure of the ghost came
out more distinctly. Athelstan gazed on it with bewilderment; his head
went round; he closed his eyes: he tried to pull himself together.

He sat up: he drank half a glass of whisky and soda, he stared steadily
at the figure he had not seen for eight years, since---- Good Heavens!
and this man had done it himself! And he was as mad as a hatter.

Mr. Edmund Gray looked serenely cheerful. He lay back in the long chair,
his feet extended and crossed: his elbows on the arms of the chair, his
finger-tips touching; his face was wreathed with smiles; he looked as if
he had always found the world the best of all possible worlds.

Athelstan heard nothing of what was said. His old friend Freddy Carstone
was talking in his light and airy way, as if nothing at all mattered. He
was not expected to say anything. Freddy liked to do all the talking for
himself--therefore he sat watching a man under an illusion so
extraordinary that it made him another man. Nothing was changed in
him--neither features nor voice nor dress--yet he was another man.
'Why,' asked Athelstan, 'why did he write that cheque for seven hundred
and twenty pounds?'

Presently Freddy stopped talking, and Mr. Edmund Gray took up the
conversation. What he said--the doctrines which he advanced, we know
already. 'And these things,' said Athelstan to himself, 'from those
lips! Is it possible?'

At ten o'clock Mr. Edmund Gray rose. He had to write a letter; he prayed
to be excused. He offered his hand again to Athelstan. 'Good-night,
sir,' he said. 'To the pleasure of seeing you again.'

'Have we never met before, Mr. Gray?' Athelstan asked.

'I think not. I should remember you, Mr. Arundel, I am sure,' Mr. Gray
replied politely. 'Besides, I never forget a face. And yours is new to
me.--Good-night, sir.'




CHAPTER XXIX

CHECKLEY SEES A GHOST


To Checkley, watching every evening, though not always at the same time,
sooner or later the same discovery was certain to come. It happened, in
fact, on Friday evening, the day after Athelstan shook hands with Mr.
Edmund Gray. On that night he left the office between six and seven,
walked to his lodgings in Clerkenwell, made himself a cup of tea, and
hurried back to Gray's Inn. Here he planted himself, as usual, close to
the passage in the north-east corner of South Square, so that he could
slip in on occasion and be effaced. Like many of the detective tribe, or
like the ostrich, fount of many fables, he imagined himself by reason of
this retreat entirely hidden from the observation of all. Of course the
exact contrary was the result. The Policeman regarded him with the
liveliest curiosity: the laundresses watched him daily: the newspaper
vendor came every evening from the gateway to see what this ancient spy
was doing, and why he lurked stealthily in the passage and looked out
furtively. He was one of the little incidents or episodes which vary the
daily routine of life in the Inn. Many of these occur every year: the
people who come to their offices at ten and go away at five know nothing
about them: the residents who leave at ten and return at six or seven
or twelve know nothing about them. But the Service know: and they talk
and conjecture. Here was an elderly man--nay, an old, old man,
apparently eighty years of age. What did he want, coming night after
night to hide himself in a passage and peer out into the Square? What,
indeed? The Policeman, who had done duty in Hyde Park, could tell
instructive stories from his own experience about frisky age: the
laundresses remembered gentlemen for whom they had 'done,' and pranks
with which those gentlemen amused themselves; but no one knew a case
parallel to this. Why should an old man stand in the corner and secretly
look out into the Square? He generally arrived at half-past seven, and
he left his post at nine, when it was too dark to see across the Square.
Then he went to the _Salutation_ and enjoyed society, conversation, and
a cheerful glass, as you have seen.

The time he chose was unfortunate, because Mr. Edmund Gray, when he
called at his Chambers, generally did so at half-past six or seven, on
his way to the Hall of Science, Kentish Town. Therefore, Checkley might
have gone on watching for a long time--say an aeon--watching and waiting
in vain. But an accident happened which rewarded him richly for all his
trouble. It was on Friday. Elsie, provided by this time with a latch-key
to the Chambers, arrived at Gray's Inn at six. She was going to spend
the evening with the Master. She walked in, ascended the staircase--Mr.
Gray had not yet arrived--opened the door, shut it behind her, and
entered the room.

The hand of woman was now visible in the general improvement of the
room. The windows were clean and bright: the wainscoted walls had been
cleaned: the ceiling whitewashed: the carpet had been swept and the
furniture dusted: there were flowers on the table: there was an easel,
on which stood Elsie's fancy portrait of Mr. Dering, so wonderfully like
Mr. Gray--a speaking likeness: books lay about the table--they were all
books on the Labour Question: on the Social Question: on the Problems of
the Day: all the books on all the questions with which men now torture
themselves, and think thereby to advance the coming of the Kingdom of
Heaven. There were new curtains, dainty curtains, of lace, hanging
before the windows: and the window-blinds themselves were clean and new.
Elsie looked about her with a certain satisfaction: it was her own
doing, the work of her own hand, because the old laundress was satisfied
to sit down and look on. 'At the least,' she said, 'the poor dear man
has a clean room.' Then she remembered that in a day or two she would
leave him to his old solitude, and she sighed, thinking how he clung to
her and leaned upon her, and already looked upon her as his
successor--'a clean room,' she said, 'when I have left him. Perhaps he
will leave the room, too, and be all day long what he used to be.--Sane
or mad? I love him best when he is mad.'

The table was covered with manuscripts. These were part of the great
work which he was about to give to the world.

Elsie had never seen the room behind this. A guilty curiosity seized
her. She felt like the youngest of Bluebeard's wives. She felt the
impulse: she resisted: she gave way: she opened the door and looked in.

She found a room nearly as large as the sitting-room. The windows were
black with dust and soot. She opened one, and looked out upon a small
green area outside, littered with paper and bottles and all kind of
jetsam. The floor of the room was a couple of inches deep with dust: the
chairs and the dressing-table were deep in dust. The bed was laid, but
the blankets were devoured by moths: there was not a square inch left
whole. It looked as if it had been brought in new and covered with
sheets and blankets and so left, the room unopened, the bed untouched,
for the ten years of Mr. Edmund Gray's tenancy.

Between the bedroom and the sitting-room was a small dark room,
containing a bath, a table for washing-up, knives and forks in a basket,
teacups and saucers.

'The pantry,' said Elsie, 'and the scullery, and the house-maid's
closet, all together. Oh! beautiful! And to think that men live in such
dens--and sleep there contentedly night after night in this lonely,
ghostly old place. Horrible! 'A rattling behind the wainscoting warned
her that ghosts can show themselves even in the daytime. She shuddered,
and retreated to the sitting-room. Here she took a book and sat by the
open window, heedless of the fact that she could be seen by anyone from
the Square.

It was seven o'clock before Mr. Edmund Gray arrived. 'Ah! child,' he
cried tenderly, 'you are here before me. I was delayed--some business.
What was it? Pshaw! I forget everything. Never mind--I am here; and
before we take a cab, I want you once more to go through with me the
points of my new Catechism. Now, if you are ready.'

'Quite ready, Master.'



At half-past seven Checkley arrived at his corner and took a preliminary
survey of the Square. 'There he is,' said the Policeman. 'There he is
again,' said two laundresses conversing on a doorstep. 'There he is as
usual,' said the newspaper man. 'Now,' asked all in chorus, 'what's he
want there?'

Mr. Checkley looked out from his corner, saw no one in the Square, and
retreated into his passage. Then he looked out again, and retreated
again. If anyone passed through the passage, Checkley was always walking
off with great resolution in the opposite direction.

Presently, in one of his stealthy peerings, he happened to look up. Then
he started--he shaded his eyes: he looked his hardest. Yes, at the open
window, freely displayed, without the least attempt at concealment, he
saw the head and face of Miss Elsie Arundel. There! There! What more was
necessary? Edmund Gray was Athelstan Arundel, or George Austin, or
both--and Elsie Arundel was an accomplice after the act. There! There!
He retreated to the seclusion of the passage and rubbed his hands. This
would please Sir Samuel. He should hear it that very night. This ought
to please him very much, because it made things so clear at last. There
she was--up-stairs, in the Chambers of Mr. Edmund Gray--in the very
room! There! There! There!

Perhaps he was mistaken. But his sight was very good--for distant
things. In reading a newspaper he might make mistakes, because he was
one of those elderly persons who enjoy their newspaper most when they
can nail it upon the wall and sit down to read it from the other side of
a large room. He looked up again. The setting sun shining on the window
of the side where he stood--the eastern side was reflected upon the
windows of No. 22--Elsie's shapely head--she had taken off her hat--was
bathed in the reflected sunshine. No doubt about her at all. There she
was. There! There! There! The old man was fain to take a walk up Verulam
Buildings and back again, to disguise his delight at this discovery. He
walked chuckling and cracking his fingers, so that those who saw
him--but there are not many in Raymond's Buildings on an August
evening--thought that he must be either a little mad or a little drunk
or a little foolish. But nobody much regards the actions of an ancient
man. It is only the respect of his grandchildren or the thought of his
possessions that gives him importance. Only the strong are regarded, and
an old man who looks poor gets no credit even for foolishness and silly
chuckles. Then Checkley went back to his corner. Oh! what was that? He
rubbed his eyes again. He turned pale: he staggered: he caught at the
door-posts. What was that? He shaded his eyes and looked again--bent and
trembling and shaking all over. Said the Policeman: 'Looks as if he's
going to get 'em again.' Said the laundresses: 'He looks as if he'd seen
a ghost.' The newspaper boy stepped half-way across the Square. 'He's
looking at Mr. Edmund Gray and the young lady. Jealous--p'raps--knows
the young lady--wouldn't have believed it prob'ly.'

Yes--Checkley was looking at that window. No doubt of that at all. He
was not able to disguise his astonishment: he no longer pretended to
hide himself. For he saw, sitting in the window, the young lady whom he
believed to be an accomplice in the crime; and standing over her, with
an expression of fatherly affection, was none other than Mr. Dering
himself.

Yes-- Mr. Dering. Most wonderful! What did it mean? Had Mr. Dering
resolved to clear up the mystery of Edmund Gray? Had he penetrated the
Chambers and found there--not Edmund Gray--but Elsie Arundel?

'My friend,' said the Policeman, standing before him so that the view of
the window was intercepted, 'you seem interested over the way.'

'I am. I am. Oh! yes. Much interested.'

'Well--don't you think you've looked at that old gentleman long enough?
Perhaps he wouldn't like so much looking at. There's a young lady, too.
It isn't manners to be staring at a young lady like a stuck pig.'

'No--no, Policeman-- I've seen enough--thank you.'

'And, still talking in a friendly way, do you think Mr. Edmund Gray over
there would like it if he knew there was a detective or a spy watching
every evening on the other side of the Square? What's the little game,
guv'nor? Anything in our line? Not with that most respectable old
gentleman, I do hope--though sometimes---- Well--what is it? Because we
can't have you goin' on as you have a been goin' on, you know.'

'Policeman'--Checkley pulled him aside and pointed to the little group
at the window--'you see that old gentleman there--do you know him?'

'Certainly. Known him ever since I came to the Inn--two years ago. The
people of the Inn have known him for ten years, I believe. That's Mr.
Edmund Gray. He's not one of the regular residents, and he hasn't got an
office. Comes here now and then when he fancies the place--Mr. Edmund
Gray, that is. I wish all the gentlemen in the Inn were half as liberal
as he is.'

'Oh! it's impossible! Say it again, Policeman. Perhaps I'm a little
deaf--I'm very old, you know--a little deaf perhaps. Say it again.'

'What's the matter with the man?' For he was shaking violently, and his
eyes stared. 'Of course that is Mr. Edmund Gray.'

'What does the girl do with him? Why are they both there together?'

'How should I know why she calls upon him? She's a young lady, and a
sweet young thing too. He's her grandfather likely.'

Checkley groaned.

'I must go somewhere and think this out,' he said. 'Excuse me,
Policeman. I am an old man, and--and-- I've had a bit of a shock and----
Good-evening, Policeman.' He shaded his eyes again and looked up.
Yes--there they were, talking. Then Elsie rose and he saw her putting on
her hat. Then she retreated up the room. But still he stood watching.

'Not had enough yet, guv'nor?' asked the Policeman.

'Only a minute. I want to see her go out.--Yes--there they are--going
out together. It is, after all---- Oh! there is no mistake.'

'There is no mistake, guv'nor,' said the Policeman. 'There goes Mr.
Edmund Gray, and there goes that sweet young thing along of him.--Ah!
there's many advantages about being a gentleman. No mistake, I say,
about them two.--Now, old man, you look as if you'd had a surprise.
Hadn't you better go home and take a drop of something?'

It was earlier than Checkley generally went to the _Salutation_. But he
delayed no longer. He tottered across the Square, showing very much of
extreme feebleness, looking neither to the right nor to the left, his
cheek white, his eyes rolling. The people looked after him, expecting
that he would fall. But he did not. He turned into the tavern, hobbled
along the passage, and sank into an arm-chair in the parlour.

'Good gracious, Mr. Checkley!' cried the barmaid as he passed, 'whatever
is the matter?'

Some of the usual company were already assembled, although it was as yet
hardly eight. The money-lender was there, sitting in his corner, taking
his tobacco and his grog in silence. The decayed Barrister was there,
his glass of old and mild before him, reading the morning newspaper. The
ex-M.P. was there. When Checkley tumbled into the room, they looked up
in surprise. When he gazed about him wildly and gasped, they were
astonished, for he seemed like unto one about to have a fit.

'Give me something, Robert--give me something,' he cried.
'Quick--something strong. I'll have it short. Quick--quick!'

Robert brought him a small glass of brandy, which he swallowed hastily.

'Oh!' he groaned, sitting up, 'I've seen-- I've seen----'

'You look as if you had seen a ghost,' said the barmaid, who had come
along with a glass of water. 'Shall I bathe your forehead?'

'No--no. I am better now--I am all right again.--Gentlemen'--he looked
round the room solemnly--'I've seen this evening a good man--an old
man--a great man--a rich man; gentlemen, wrecked and cast away and
destroyed and ruined. With a little devil of a woman to laugh at him!'

'They don't generally laugh at the men when they are ruined,' said Mr.
Langhorne. 'They laugh while they are ruining them. It's fun to them. So
it is to the men. Great fun it is while it lasts. I daresay the little
woman won't really laugh at him. In my case----'

His case was left untold, because he stopped and buried his head in his
newspaper.

Then Shylock spoke. He removed his pipe from his lips and spoke, moved,
after his kind, by the mention of the words wreck and ruin, just as the
vulture pricks up its feathers at the word death.

'To see a rich man wrecked and ruined, Mr. Checkley, is a thing which a
man may see every day. The thing is not to lose by their wreck--to make
money out of it. Rich men are always being wrecked and ruined. What else
can you expect if men refuse to pay their interest and to meet their
bills? The melancholy thing--ah! the real sadness--is the ruin of a man
who has trusted his fellow creatures and got taken in for his pains.
Only this morning I find that I've been let in by a swindler--a common
swindler, gentlemen--who comes round and says he can't pay up--can't pay
up--and I'm welcome to the sticks.--Which kind of man might your friend
be, Mr. Checkley, the man who's trusted his neighbour and got left--or
the neighbour who's ramped the man that trusted him?'

'It isn't money at all,' Checkley replied.

'Then, sir, if it isn't money,' said the money-lender, 'I don't know why
you come in frightening this honourable company out of their wits. If it
isn't money, how the devil can the gentleman be wrecked and ruined?'

For two hours Mr. Checkley sat in silence, evidently not listening to
what was said. Then he turned to Mr. Langhorne the Barrister: 'You've
known Mr. Edmund Gray a long time, I believe?'

'Nine years--ten years--since he came to the Inn.'

'Always the same man, I suppose?' said Checkley. 'Never another man--not
sometimes a young man--or two young men--one rather a tall young man,
looks as if the world was all his--supercilious beast?'

'Never more than one man at once,' replied the Barrister with a show of
forensic keenness. 'He might have been two young men rolled into one;
but not to my knowledge: always the same man to look at, so far as I
know--and the same man to talk with.'

'Oh! yes--yes. There's no hope left--none. He's ruined and lost and cast
away and done for.'

He rose and walked out. The company looked after him and shook their
heads. Then they drew their chairs a little closer, and the gap made by
his departure vanished.




CHAPTER XXX

THE DAY AFTER THE GHOST


When Mr. Dering arrived at his office next morning he observed that his
table had not been arranged for him. Imagine the surprise of the
housewife should she come down to breakfast and find the ham and the
toast and the tea placed upon the table without the decent cloth! With
such eyes did Mr. Dering gaze upon the pile of yesterday's letters lying
upon his blotting-pad, the pens in disorder, the papers heaped about
anyhow, the dust of yesterday everywhere. Such a thing had never
happened before in his whole experience of fifty-five years. He touched
his bell sharply.

'Why,' he asked, hanging up his coat without turning round, 'why is not
my table put in order?' He turned and saw his clerk standing at the open
door.--'Good Heavens! Checkley, what is the matter?'

For the ancient servitor stood with drooping head and melancholy face
and bent shoulders. His hands hung down in the attitude of one who waits
to serve. But he did not serve. He stood still and he made no reply.

He understood now. Since the apparition of South Square he had had time
to reflect. He now understood the whole business from the beginning to
the end. One hand there was, and only one, concerned with the case. Now
he understood the meaning of the frequent fits of abstraction, the long
silences, this strange forgetfulness which made his master mix up days
and hours, and caused him to wonder what he had done and where he had
been on this and that evening. And somebody else knew. The girl knew.
She had told her lover. She had told her brother. That was why the new
Partner laughed and defied them. It was on his charge that young Arundel
had been forced to leave the country. It was he who declared that he had
seen him place the stolen notes in the safe. It was he who had charged
young Austin and whispered suspicions into the mind of Sir Samuel. Now
the truth would come out, and they would all turn upon him, and his
master would have to be told. Who would tell him? How could they tell
him? Yet he must be told. And what would be done to the jealous servant?
And how could the old lawyer, with such a knowledge about himself,
continue to work at his office? All was finished. He would be sent about
his business. His master would go home and stay there--with an
attendant. How could he continue to live without his work to do? What
would he do all day? With whom would he talk? Everything finished and
done with. Everything----

He stood, therefore, stricken dumb, humble, waiting for reproof.

'Are you ill, Checkley? asked Mr. Dering. 'You look ill. What is the
matter?

'I am not ill,' he replied in a hollow voice, with a dismal shake of the
head. 'I am not exactly ill. Yes, I am ill. I tried to put your table in
order for you this morning, but I couldn't, I really couldn't. I feel as
if I couldn't never do anything for you--never again. After sixty years'
service, it's hard to feel like that.'

He moved to the table and began mechanically laying the papers straight.

'No one has touched your table but me for sixty years. It's hard to
think that another hand will do this for you--and do it quite as well,
you'll think. That's what we get for faithful service.' He put the
papers all wrong, because his old eyes were dimmed with unaccustomed
moisture. Checkley had long since ceased to weep over the sorrows of
others, even in the most moving situations, when, for instance, he
himself carried off the sticks instead of the rent. But no man is so old
that he cannot weep over his own misfortunes. Checkley's eye was
therefore dimmed with the tear of Compassion, which is the sister of
Charity.

'I do not understand you this morning, Checkley. Have you had any
unpleasantness with Mr. Austin--with any of the people?'

'No--no. Only that I had better go before I am turned out. That's all.
That's all'--he repeated the words in despair. 'Nothing but that.'

'Who is going to turn you out? What do you mean, Checkley? What the
devil do you mean by going on like this? Am I not master here? Who can
turn you out?'

'You can, sir, and you will--and I'd rather, if you'll excuse the
liberty, go out of my own accord. I'm a small man--only a very small
man--but, thank God! I've got enough to give me a crust of bread and
cheese to live upon.'

'I tell you what, Checkley: you had better go home and lie down and rest
a little. You are upset. Now, at our age we can't afford to be upset. Go
home, and be easy. Old friends don't part quite so easily as you think.'
Mr. Dering spoke kindly and gently. One must be patient with so old a
servant.

Checkley sobbed and choked. Like a child he sobbed. Like a child of
four, Checkley choked and sniffed. 'You don't understand,' he said. 'Oh,
no--you can't understand. It's what I saw last night.'

'This is very wonderful. What did you see? A ghost?'

'Worse than a ghost--who cares for a ghost? Ghosts can't turn a man out
of his place and bring him to be a laughingstock. No--no. It was a man
that I saw, not a ghost.'

'If you can find it possible to talk reasonably'--Mr. Dering took his
chair and tore open an envelope--'when you can find it possible to talk
reasonably, I will listen. Meantime, I really think that you had better
go home and lie down for an hour or two. Your nerves are shaken; you
hardly know what you are saying.'

'I was in Gray's Inn yesterday evening. By accident, at eight.' He spoke
in gasps, watching his master curiously. 'By accident--not spying.
No--by accident. On my way to my club--at the _Salutation_. Walking
through South Square. Not thinking of anything. Looking about
me--careless-like.'

'South Square, Gray's Inn. That is the place where the man Edmund Gray
lives: the man we want to find and cannot find.'

'Oh! Lord! Lord!' exclaimed the clerk. 'Is it possible?' He lifted his
hand and raised his eyes to heaven and groaned. Then he resumed his
narrative.

'Coming through the passage, I looked up to the windows of No. 22--Mr.
Edmund Gray's Chambers, you know.'

'I believe so.' Mr. Dering's face betrayed no emotion at all. 'Go on; I
am told so.'

'In the window I saw Mr. Edmund Gray himself--himself.'

'Curious. You have seen him--but why not?'

'The man we've all been so anxious to find. The man who endorsed the
cheque and wrote the letters and got the papers--there he was!'

'Question of identity. How did you know him, since you had never seen
him before?'

This question Checkley shirked.

'He came down-stairs five minutes afterwards, while I was still looking
up at the windows. Came down-stairs, and walked out of the Square--made
as if he was going out by way of Raymond's Buildings--much as if he
might be going to Bedford Row.'

'These details are unimportant. Again--how did you know him?'

'I asked the Policeman who the gentleman was. He said it was Mr. Edmund
Gray. I asked the newspaper boy at the Holborn entrance. He said it was
Mr. Edmund Gray, and that everybody knew him.'

'So everybody knows him. Well, Checkley, I see nothing so very
remarkable about your seeing a man so well known in the Inn. It adds
nothing to our knowledge. That he exists, we know already. What share,
if any, he has had in this case of ours remains still a mystery. Unless,
that is, you have found out something else.'

Checkley gazed upon his master with a kind of stupor. 'No--no,' he
murmured. 'I can't.'

'What did you do, when you found out that it was the man?'

'Nothing.'

'You did nothing. Well--under the circumstances I don't know what you
could have done.'

'And he walked away.'

'Oh! He walked away. Very important indeed.--But, Checkley, this story
does not in the least account for your strange agitation this morning.
Have you anything more to tell me? I see that you have, but you seem to
experience more than usual difficulty in getting it out.'

The clerk hesitated. 'Do you,' he asked at last--'do you--happen--to
know Gray's Inn?'

'I daresay I have been there--years ago. Why?'

'Oh! you haven't been there lately, have you?'

'Not lately--not for forty years, or some such inconsiderable period.
Why?'

'I thought you might yourself have met Mr. Edmund Gray--been to his
Chambers, perhaps.'

Mr. Dering sat upright and laid his hand upon his letters. 'Checkley,'
he said, 'I am always willing to make allowance for people in mental
distress, but I think I have made allowance enough. Come to the point.
Have you lost any money?'

'No--no; not so bad as that--but bad enough. No, I couldn't afford to
lose money. I haven't got enough to spare any. But I got a shock--a kind
of stroke--partly because of the man I met, and partly because of the
person with him.'

'Oh! who was that? Are we arriving at something?'

'I hadn't told you that. The person who was sitting at the open window
with him, who came down-stairs with him, and walked out of the Square
with him, was no other than your own ward, Miss Elsie Arundel herself!'

'Oh! why not?' asked Mr. Dering carelessly. 'She told me yesterday, was
it? that she knows him.'

'If it had been anyone else she was with,' he replied, mixing up his
grammar--'if it had been anyone else who was with her--I wouldn't have
been surprised! But to see the two together. That gave me a turn that I
can't get over.'

'Still--why not? Miss Elsie Arundel has already told me that she is
acquainted with Mr. Edmund Gray.'

'What? She has told you--she has actually told you? Oh! what has she
told you? Oh! Lord! Lord! What is a man to say or to do? She told
you--what is best to do?' He wrung his hands in his distress and his
perplexity.

'I cannot understand, Checkley,' said Mr. Dering with emphasis, 'the
reason for this display of excitement. Why should she not tell me or
anybody else? Do you suppose that my ward is doing anything clandestine?
She has told me that she is acquainted with this man. She asserts
further--that we have made a great mistake about him. What she means, I
cannot understand. She says, in fact, that this gentleman is a perfectly
honourable person. It is possible that he has deceived her. It is also
possible that the name of Edmund Gray has been wrongfully used in the
papers which belong to the case. Certainly it was an Edmund Gray who
endorsed the first cheque; and an Edmund Gray having an address at 22
South Square whose name is connected with the later business. Well, we
shall see presently.--When do you take out the warrant for the arrest
of this man? By the way, Elsie Arundel implores me not to allow that
step. When are you going to do it?'

'This morning, I was going to do it. Everything is ready--but----'

'But what?'

'I can't do it now.'

'The man is clean gone off his head.'

'Leave it till to-morrow--only to-morrow, or Monday. Before then,
something is certain to turn up. Oh! certain sure it is. Something must
turn up.'

'There is certainly something that you are keeping behind, Checkley.
Well--wait till Monday. To-day is Saturday. He can't do very much
mischief between this and Monday.--That's enough about Edmund Gray. Now,
here is another point, to which I want a direct answer from you. My
brother asserts, I believe on your authority, that Athelstan Arundel has
been living in a low and profligate manner in some London suburb, and
that he was in rags and poverty early this year. What is your authority
for this?'

'Why, I heard him confess--or not deny--that he'd been living in
Camberwell in bad company. It was at the _Salutation_ I heard it. He
didn't see me. I'd got my head behind a paper. He never denied it.'

'Humph!--And about the rags?'

'I don't know anything about the rags.'

'Very likely there is as much foundation for the one charge as for the
other. Three or four years ago, he was in America, to my knowledge. He
wrote to me from America. I now learn, on the authority of his sister,
that he only came back a month ago, and that he has been and is still in
the service of an American paper. What have you got to say to that?'

'Nothing. I don't feel as if I could say anything. It's all turned upsy
down. That won't do, I suppose, no more than the rest.'

'But, my friend, if that is true, your theory of conspiracy and
confederacy, which you took so much pains to build up, falls to the
ground as far as Athelstan is concerned.'

'Yes.-- Oh! I haven't nothing to say.' It was a mark of the trouble
which possessed him that his language reverted to that of his young
days, before he had learned the art of correct speech from the copying
of legal documents. He preserved the same attitude with bent head and
hanging hands, a sad and pitiful object.

'Since Athelstan was not in London during the months of March and April,
he could have had no hand in the later forgeries. And it is acknowledged
that the same hand was concerned both in the earlier and the later
business.'

'Yes--yes--the same hand. Oh! yes--the same hand,' he repeated with
pathos unintelligible to his master. 'The same hand--the same hand;
yes--yes--the same hand--that's the devil of it--same hand done it all.'

'Then what becomes of your charge against my young Partner? You were
extremely fierce about it. So was my brother. You had no proofs--nor had
he. If the same hand was in both forgeries, it could not have been the
hand of George Austin. What do you say to that?'

'Nothing. I'm never going'--still standing hands hanging--'to say
anything again as long as I live.'

'But you were very fierce about it, Checkley. You must either find more
proofs or withdraw your accusation.'

'Oh! if that's all, I withdraw-- I withdraw everything.'

'Why did you bring that charge then, Checkley? You've been making
yourself very busy over the character of my Partner. You have permitted
yourself to say things in the office before the clerks about him. If it
turns out that he has had nothing to do with the business, you will be
in a very serious position.'

'I withdraw-- I withdraw everything,' the old clerk replied, but not
meekly. He was prepared to withdraw, but only because he was forced.

'Remember, too, that it was you who brought the charge against young
Arundel.'

'I withdraw-- I withdraw everything.'

'You went so far as to remember--the other day--having seen him replace
the notes in the safe. What do you say to that?'

'I withdraw.'

'But it was a direct statement--the testimony of an eyewitness. Was it
true or not?--I don't know you this morning, Checkley. First, you appear
shaking and trembling: then you tell me things which seem in no way to
warrant so much agitation. Next, you withdraw an accusation which ought
never to have been made except with the strongest proof. And now you
wish to withdraw an alleged fact.'

Checkley shook his head helplessly.

'I acknowledge that the business remains as mysterious as before.
Nothing has been found out. But there remains an evident and savage
animosity on your part towards two young gentlemen in succession. Why?
What have they done to you?'

Checkley made reply in bold words, but still standing with hanging
hands: 'I withdraw the animosity. I withdraw everything. As for young
Arundel, he was a supercilious beast. We were dirt beneath his feet. The
whole earth belonged to him. He used to imitate my ways of speaking, and
he used to make the clerks laugh at me. I hated him then. I hate him
still. It was fun to him that an old man, nigh seventy, with no
education, shouldn't speak like a young gentleman of Oxford and
Cambridge College. He used to stick his hat on the back of his head as
if it was a crown, and he'd slam the door after him as if he was a
Partner. I hated him. I was never so glad as when he ran away in a rage.
He was coming between you and me, too.--Oh! I saw it. Cunning he was.
Laying his lines for to come between you and me.'

'Why--you were jealous, Checkley.'

'I was glad when he ran away. And I always thought he'd done it, too. As
for seeing him put the cheque back in the safe, I perceive now that I
never did see him do it. Yet I seemed to think at the time that I'd
remembered seeing him do a kind of a sort of a something like it. I now
perceive that I was wrong. He never done it. He hadn't the wits to
contrive it. That sort is never half sharp. Too fine gentleman for such
a trick.--Oh! I know what you are going to say next. How about the
second young fellow? I hate him too. I hate him because he's the same
supercilious beast as the other, and because he's been able to get round
you. He's carneyed you--no fool like an old fool--and flattered
you--till you've made him a Partner. I've worked for you heart and soul
for sixty years and more, and this boy comes in and cuts me out in a
twelvemonth.'

'Well! but Checkley--hang it!--I couldn't make you a Partner.'

'You didn't want no Partners. You could do your work, and I could do
mine and yours too, even if you did want to go asleep of an afternoon.'

'This is grave, however. You hated Mr. Austin, and therefore you bring
against him this foul charge. This is very grave, Checkley.'

'No-- I thought he was guilty. I did, indeed. Everything pointed that
way. And I don't understand about young Arundel, because he came into
the _Salutation_ with the Cambridge gentleman who gets drunk there every
night, and he said that he lived at Camberwell for eight years with bad
company as I wouldn't name to you, sir. I thought he was guilty. I did,
indeed.'

'And now?'

'Oh! now it is all over. Everything's upsy down. Nobody's guilty. I know
now that he hasn't had anything to do with it. He's a young man of very
slow intelligence and inferior parts. He couldn't have had anything to
do with it. We ought to have known that.'

'Well--but who has done it, after all?'

'That's it.' Checkley was so troubled that he dropped into a chair in
the presence of his master. 'That's it. Who's done it? Don't you know
who done it? No-- I see you don't so much as suspect. No more don't I.
Else--what to do--what to say--Lord only knows!' He turned and ran--he
scuttled out of the room, banging the door behind him.

'He's mad,' said Mr. Dering. 'Poor man! Age makes some men forgetful,
but it has driven Checkley mad.'




CHAPTER XXXI

THE THREE ACCOMPLICES


On that same evening the three accomplices--probably on the proceeds of
their iniquities--were dining together at the _Savoy_. After dinner they
sat on the verandah overlooking the river and the embankment. 'Tis
sweet, what time the evening shades prevail, while one is still in the
stage of physical comfort and mental peace attendant upon an artistic
little banquet, to view from the serene heights of a balcony at that
hotel the unquiet figures of those who flit backwards and forwards
below. They--alas!--have not dined so well, or they could not walk so
fast, or drag their limbs so hopelessly, or lean over the wall so sadly.

Elsie leaned her head upon her hands, looking down upon this scene,
though not quite with these thoughts. Young ladies who are quite happy,
and are going to be married next week, do not make these comparisons.
Happiness is selfish. When one is quite happy, everybody else seems
quite happy too--even Lazarus and the leper. We must never be happy if
we do not wish to be selfish.

Coffee was on the table. Athelstan had a cigar. They were all three
silent. During dinner they had talked gaily, because everybody knows
that you cannot talk with strange people listening. After dinner they
sat in silence, because it is only when the waiters are gone that one is
free to talk.

'Elsie,' said George presently, 'you have something to tell
us--something you have discovered. For my own part, since I handed the
case over to anybody else, I feel as if I were not interested in it. But
still, one would like to know--just for curiosity's sake--when Checkley
is to be "run in."'

'Yes,' said Elsie, 'I must tell you. Perhaps I ought to have told you
before. Yet there was a reason. Now--you will be greatly astonished,
George.'

'Before you begin, Elsie '--Athelstan removed his cigar--'I must tell
you that yesterday evening I, too, made a discovery--what the Americans
call a pivotal discovery--a discovery that discovers everything. I
should have told you last night, but you announced your communications
for this evening, and I thought we would expose our discoveries at the
same time.'

'You have found out too!' Elsie cried. 'I see by your face that you
have. Well, Athelstan, so much the better. Now, tell your discovery
first, and I will follow.'

'It is this. I have discovered Edmund Gray. I have sat with him and
discoursed with him, in Freddy Carstone's Chambers. He came in, sat
beside me, and conversed for more than an hour.'

'Oh!' said Elsie. 'Then you know all--as much as I know.'

'Observe,' George interposed, 'that I know nothing as yet.'

'Wait a moment, George. Learn that I have myself known Mr. Edmund Gray
for a fortnight. You will think, perhaps, that I ought to have told you
before. Well--but there is a reason--besides, the way, to begin with,
did not lie quite clear before me. Now the time has come when you should
advise as to the best course to follow.'

'You have certainly been more mysterious than any oracle, Elsie. Yet you
will bear witness, if it comes to bearing witness, that I accepted your
utterances and believed in them.'

'You certainly did, George.--And now, Athelstan, tell him the whole.'

'In one word then--Edmund Gray, the man we have been looking after so
long, is none other than Edward Dering, of 12 New Square, Lincoln's Inn,
Solicitor.'

'I don't understand,' said George, bewildered. 'Say it all again.'

Athelstan repeated his words.

'That is my discovery, too,' said Elsie. 'Now you know all, as you
understand.'

'But I don't understand. How can one man be another man?'

'I sat beside one man,' Athelstan added, 'for an hour and more; and lo!
all the time he was another man.'

'And still I am fogged. What does it mean?'

'It means, George, what you would never suspect. The one man received me
as a stranger. He knew nothing about me: he had never heard my name,
even. Yet the other man knows me so well. It was very odd at first. I
felt as if I was talking to a sleep-walker.'

'Oh!' cried George, 'I know now. You have seen Mr. Dering in a kind of
sleep-walking state-- I too have seen him thus. But he said nothing.'

'You may call it sleep-walking if you like. But, George, there is
another and a more scientific name for it. The old man is mad. He has
fits of madness, during which he plays another part, under another name.
Now, do you understand?'

'Yes--but--is it possible?'

'It is more than possible; it is an actual certainty. Wait. Let Elsie
tell her story.'

Then Elsie began, with a little air of triumph, because it is not given
to every young lady to find out what all the men have failed to find.

'Well--you see--I was always thinking over this business, and wondering
why nothing was found out about it, and watching you look this way and
that, and it occurred to me that the first thing of all was to find out
this Mr. Edmund Gray and lay hands upon him. At first I thought I would
just go and stand outside his door all day long and every day until he
came. But that seemed a waste of time. So I remembered how you found his
door open, and went in and spoke to the laundress. I thought that I
would do the same thing, and sit down there and wait until he should
come. But I was afraid to sit in the rooms of a strange man all
alone--no, I could not do it. So I just found out the old woman--the
laundress--as you did, George, and I gave her money, and she told me
that Mr. Gray was at his Chambers almost every Saturday afternoon. Very
well; if anybody chose to wait for him all Saturday afternoon, he would
certainly be found. So on Saturday afternoon I took a cab and drove to
Holborn, and got to the place before his arrival. But again, as it was
not quite nice to stand at an open doorway in a public Square, I thought
I would wait on the stairs. So I mounted--the doors were all
closed--nobody was left in the place at all--I thought I should be
perfectly safe and undisturbed, when I heard the noise of footsteps
overhead--a tramp, tramp, tramp up and down, with every now and then a
groan--like a hungry creature in a cage. This kept on for a long time,
and frightened me horribly. I was still more frightened when a door
overhead opened and shut and the footsteps came down-stairs. They
belonged to a man--an elderly man--who seemed as much frightened at
seeing me as I was at seeing him. He asked me whether I wanted any one;
and when I said I wanted Mr. Edmund Gray, he said that he was a friend
of Mr. Gray's, and that, since I was a friend too, I might act for
Edmund Gray and lend him some money. He looked desperately poor and
horribly hungry and thin and shabby, the poor old man!'

'So you acted for Edmund Gray. That was old Langhorne. He is a
barrister, who lives in the garret, and is horribly down on his
luck.--Go on.'

'Poor Elsie!' said George. 'Think of her, all alone on the staircase!'

'When he was gone, there was no sound at all. The place was perfectly
quiet. The time passed so slowly--oh! so slowly. At last, however, I
heard a step. It came up the stairs. Oh! my heart began to beat. Suppose
it should be Mr. Edmund Gray. Suppose it was some other person. Suppose
it was some horror of a man! But I had not long to wait, because Mr.
Edmund Gray himself stood on the landing. He stared at me, rather
surprised to find a young lady on the stairs, but he showed no sign of
recognition whatever. I was a complete stranger to him.'

'And was the man Mr. Dering?'

'He was--Mr. Dering. There was just the least little change in him. He
wore his coat open instead of buttoned. He had no gloves, his hat was
not pulled over his eyes, and his face was somehow lighter and brighter
than usual.'

'That is so,' said Athelstan. 'Exactly with these little changes he
presented himself to me.'

'Perhaps there is another man in the world exactly like him.'

'Futile remark!--Go on, Elsie.'

'Then I guessed in a moment what it meant. I stepped forward and asked
him if he was Mr. Edmund Gray. And then I followed him into his
rooms.--George, there is no manner of doubt whatever. Mr. Dering has
periods, whether regular or not I cannot tell, when he loses himself and
becomes in imagination another man. He is mad, if you like, but there is
method in his madness. The other man is just himself turned inside out.
Mr. Dering believes in the possible wickedness of everybody: the other
man believes in the actual goodness of every man. Mr. Dering considers
Property the only stable foundation of Society: the other man considers
Property the root of all evil. Mr. Dering is hard and jealous: the other
man is full of geniality and benevolence. Mr. Dering is Justice: the
other man is Mercy.'

'Very neatly put, Elsie. There is quite an eighteenth-century balance
about your sentences and sentiments. So far'--Athelstan contributed his
confirmation--'so far as I could judge, nothing could be more true. I
found my man the exact opposite of himself.'

'Can such a thing be possible? If I were to speak to him, would he not
know me?'

'You forget, George. You have seen him in that condition, and he did not
know you.'

'Nothing is more common'--Athelstan the Journalist began to draw upon
the encyclopaedic memory which belongs to his profession--'than such a
forgetfulness of self. Have you ever been into a Lunatic Asylum? I
have--for professional purposes. I have discoursed with the patients,
and been instructed by the physicians. Half the time many of the
patients are perfectly rational: during the other half they seem to
assume another mind with other memories. It is not real possession, as
the ancients called it, because they never show knowledge other than
what they have learned before. Thus, a sane man who cannot draw would
never in insanity become an artist. So Mr. Dering, when he is mad,
brings the same logical power and skill to bear upon a different set of
maxims and opinions. Said a physician to me at this asylum of which I
speak: "There are thousands of men and women, but especially men, who
are mad every now and then, and don't know it. Most of the crimes are, I
believe, committed in moments of madness. A young fellow steals
money--it is because at the moment he is so mad that he even persuades
himself that borrowing is not stealing: that he is only borrowing: that
he can get it back, and put it back before it is found out. What is
uncontrollable rage but sudden madness? There are the men who know that
they are mad on some point or other, and cunningly hide it, and are
never found out. And there are the men who are mad and don't know it. In
their mad times they commit all kinds of extravagances and follies, yet
somehow they escape detection." So he talked; and he told me of a man
who was a lawyer in one town with a wife and family, and also a lawyer
in another with a different wife and family. But one lawyer never found
out the other; and the thing was only discovered when the man got a
paralytic stroke and died in a kind of bewilderment, because, when the
time came for him to be the other man, he found himself lying in a
strange bedroom with a strange family round him. I had long forgotten
the asylum. I did the place for my paper three or four years ago, and
scored by the description. Since last night I have been recalling my
experience and applying it. You see there can never be any physical
change. This is no Hyde and Jekyll business. Whatever happens must be
conducted with the same body and the same mind. The same processes of
mind in which the man is trained remain, but his madness requires a new
setting.'

'One cannot understand,' said Elsie.

'No. But then one cannot understand everything. That's the real beauty
of this world: we are planted in the midst of things: we can give names
to them--Adam began that way, didn't he?--but we can't understand any of
them; and most people think that when we have given a name we have
succeeded in understanding. Well, Elsie--we don't understand. But we may
find out something. I take it that the other man grew up by degrees in
his brain, so that there is no solution in the continuity of thought and
recollection. The Edmund Gray developed himself. He has been developed
for nearly ten years, since he has occupied the same Chambers all the
time.'

'But about the forgeries?' George sprang to his feet. 'I declare,' he
cried, 'that I had quite forgotten the real bearing on our case.'

'Edmund Gray,' said Elsie, 'says that his own lawyer who manages his
affairs is Edward Dering. If he were to write letters while Edmund Gray,
he would not impose upon Edward Dering.'

'He cannot write to two men,' said Athelstan. 'There must be a
border-land between the waking and the dreaming, when the two spirits of
Edmund Gray and Edward Dering contend for the mastery, or when they
command each other--when Edmund Gray endorses cheques and Edward Dering
writes letters and conducts transfers for his client--his
double--himself.'

'I have seen him in such a state,' said George. 'At the time I never
suspected anything but a passing trouble of mind, which caused him to be
so wrapped up in his thoughts as not to be able to distinguish anything.
He was then, I doubt not now, carrying out the instructions of Edmund
Gray, or he was Edmund Gray acting for himself. Checkley whispered not
to disturb him. He said that he had often seen him so.'

'I have never tried to understand,' said Elsie. 'But I saw that Edmund
Gray was Mr. Dering gone mad, and that he himself, and nobody else, was
the perpetrator of all these forgeries; and I have been trying to
discover the best way--the kindest way to him--the surest way for us, of
getting the truth known.--George, this is the secret of my mysterious
movements. This is why I have not given you a single evening for a
whole fortnight. Every evening--both Sundays--I have spent with this
dear old man. He is the most delightful--the most gentle--the most
generous--old man that you ever saw. He is full of ideas--oh! quite
full--and they carry you out of yourself, until you awake next morning
to find that they are a dream. I have fallen in love with him. I have
had the most charming fortnight--only one was always rather afraid that
he might come to himself, which would be awkward.'

'Well, Elsie, have you found a way?'

'I think I have. First, I have discovered that when he is surrounded
with things that remind him of Edmund Gray, he remains Edmund Gray.
Next, I have found out that I can, by talking to him even at his office,
when he has his papers before him, turn him into Edmund Gray.'

'You are a witch, Elsie.'

'She is,' said George, looking at her in the foolish lover's way. 'You
see what she has turned me into--a long time ago, and she has never
turned me back again.'

'I have been thinking too,' said Athelstan. 'For our purposes, it would
be enough to prove the identity of Edmund Gray and Edward Dering. That
explains the resemblance of the handwriting and of the endorsement. My
commissionaire's recollection of the man also identifies the cheque as
drawn by himself for himself under another name. It explains the
presence of the notes in the safe. It also shows that the long series of
letters which passed between him and the broker were written by himself
for himself. Here, however, is a difficulty. I can understand Edward
Dering believing himself to be Edmund Gray, because I have seen it. But
I cannot understand Edward Dering believing himself to be the Solicitor
to Edmund Gray and writing at his command.'

'But I have seen him in that condition,' said Elsie. 'It was while he
was changing from one to the other. He sat like one who listens. I think
that Edmund Gray was at his elbow speaking to him. I think I could make
him write a letter by instruction from Edmund Gray. That he should
believe himself acting for a client in writing to the broker is no more
wonderful than that he should believe himself another man altogether.'

'Show me, if you can, the old man acting for an imaginary client.
Meantime, I mentioned the point as a difficulty. Prove, however, to Mr.
Dering and to the others concerned that he is Edmund Gray, and all is
proved. And this we can do by a host of witnesses.'

'I want more than this, Athelstan,' said Elsie. 'It would still be open
to the enemy to declare that George, or you, or I, had made use of his
madness for our own purposes. I want a history of the whole case written
out by Edmund Gray himself--a thing that we can show to Mr. Dering and
to everybody else. But I dread his discovery. Already he is suspicious
and anxious. I sometimes think that he is half conscious of his
condition. We must break it to him as gently as we can. But the shock
may kill him. Yet there is no escape. If the forgeries were known only
to ourselves, we might keep the discovery a secret; and only if
necessary--but it would not be necessary--keep some sort of watch over
him and warn the Bank. But Checkley has told the clerks and the people
at the Bank, and there are ourselves to think of and my mother and
Hilda.--No; we must let them all know.'

'And if one may mention one's self,' said Athelstan, 'my own little
difficulty presses. Because, you see, I don't know how long I may be
kept here. Perhaps to-morrow I might go on to St. Petersburg or to
Pekin. Before I go, Elsie, I confess that I should like my mother to
understand that--that she was a little hasty--that is all.'

'You are not going to St. Petersburg, brother.' Elsie took his hand.
'You are not going to leave us anymore. You are going to stay. I have
made another discovery.'

'Pray, if one may ask----'

'Oh! you may ask. I saw a letter to-day--Mr. Dering showed it to me. It
was written from the States three or four years ago. It showed where you
were at that time and showed me more, Athelstan--it showed me how you
lost the pile of money that you made over that silver mine--you
remember, Athelstan?'

He made no reply.

'Oh! do you think that I am going to accept this sacrifice? George, you
do not know. The donor of that great sum of money which Mr. Dering held
for me--we have often wondered who it was. I have only found out
to-day--it was Athelstan. He gave me all he had for such a trifling
thing--only because I would not believe that he was a villain--all he
had in the world--and went out again into the cold. He said he dropped
his money down a gully or a grating on the prairie--some nonsense. And
he sent it all to me, George.--What shall we do?'

'Is this really true, Athelstan? Did you really give up all this money
to Elsie?'

'She says so.'

'It is quite true, George. I saw the letter--Mr. Dering showed it to
me--in which he sent that money home, and begged Mr. Dering to take care
of it, and to give it to me on the day when I should be one-and-twenty.
He cannot deny it. Look at him. He blushes--he is ashamed--he hangs his
head--he blows tobacco-smoke about in clouds, hoping to hide his red
cheeks. And he talks of going on to St. Petersburg, when we know this
secret, and have got the money! What do you call this conduct, George?'

'Athelstan--there is no word for it. But you must have it back. You
must, and shall. There can be no discussion about it. And there is not
another man in the world, I believe, who would have done it.'

'Nonsense. I should only have lost it, if I had kept it,' Athelstan
replied after the Irish fashion.

'You hear, Athelstan. It is yours. There can be no discussion. That's
what I like a man for. While we women are all talking and disputing, the
man puts down his foot and says: "There can be no discussion." Then we
all stop, and the right thing is done. It is yours, brother; and you
shall have it, and you shall stay at home with us always and always.'
She laid her hand upon his shoulder, and her arm round his neck,
caressing him with hand and voice.

The man who had wandered alone for eight years was not accustomed to
sisterly caresses. They moved him. The thing itself moved him.

'All this belongs to another chapter,' he said huskily. 'We will talk of
it afterwards, when the business in hand is despatched.

'Well, then--that is agreed. You are to have your money back: my mother
is to take her suspicions back: Mr. Dering is to have his certificates
back and his dividends: Checkley is to take his lies back: Sir Samuel is
to have his charges back: George and I are going to have our peace of
mind back. And we are all going to live happy ever afterwards.'

'As for Wednesday now,' said George. 'It is not an unimportant day for
us, you know.'

'Everything is ready. On Sunday morning my mother is always at home
before Church. I will see her then, and acquaint her with the news that
the wedding will take place as originally proposed, at her house. This
will astonish her very much, and she will become angry and polite and
sarcastic. Then I shall tell her to prepare not only for a wedding
feast, but also for a great, a very great surprise. And I shall also
inform her that I shall be given away by my brother. And then--then--if
I know my mother aright, she will become silent. I shall do that
to-morrow morning.--In the evening, George, you will get your best-man,
and I will get your sisters, my bridesmaids, and we will come here, or
go to Richmond or somewhere--and have dinner and a cheerful evening.--Am
I arranging things properly?'

'Quite properly. Pray go on.'

'Sunday afternoon I have promised to spend with my master--Edmund Gray.
He is going to read me a new Paper he has just finished, in which he
shows that Property can be destroyed by a painless process--Athelstan,
put all your money into your pocket and keep it there--in less than a
twelvemonth, and with it all crime--all sweating, all injustice.--No,
Athelstan, he is not mad. When he argues on this theme he is persuasive
and eloquent. He convinces everybody. I shall hear him out, and then I
shall try to make him write down all that has happened. If we can only
get such a confession, it would be better than anything else. But it may
be difficult. He does not like being questioned about himself. If I do
succeed--I don't know quite what I ought to do next. He must be told.
Some time or other he must have the truth. I thought of asking all the
people mentioned to meet at his office on Monday morning at noon when
Mr. Dering is always himself. On Sunday I would not. He has to address
his people on Sunday evening. Let him do so undisturbed. I will leave
him in happiness that one night longer. But you two--you will be
anxious. Come on Sunday evening--between eight and nine--to the Hall of
Science. Then you will hear him and see me. And I will let you know how
I have prospered.'

'Sunday evening,' said George. 'Monday comes next, then Tuesday, and
before Wednesday, my Elsie, the character of these two convicts has to
be completely whitewashed, even to the satisfaction of Hilda herself.
Are we not running it pretty close?'

'Unbeliever! Doubter! I tell you that you shall be married with all your
friends round you, and that Athelstan shall give me away. And you shall
go away on your holiday with a quiet heart and nothing to trouble you.
What a foolish boy not to be able to trust his bride even for such a
simple thing as getting a confession out of a madman!'

'Do you sport a crest, old man?' asked Athelstan.

'I believe there is some kind of a sort of a thing somewhere around. But
crests are foolishness.'

'Not always. Take a new one, George--a real one. Stamp it on your spoons
and forks and in your books and on your carriage. Let it be simply the
words, "Dux Femina Facti."'




CHAPTER XXXII

ELSIE AND HER MOTHER


'Can you spare me a few minutes, mother?'

Mrs. Arundel looked up from the desk where she was writing a letter, and
saw her daughter standing before her. She started and changed colour,
but quickly recovered, and replied coldly: 'I did not hear you come in,
Elsie. What do you want with me?'

Outside, the bells were ringing for Church: it was a quarter to eleven:
Mrs. Arundel was already dressed for Church. She was one of those who do
not see any incongruity between Church and a heart full of animosities.
She was bitter against her daughter, and hard towards her son, and she
hated her son-in-law elect with all the powers of her passionate nature.
But, my brothers, what an array of bare benches should we see in every
place of worship were those only admitted who came with hearts of
charity and love!

'Do you wish to keep me long, Elsie? If so, we will sit down. If not, I
am ready for Church, and I do not like to arrive late. People in our
position should show a good example.'

'I do not think that I shall keep you very long. But if you sit down,
you will be so much more comfortable.'

'Comfort, Elsie, you have driven out of this house.'

'I will bring it back with me, then. On Monday evening, mother, I am
coming back.'

'Oh! What do you mean, child? Has the blow really fallen? I heard that
it was impending. Is the young man--is he--a prisoner?'

'No, mother. You are quite mistaken. You have been mistaken all along.
Yet I shall come back on Monday.'

'Alone, then?'

'I shall leave it to you whether I come back alone, or with the two men
whom I most regard of all the world--my lover and my brother.'

'You know my opinions, Elsie. There has been no change in them. There
can be none.'

'Wednesday is my wedding day.'

'I am not interested in that event, Elsie. After your wedding with such
a man, against the opinions, the wishes, the commands of all whom you
are bound to respect, I can only say that you are no longer my
daughter.'

'Oh! How can you be so fixed in such a belief? Mother, let me make one
more appeal to your better feelings. Throw off these suspicions. Believe
me, they are baseless. There is not the shadow of a foundation for this
ridiculous structure they have raised. Consider. It is now--how
long?--three weeks since they brought this charge, and they have proved
nothing--absolutely nothing. If you would only be brought to see on what
false assumptions the whole thing rests.'

'On solid foundations--hard facts--I want no more.'

'If I could prove to you that Athelstan was in America until a month
ago.'

'Unhappy girl! He is deceiving you. He has been living for eight years
in profligacy near London. Elsie, do not waste my time. It should be
enough for me that my son-in-law, Sir Samuel Dering, a man of the
clearest head and widest experience, is convinced that it is impossible
to draw any other conclusions.'

'It is enough for me,' Elsie rejoined quickly, 'that my heart tells me
that my brother and my lover cannot be such creatures.'

'You have something more to say, I suppose.' Mrs. Arundel buttoned her
gloves. The clock was now at five minutes before eleven.

'Yes. If it is no use at all trying to appeal to----'

'No use at all,' Mrs. Arundel snapped. 'I am not disposed for
sentimental nonsense.'

'I am sorry, because you will be sorry afterwards. Well, then, I have
come to tell you that I have made all the preparations, with George's
assistance, for Wednesday.'

'Oh!'

'Yes. The wedding cake will be sent in on Tuesday. My own dress--white
satin, of course, very beautiful--is finished and tried on. It will be
sent in on Monday evening. The two bridesmaids' dresses will also come
on Monday. George has arranged at the Church. He has ordered the
carriages and the bouquets and has got the ring. The presents you have
already in the house. We shall be married at three. There will be a
little gathering of the cousins after the wedding, and you will give
them a little simple dinner in the evening, which will, I daresay, end
with a little dance. George has also seen to the red cloth for the steps
and all that. Oh! And on Tuesday evening you will give a big dinner
party to everybody.'

'Are you gone quite mad, Elsie?'

'Not mad at all, my dear mother. It is Sir Samuel who is mad, and has
driven you and Hilda mad. Oh! everything will come off exactly as I tell
you. Perhaps you don't believe it.'

'You are mad, Elsie. You are certainly mad.'

'No, my dear mother, I am not mad. Oh! it is so absurd, if it were not
so serious. But we are determined, George and I, not to make this
absurdity the cause of lasting bitterness. Therefore, my dear mother, I
do not want to be married from my brother's lodgings, but from your
house. You will come to my wedding, I prophesy, full of love--full of
love'--her eyes filled with tears--'for me and for George--and for
Athelstan--full of love and of sorrow and of self-reproach. I am to be
given away by my brother--you will come, I say, with a heart full of
love and of pity for him.'

Mrs. Arundel gazed at her stonily.

'Everybody will be there, and you will receive all your friends after
the wedding. I have taken care of the invitations. Hilda will be there
too, horribly ashamed of herself. It will be a lovely wedding; and we
shall go away with such good wishes from yourself as you would not in
your present state of mind believe possible. Go now to Church, my dear
mother, prepared for a happy and a joyful day.'

'I sometimes believe, Elsie,' said Mrs. Arundel, more coldly still,
'that you have been deprived of your senses. So far from this, I shall
not be present at your wedding. I will not interfere with your holding
your marriage here, if you like; you may fill the house with your
friends, if you please. I shall myself take shelter with my more dutiful
daughter. I refuse to meet my unhappy son; I will not be a consenting
party to the tie which will entail a lifelong misery----'

'My dear mother--you will do everything exactly as I have
prophesied.--Now, do not say any more, because it will only make our
reconciliation a little more difficult. I ought to go to Church on the
Sunday before my wedding if any day in the week. If you would only
recover your trust in my lover's honour, I could go to Church with you
and kneel beside you. But without that trust---- Oh! go, my dear mother.
You will find my prophecy come true, word for word--believe me or not.'

Mrs. Arundel went to Church. During the service she felt strange
prickings of foreboding and of compunction and of fear, anxiety, and
hope, with a little sadness, caused by the communication and the
assurances of her daughter. Even in such a case as this, the thinker of
evil is sometimes depressed by the arrival of the prophet of good. When
Mrs. Arundel came away from Church, she became aware that she had not
heard one single word of the sermon. Not that she wanted very much to
hear the sermon, any more than the First or Second Lesson--all three
being parts of the whole which every person of respectability must hear
once a week. Only it was disquieting to come away after half an hour's
discourse with the feeling that she did not remember a single syllable
of it. She took her early dinner with the other daughter, to whom she
communicated Elsie's remarkable conduct, and her prediction and her
invitation. It was decided between them that her brain was affected--no
doubt, only for a time--and that it was not expedient for them to
interfere; that it was deplorable, but a part of what might have been
expected; and that time would show. Meanwhile, Sir Samuel reported that
it had been resolved to get a warrant for the arrest of the man Edmund
Gray, who hitherto had eluded all attempts to find him.

'He appears to be a real person,' the knight concluded--'an elderly man,
whose character, so far as we can learn, is good. It is, however,
significant that nothing has been discovered concerning his profession
or calling. That is mysterious. For my own part, I like to know how a
man earns his daily bread. I have even consulted a person connected with
the Police. Nothing is known or suspected about him. But we shall see as
soon as he is before the magistrate.'

'And Wednesday is so close! Oh! my dear Sir Samuel, hurry them up. Even
at the last moment--even at the risk of a terrible scandal--if Elsie
could be saved!'

'Well,' said Sir Samuel, 'it is curious--I don't understand it--we had
arranged for the application for a warrant for Friday morning. Would you
believe it? That old donkey Checkley won't go for it--wants it put
off--says he thinks it will be of no use. What with this young man
Austin at first, and this old man Checkley next, we seem in a conspiracy
to defeat the ends of justice. But to-morrow I shall go myself to my
brother. It is time this business was finished.'

'Yes--yes,' said Mrs. Arundel. 'And my dear Sir Samuel, before
Wednesday--let it be before Wednesday, I implore you, for all our
sakes!'

'My dear Madam, it shall be to-morrow.'



At noon, Elsie returned to Half Moon Street, where George was waiting
for her.

'I have made one more attempt,' she said, with tears; 'but it was
useless. Her heart is as hard about you as ever it was about Athelstan.
It is wonderful that she should have so little faith. I suppose it comes
of going into the City and trying to make money. Edmund Gray would say
so. I would have told her all, but for the old man's sake. He knows
nothing: he suspects nothing; and I want to make the case so complete
that there shall be no doubt--none whatever--possible in the minds of
the most suspicious. Even Checkley must be satisfied. I shall finish the
work, I hope, this afternoon-- Oh! George--is it possible? Is our
wedding day next Wednesday--actually next Wednesday? And the hateful
cloud shall be blown away, and--and--and----'

For the rest of this chapter look into the book of holy kisses, where
you will very likely find it.




CHAPTER XXXIII

PLENARY CONFESSION


Early on Sunday afternoon Elsie started upon her mission. She was
anxious, because she was entering upon a most important business, and
one requiring the greatest delicacy in the handling. It was enough--more
than enough--that her witnesses should be able, one after the other, to
identify Mr. Dering with Mr. Edmund Gray: but how much more would her
hands be strengthened if she could produce a full and complete narrative
of the whole affair, written by the hand which had done it all? To get
that narrative was her business with the Master that afternoon. But she
was hopeful, partly because she knew her power over the philosopher; and
partly because, like every woman who respects herself, she had always
been accustomed to get exactly what she wanted, either by asking,
coaxing, flattering, or taking.

The Master was waiting for her--one should never keep a Master
waiting--and she was a little late: he was impatient: he had so much to
talk about and to teach: one point suggested another in his mind: so
much to say: he grudged the least delay: he walked about the room
chafing because the hour appointed was already five minutes in the past:
he would scold her: she must really learn to be punctual: they had only
about five short hours before them for all he had to say. Was this the
zeal of a student? But at that point she opened the door and ran in,
breathless, smiling, eager, holding out both her hands, a dainty
delicate maiden all his own--his disciple--his daughter--the daughter of
the New Humanity--and he forgot his irritation, and took her hands in
his and kissed her forehead. 'Child,' he sighed, 'you are late. But
never mind. You are here. Why, you have grown so precious to me that I
cannot bear you to be a minute late. It is such a happiness--such a joy
in the present--such a promise for the future--that I have such a
disciple! Now sit down--take off your bonnet. I have put a chair for you
at the window--and a table for you to write. Here is your
note-book.--Now--you have thought over what I taught you last?--That is
well. Let us resume at the point where we left off--the rise of the
co-operative spirit, which is the rise of the New Humanity.'

He talked for two hours--two long eloquent hours: he walked about the
room: or he stopped before his disciple emphasising with the forefinger
of admonition--repeating--illustrating by anecdote and memory--he had a
prodigious memory. The Scholar listened intelligently. Sometimes she
asked a question: sometimes she made notes. You must not think that she
was a sham scholar; her interest in the Master's system was not
simulated. Above all things, she loved to hear this enthusiast talk--who
would not love to hear of the New Jerusalem? Always he made her heart to
glow with the Vision that he conjured up before her eyes of a world
where there should be no more sorrow nor crying nor any more pain, nor
any of the former things. He made her actually see--what others only
read of--the Four-square City itself with its gates open night and day,
its jasper walls, and its twelve foundations of precious stones.--'Why,'
he said, 'the gates are open night and day because there is no Property
to defend; and the walls are of jasper because it is the most beautiful
of minerals, and because it can be polished like a mirror, so that the
country around is reflected on its surface, which shows that it all
belongs to the City; and the precious stones are the twelve cardinal
virtues of Humanity, on which the order of the future shall
rest--namely, Faith, Brotherly Love, Obedience, Patience, Loyalty,
Constancy, Chastity, Courage, Hope, Simplicity, Tenderness, and
Industry. It is an allegory--the whole book is an allegory--of
Humanity.' And she saw, beside the City, the river of life with the tree
of life for the healing of all nations.

Then she clean forgot the purpose for which she had come: she was
carried away: her heart beat--her cheek glowed. Oh! Lovely Vision! Oh!
Great and glorious Prophet! He made a Heaven, and placed it on this
earth. Now the mind of man can conceive of no other happiness but that
which humanity can make out of the actual materials found upon this
earthly ball. The Heaven, even of the most spiritual, is a glorified
world; the Hell, even of the most gentle, is a world of fleshly pain: no
other Heaven attracts: no other Hell terrifies: there is no promise, or
hope, or prospect, or inheritance that man desires or poet can feign or
visionary can preach but an earthly Heaven: it must be a Heaven
containing sunshine and shower, kindly fruits in due season, love and
joy and music and art, and men and women who love each other and labour
for each other. Such a world--such a New Jerusalem--the Master drew
every day; he loved it, and lingered over it; he painted over and over
again this splendid Vision. He was never tired of painting it, or his
hearers of gazing upon it. But to-day he spoke with greater fulness,
more clearly, more brilliantly, more joyously than ever. Was the Prophet
really a man of seventy years and more? For his mind was young--the
enthusiast, like the poet, never grows old. His voice might have been
the voice of a boy--a marvellous boy--a Shelley--preaching the glories
of the world when Property should be no more.

He ceased. And the Vision which he had raised quickly faded away. They
were back again in the dingy old Inn; they were among the solicitors and
the money-lenders and the young fellows who have their Chambers in the
place. The Inn is about as far from the New Jerusalem as any place under
the sun; it is made over bodily and belongs--every stair--every
chamber--to the interests of Property.

He ceased his prophecy, and began to argue, to reason, to chop logic,
which was not by any means so interesting. At last he stopped this as
well. 'You have now, dear child,' he said, 'heard quite as much as you
can profitably absorb. I have noticed for the last two or three minutes
your eyes wandering and your attention wearied. Let us stop--only
remember what I have just said about the diseases of the Body Politic.
They are akin to those that affect the human body. By comparing the two
we may learn not only cause, but also effect. We have our rheumatisms,
gouts, asthmas, neuralgias, colds and coughs, fevers and other ills. So
has the Body Politic. Whence come our diseases? From the ignorance, the
follies, the vices, the greed and gluttony of our forefathers. So those
of the Body Politic. Take away Property and you destroy greed. With
that, half the diseases vanish.'

Elsie heard and inclined her head. It did occur to her that perhaps
Property in the Body Politic might be represented by food in the Body
Human, but she forbore. The Master was one who did not invite argument.
Nearly all the great Teachers of the world, if you think of it, have
conveyed their wisdom in maxims and aphorisms.

He took out his watch. 'It is nearly four,' he said. 'Shall we go on to
the Hall?'

'Not yet. There is no need for us to be there before six. We have two
good hours before us. Let us use them more pleasantly than in sitting
alone in the Hall--you must own that it is stuffy. We will talk about
other things--about ourselves--not about me, because I am quite an
insignificant person, but about you, dear Master.' She was now about to
enter upon her plan of duplicity. She felt horribly ashamed, but it had
to be done. She strengthened herself: she resolved: she suppressed the
voice of conscience.

'About me?' asked the Master. 'But what is there to talk about?'

'Oh! there is ever so much.' She took his right hand in her own and held
it, knowing that this little caress pleased and moved him. 'Master--what
a wonderful chance it was that brought me here! I can never sufficiently
wonder at it. I have told George--George Austin--my lover, you know: and
Athelstan--he is my brother.' She looked at him sharply, but there was
no sign of recognition of those two names. Edmund Gray had never heard
of either. 'I have told them about you and of your great work, and how
you are teaching me and everything. But when they ask me who you are,
where you have lived, and all about you, I can tell them nothing. Oh! I
know it matters nothing about me and my own friends; but, my dear
Master, we have to think of the future. When the Cause has spread, and
spread, and spread, till it covers the whole world, people will want to
know all about the man who first preached its principles. Who will be
able to tell them? No one. You are alone; you have no wife or children.
Your name will remain for ever attached to the Cause itself. But
you--you--the man--what will you be? Nothing. Nothing but a name. You
ought to write an autobiography.'

'I have sometimes thought I would do so'--his face became troubled;
'but--but----'

'But you are always occupied with working for the world. You have no
time, of course. I quite understand that; and it worries you--does it
not?--to be called upon to turn your thoughts from the present back to
the past.'

'Yes--yes; it does--it does. Elsie, you exactly express the
difficulty.'

'And yet--you must own--you must confess--it is natural for the world to
want to know all about you. Who was the great Edmund Gray? Why, they
will want to know every particular--every single particular: where you
were born--where you were educated--who were your masters--what led you
to the study of Humanity and its problems--where you lived; if you were
married and to whom--what you read--who were your friends. Oh! there is
no end to the curiosity of the world about their great men.'

'Perhaps.' He rose and looked out of the window. When men are greatly
pleased they must always be moving. 'I confess that I have never thought
of these things at all. Yet, to be sure--you are right.' He murmured and
purred.

'No, but I have thought of them, ever since I had the happiness of being
received by you. Master, will you trust me? Shall I become your
biographer? You cannot find one more loving. You have only to give me
the materials. Now--let me ask you a few questions just for a
beginning--just to show you the kind of thing I shall want to know.'

He laughed and sat down again. 'Why, my life has not got in it one
single solitary incident, or episode, or adventure. There are no
misfortunes in it. There is not such a thing as a disease in it. I have
always been perfectly well. There is not even a love episode or a
flirtation in it. There are not even any religious difficulties in it.
Without love, ill-health, misfortune, religious doubts--where is the
interest in the life, and what is there to tell?'

'Well, a life that has no incident in it must be the life of a student.
It is only a student who never falls in love.'

'Or,' said the Philosopher, 'a money-getter.'

'Happily, there are not many students or we women should be disconsolate
indeed. Do you know, Master, that you can only be excused such a
dreadful omission in your history by that one plea? Sit down again,
Master,' for again he was walking about restlessly, partly disturbed by
her questions, and partly flattered and pleased by her reasons. She
opened her note-book and began to ask questions about himself--very
simple questions, such as would not introduce any disturbing points. He
answered readily, and she observed with interest that he gave correctly
the facts of his own--Edward Dering's--history.

He was born, he said, in that class which upholds Property--the Better
Class--meaning the Richer. His father was a wealthy solicitor, who lived
in Bedford Row. He was born in the year 1815--Waterloo year. He was the
eldest of a family of five--three daughters and two sons. He was
educated at Westminster. On leaving school, his father offered him the
advantage of a University course, but he refused, being anxious to begin
as early as possible his life's work--as he thought--in the defence of
Property. He was therefore articled to his father; and at the age of
twenty-two he passed his examination and was admitted.

'And then you were young--you were not yet a student--you went into
society. You saw girls and danced with them. Yet you never fell in love,
and were never married. How strange! I thought everybody wanted love. A
man's real life only begins, I have always been taught, with love and
marriage. Love means everything.'

'To you, my child, no doubt it does. Such as you are born for love,' he
added gallantly. 'Venus herself smiles in your eyes and sits upon your
lips. But as for me I was always studious more or less, though I did not
for long find out my true line. I worked hard--I went out very little. I
was cold by nature, perhaps. I had no time to think about such things.
Now, when it is too late, I regret the loss of the experience. Doubtless
if I had that experience I should have gained greatly in the power of
persuasion. I should have a much more potent influence over the women
among my hearers. If I were a married man I should be much more in
sympathy with them.'

'No--n--no.' Elsie hesitated a little. 'Perhaps women--especially the
younger kind--get on better with unmarried men. However, you were not
married.'

'At first, then, I was a solicitor with my father. Then--presently----'
His face put on the troubled look again.

'You continued,' Elsie interrupted quickly, 'to work at your profession,
though you took up other studies.'

'No--no--not quite that.'

'You began to take up Social problems, and gradually abandoned your
profession.'

'No--no--not that either--quite.'

'You found you could not reconcile your conscience any longer to
defending Property.'

'No--I forget exactly. It is strange that one should forget a thing so
simple. I am growing old, I suppose.--Well--it matters not. I left the
profession. That is the only important thing to remember. That I did so
these Chambers prove. I came out of it. Yes, that was it. Just at the
moment, my head being full of other things, I cannot remember the exact
time, or the manner of my leaving the profession. I forget the
circumstances, probably because I attached so little importance to it.
The real point is that I came out of it and gave myself up to these
studies.'

She noted this important point carefully and looked up for more.

'There, my dear child, is my whole life for you. Without an incident or
an episode. I was born: I went to school: I became a solicitor: I gave
up my profession: I studied social economy: I made my great discovery: I
preached it. Then--did I say my life was without an episode and without
love? No--no--I was wrong. My daughter--I have at last found love and a
child--and a disciple. What more have I to ask?'

'My Master!' No daughter could be more in sympathy with him than this
girl.

'It is all most valuable and interesting,' she said, 'though the facts
are so few. Books will be written, in the future, on these facts, which
will be filled out with conjecture and inference. Even the things that
you think of so little importance will be made the subject of comment
and criticism. Well--but my Biography of you will be the first and best
and most important. I shall first make a skeleton life out of the facts,
and then fill in the flesh and blood and put on the clothes, and present
you, dear Master, just as you are.'

'Ask me what you will, but not too often. It worries me to remember the
past. My dear, I am like a man who has made himself--who has risen from
the gutter. He cannot deny the fact, but he doesn't like to be talking
about it; and he is insulted if anyone charges him with the fact or
alludes to it in any way in his presence. That is my case exactly. I
have made myself. I have raised myself from the gutter--the gutter of
Property. I actually worked in defence of Property till I was sixty
years old and more. Now I am rather ashamed of that fact. I do not deny
it--you must put it into your Biography--but I do not like talking about
it.'

'You were once a solicitor, and you are now a Prophet. What a leap!
What a wonderful leap! I quite understand. Yet sometimes, now and then,
for the sake of the curious impertinent world, look back and tell me
what you see.'

'I suppose it is because I am so absorbed in my work that it is
difficult for me to remember things. Why, Elsie, day after day, from
morning to evening, I sit here at work. And in the evening I remember
nothing of the flight of time. The hours strike, but I hear them not.
Only the books on the table show what has been my occupation. And you
want me to go back, not to yesterday, but ten, twenty, thirty years ago.
My dear child, I cannot. Some of the past is clear to me--a day here and
there I remember clearly--all my evenings at the Hall of Science: my
lessons with you; those I remember. But to recall days passed in
meditation and absorbing study is not possible. No--no--I cannot even
try.'

He spoke with a little distress, as if the very thought of the necessary
effort troubled him.

'Believe me, my dear Master,' said Elsie, 'I would not vex you. Only for
some of the things which you do remember. For instance, the world always
wants to know about the private fortunes of its great men. Your own
affairs, you told me once, are in the hands of a--Mr.--Mr.--what is his
name?'

'Dering--Dering. A very well known solicitor. His office is in New
Square, Lincoln's Inn--he manages my money matters. I am, I believe,
what the world calls wealthy.'

'That gives you independence and the power of working for Humanity, does
it not?'

'It does,' said the Scourge and Destroyer of Property, unconscious of
the incongruity. 'Dering, my solicitor, is, I believe, a very honest
man. Narrow in his views--wedded to the old school--quite unable to see
the advance of the tide. But trustworthy. He belongs to a tribe which is
indispensable so long as Property is suffered to exist.'

'Yes--only so long. Property and lawyers will go out hand in hand.'

'And magistrates,' he added with enthusiasm. 'And Courts of Justice and
prisons. And criminals, because the chief incentive to crime will be
destroyed. What a glorious world without a law, or a lawyer, or a
policeman!'

'Mr. Dering, is it? Why, my dear Master, I know something about Mr.
Dering. My brother Athelstan was articled to him. He became a managing
clerk for him. Then there was trouble about a cheque. Something was
wrong about it. He was unjustly blamed or suspected, and he left the
House. I wonder, now, whether you could throw any light upon that
business of the cheque?'

'I, my dear child? A single solitary cheque at a lawyer's office? How
should I possibly know anything about it?'

'Oh! but you might remember this cheque, because, now I think of it,
your own name was connected with it. Yes--it was. I am certain it was.
The cheque was drawn in March in the year 1882--a cheque for seven
hundred and twenty pounds, payable to your order--the order of Edmund
Gray.'

'A cheque for seven hundred and twenty pounds? In March 1882? That must
have been: yes--yes--that was about the time. Now, this is really most
remarkable, child, most remarkable that you should actually hit upon a
cheque--one of thousands issued from that office--which I should
remember perfectly. Life is full of coincidences--one is always hearing
odd things said, meeting faces which one knows.--Well, it is most
remarkable, because I received a cheque for that very amount at that
very time from Dering. Oh! I remember perfectly. It was when I had a
scheme--I thought it then, being younger than I am now--a very good
scheme indeed. It was intended for the gradual destruction of Property.
I did not understand at that time so fully as I do now the rising of the
tide and the direction of the current which is steadily advancing to
overwhelm Property without any feeble efforts on my part. Yet my scheme
was good so far as it went, and it might have been started with good
effect, but for the apathy of the workers. You see, they were not
educated up to it. I had already begun upon my scheme by advancing to
certain working men sums which should make them independent of their
employers until they should have produced enough to sell directly,
without the aid of an employer, at their own co-operative stores.
Unfortunately, most of them drank the money: the few who used it
properly, instead of backing up their fellow-workmen, became themselves
employers, and are now wealthy. Well, I thought I would extend this
method. I thought that if I got together a chosen band--say, of seventy
or so--and if, after teaching them and educating them a bit, I gave
them, say, ten pounds apiece, to tide them over the first few weeks,
that I might next open a distributive and co-operative store for them,
and so take the first step to abolishing the middle-man--the man of
trade.'

'I see; and so you drew the money for that purpose?'

'Yes. But as I told you, I was obliged to abandon my scheme. The men
were not sufficiently advanced. They listened; they professed great
willingness to receive the money; but they gave me no encouragement to
hope that they would carry out my plan. So it fell through. And the men
remain to this day with their employers. And so--you see--I never used
the money. I remember that I had the cheque cashed in ten-pound notes
for the purpose.'

'What became of the notes?'

'I don't know. They are in the Bank, I suppose--wandering about the
world. I gave them back to Dering.'

'Oh! my dear Master'--Elsie sprang to her feet and laid a sheet of paper
on the table--'this is most Providential! I cannot tell you what a
dreadful cause of trouble this cheque has been to us. It has half ruined
my brother's life. For Heaven's sake, write it all down for me. Quick!
quick! before you forget it all.'

'I shall not forget it. Nevertheless, Elsie, if a statement of the facts
can be of any use to you'--he changed his seat and took up the
pen--'certainly I will write it for you.'

'I am requested,' he wrote, 'by Miss Elsie Arundel, my Scholar, to state
what I know of a certain transaction which took place in March 1882. The
facts are as follows: I had need of a sum of seven hundred and twenty
pounds. For certain purposes I wanted it in ten-pound notes. I asked my
agent, Mr. Dering, to give me a cheque; and as I thought that I should
want the money immediately, perhaps in an hour or so, I asked him to
make it payable to my order, and not to cross the cheque. He drew the
cheque and gave it to me in his office. I then went to the hotel where I
was stopping--a place in Arundel Street, Strand, and sent a
commissionaire to the Bank for the money. He brought it, as I had
requested, in ten-pound notes. In a few days I discovered that my plan
could not be even commenced without the greatest danger of defeating its
own object. I therefore took the notes to Mr. Dering's office and placed
them in his safe. I suppose that he has long since returned them to the
Bank.'

'There, child,' he said, reading this statement aloud. 'That is what I
recollect about this matter.'

'Sign it.' Elsie gave him the pen again. 'Sign it, dear Master.--Oh!
thanks--thanks a thousand times! You don't know--oh! you will never know
or understand--I hope--how precious this document will be for me'--she
folded the paper in an envelope and placed it in her handbag--'and for
my people--my brother and all. Oh! my dear Master.' She stooped and
kissed his hand, to hide the tears in her eyes. Athelstan's name was
safe now whatever happened. He would be completely cleared at last.

'Why, my dear Scholar--my dear daughter.' Mr. Edmund Gray was moved
himself almost to tears at this unexpected burst of feeling. 'As if
there was anything I would not do for you if I could. I, who have never
loved any woman before, love one now. She is my daughter--my
grandchild.--So your brother will be helped by this little
reminiscence--will he? Actually, your brother! I wonder if there is
anything more that I could remember for you in this uneventful life of
mine.'

'Oh no!--that would be too much to hope. Yet there is a chance--just a
chance. I wonder if I may tell you. There is still time before us. If we
are at the Hall by six we shall do very well. It is no more than
half-past four. Shall I tell you the trouble? Oh! But it is a shame. And
you with this great work laid upon you! No--no--I must not.' Oh!
Delilah! oh! Circe! for she looked as if, in spite of her unwilling
words, she wanted to tell it very badly indeed.

'Nay, my dear. You must, and you shall.--What? You are in trouble, and
you will not tell me what it is. You--my Scholar--my clear-eyed
disciple, who can see what these dull creatures of clay around us can
never understand--you are in trouble, and you hesitate to tell me?--Fie!
fie! Speak now. Tell me all.'

'I have told you that I have a lover, and that I am engaged to be
married.'

'Yes--yes. His name, too, you have told me. It is George--George Austin.
There were Austins once--I seem to remember--but that does not matter.'

'We are to be married on Wednesday.'

'So soon? But you have promised that I shall not lose my pupil.'

'No, dear Master. As soon as we come back from our holiday, I will come
and see you again and learn of you. Do not doubt that. I can never again
let you go out of my life. I shall bring my--my husband with me.'

'If I thought your marriage would take you away from me, I should be the
most unhappy of men. But I will spare you for a month--two months--as
long as you please. Now, tell me what is on your mind.'

'George was one of Mr. Dering's managing clerks--your Mr. Dering, you
know.'--Mr. Edmund Gray nodded gravely. 'He had no money when we were
engaged, and we thought that we were going to be quite a poor and humble
pair. But a great piece of good fortune happened to him, for Mr. Dering
made him a Partner.'

'Did he? Very lucky for your friend. But I always thought that Dering
ought to have a Partner. At his age it was only prudent--necessary,
even.'

'So we were made very happy; and I thought we were the luckiest couple
in the world. But just then there was a discovery made at the office--a
very singular discovery--I hardly know how to describe it, because it is
not quite clear to me even yet. It was concerned with the buying or
selling or transfer of certain stocks and shares and coupons and that
kind of thing. Mr. Dering seems not to remember having signed the papers
concerned. There is a fear that they are in wrong hands. There is a
suspicion of forgery even. I am ashamed even to mention such a thing to
you, but my lover's name has been connected with the business; and
Dering's clerk, Checkley--you know Checkley?'--

'Certainly--Dering's old servant.'

'Has openly charged George--on no evidence, to be sure--of having forged
the letters or of having assisted in the forgery.'

'This is very serious.'

'It is very serious; but we do not intend to let the thing interfere
with our wedding. Only, unless I can remove the last ray of suspicion
before Wednesday, we shall spend our honeymoon at home, in order to
watch the case from day to day.'

'Buying or selling stocks? Dering would be constantly doing that.'

'It appears that these transactions were the only things of the kind
that he has done this year. That is to say, he denies having done
these.'

'Well--as for these having been the only transactions of the kind, he
managed a good bit of such business for me this last spring.'

'Did he? Do you remember the details of that business?'

'Clearly. It was only yesterday, so to speak.'

'Was it the purchase or transfer of stock or shares?'

'Certainly. To a very large amount. I have told you about my Industrial
Village, have I not? The Village where all are to be equal--all are to
work for a certain time every day, and no longer--all are to be paid in
rations and clothes and houses, and there is to be no private
property--my Ideal Village.'

'I know. A lovely Village.'

'It was early in the spring that I finished my designs for it. Then it
occurred to me that it would be well if, instead of always going to my
lawyer for money, I had a large sum at my command lying at my Bank. So I
instructed Dering to transfer to my name a great quantity of stocks
lying in his name. He was a trustee or a--well--it is rather unusual,
but I like having all my business affairs managed for me, and---- But
this will not interest you'--this with the look of irritation or
bewilderment which sometimes passed over his face. 'The important thing
is that it was done, and that my Bank received those transfers, and has
instructions to receive the dividends.'

'Oh! And has all the papers, I suppose?'

'It had them. But I thought that perhaps my old friend might think it
looked like want of confidence if I left them there, so I sent for them,
and took them to his office. They are now in the safe. I put them there
myself with my own hand; or he did with his own hand--I forget.
Sometimes--it is very odd--when I think of things done at that office, I
seem to have done it myself; and sometimes I think that he did it. Not
that it matters.'

'Not at all. The papers are actually in the safe again?'

'Certainly. I--that is--he--he or I--put them there.'

'Oh! my dear Master'--Elsie clapped her hands--'this is even more
important than the other. You do not know--you cannot guess--what
mischiefs you are able to stop. If I had only been able to talk to you
about these things before! The paper you have already written is for my
brother. Now sit down, my Master, and write another that will do for
me.'

'I will do anything you ask me--and everything. But as for this, why not
ask Dering? His memory never fails. His mind is like a box which holds
everything and can never be filled. Perhaps he would not like these
private affairs--as between solicitor and client--to be talked about.'

'We cannot go to Mr. Dering. There are certain reasons which would not
interest you. All we want is a clear, straightforward statement, an
exact statement of what happened. Sit down now and write me a full
account of each transaction.'

'Certainly; if it will be of the least use to you.'

'Early in the present year,' he began, 'I found that my plan of an
Industrial Village if it was to be carried into effect would want all
the money I could command. It occurred to me that it would be well to
transfer a certain sum from the hands of my agent, and to place it in my
own Bank ready to hand. I began then, in March, with a sum of six
thousand pounds, which Dering, by my instructions, handed over to my
Bank in the form of shares and stocks. I believe they were transfers of
certain stocks held by him in his own name, but forming part of my
fortune--my large private fortune. The Bank was instructed to receive
the dividends on that sum. A month or so later I obtained from Dering
other stock to the value of twelve thousand pounds, the papers of which
were also given to my Bank. And after that I took out papers
representing twenty thousand pounds; so that I had in my hands, ready to
be sold out and used at a moment's notice, no less than thirty-eight
thousand pounds. All this money I intended to devote to my Industrial
Village. The scheme is still one in which I put my whole confidence. But
it has not yet been carried into effect, in consequence of the
difficulty of finding working men equal to the situation. They
understand working for the man who has the money; they do not understand
working for the man who has none, that is for each other and for
themselves. For my own part I could only find working men of that stamp.
Perhaps I am too much in the study. I do not go about enough among
working men. There must be some advanced to my stage of
development.--Well, for want of men, I could not start my Village, and I
have not used the money. As for the papers, I have taken them out of the
Bank and placed them in Dering's safe.'

Elsie looked over his shoulder, reading every word. 'The letters which
Mr. Dering wrote to the stockbroker in accordance with your
instructions. They were written for him--perhaps--by you. It is unusual,
but----'

'I told you,' he replied sharply. 'What is the use of saying things
twice? There are some things which confuse a man. I wrote them--he wrote
them--he acted for me--or I acted for myself. What matter? The end is as
I have written down for you.--Now, will this paper be of any use to
you?'

'Of the greatest use. Please sign it, dear Master.'

He obeyed, and signed 'Edmund Gray.'

'There is one thing more.' Elsie saw in his face signs of disquiet, and
hastened on. 'You have got your Bank book here?'

'Yes. The Manager sent it here with an impertinent note about
references, which I have sent on to Dering.--What do you want with the
Bank book? It is in one of those drawers. See--here it is--cheque book
too.'

'If I were you, Master, I would have no more trouble about the money.
You have given Mr. Dering the transfers and papers--why not give him
back the money as well? Do not be bothered with money matters. It is of
all things important to you to be free from all kinds of business and
money matters. Who ever heard of a Prophet drawing a cheque? You sit
here and work and meditate. You go to the Hall of Science and teach. It
is the business of your friends to see that all your necessities are
properly supplied.--Now, if you will in these minor matters suffer your
friends to advise----'

'Surely. I ask for nothing else.'

'Then, dear Master, here is your cheque book and here your Bank book.
Draw a cheque payable to the order of Edward Dering for all the money
that is lying here--I see it is seven hundred and twenty-three pounds
five shillings and threepence.--I will take care of the cheque--so.--Oh!
you have signed Edward Dering--careless Master! Draw another--now sign
it Edmund Gray.--That will do.--And you had better at the same time
write a letter to the Bank asking the Manager in future to receive the
dividends for the account of Mr. Dering. I will write the letter, and
you shall sign it. Now--no--no--not Edward Dering--Edmund Gray. Your
thoughts are wandering.--There!--Now, dear Master, you are free from
everything that might trouble you.'

The Master pushed back the blotting-pad with impatience, and rose from
the chair. Elsie took possession of the signed cheques, the cheque book,
the Bank book, and the letter. She had all--the statement in Edmund
Gray's own handwriting-all--all--that was wanted to clear up the
business from the beginning to the end. She put everything together in
her handbag. She glanced at her companion: she perceived that his face
was troubled. 'I wish,' he said fretfully, 'that you had not worried me
with those questions about the past. They disturb me. The current of my
thoughts is checked. I am full of Dering and his office and his
safe--his safe--and all----'

Elsie trembled. His face was changing--in a minute he would have
returned to Mr. Dering, and she would have had to explain. 'Master,' she
cried, laying her hand upon his arm, 'think. We are going to the Hall of
Science--your Hall of Science--yours. The people are waiting for their
Prophet. You are to address them. To-night you must surpass yourself,
because there are strangers coming. Tell us--once again--all over
again--of that world where there is no crime, no suffering, no iniquity,
no sin, no sorrow--where there are no poor creatures deprived by a cruel
social order of liberty, of leisure, of comfort, of virtue, of
everything--poor wretches born only to toil and to endure. Think of
them. Speak for them. Plan for them. Make our hearts burn within us for
shame and rage. Oh, Master'--for his face was troubled still and
doubtful, as if he was hovering on the border-land between himself and
his other self--'no one can speak to them like you; no one has your
power of speech: make them feel that new world--make them see
it--actually see it with their earthly eyes--make them feel it in their
hearts.'

'Child'--he sighed; his face fell back into repose--'you comfort me. I
was falling--before you came to me I often used to fall--into a fit of
gloom--I don't know why. Something irritates me; something jars;
something awakens a feeling as if I ought to remember--remember--what? I
do not know.--I am better now. Your voice, my dear, at such a moment is
to me like the sound of David's harp to Saul. It chases away the
shadows. Oh! I am better already. I am well. If you want to ask any
other questions, do so. As for those transactions--they are perfectly
correct in form and everything. I cannot for the life of me understand
why Dering, who is a practical man----'

'Never mind Dering, my dear Master--or those transactions. Think only of
the world of the New Humanity. Leave the transactions and the papers to
me. I hope that you will never find out why they were wanted, or how
they were to be used.--Now let us start. We shall be in excellent time.'

The Hall of Science was half full of people--the usual gathering--those
who came every Sunday evening and took the simple feast of fraternity.
The table was spread with the white cloth, on which were laid out the
toast and muffins, the ham and shrimps, and bread and butter and
watercress; and on the appearance of the Chief, the tea was brought up,
and they all sat down. Now, it had been observed by all that since the
adhesion of this young lady the Leader's discourses had been much more
confident, his manner had been clearer, his points more forcibly put.
This was because, for the first time, he had had an opportunity of
discussing his own doctrines with a mind able to follow him. Nothing so
valuable to a teacher of new things as a sympathetic woman for listener
and disciple. Witness the leading example of the Prophet Mohammed. Also,
their leader had never before been so cheerful--so hopeful--so full of
life and youth and spring. He was young again: he talked like a young
man, though his hair was gray. This was because he loved a woman, for
the first time in his life: he called it paternal affection: whatever
kind of love it was, it worked in him the same miracle that love always
works in man--young or old--it gave him back the fire of youth.

This evening he sat at the head of the table dispensing his simple
hospitality with a geniality and a heartiness unknown before the arrival
of this young lady. He talked, meantime, in the lofty vein, above the
style and manner common to his hearers, but not above their
comprehension; he spoke of a higher life attainable by man at his best,
when the victory over nature should be complete, and every force should
be subdued and made slave to man, and all diseases should be swept away,
and the Perfect man should stand upon the earth at last, Lord and Master
of all--Adamus Redivivus. When that time should come, there would be no
Property, of course; everything was to be in common; but the new life
would be full of love and joy; there would be long-continued youth, so
that none should be made to rise from the feast unsatisfied; nay, it
seemed to this Dreamer that everyone should continue at the feast as
long as he pleased, till he was satiated and desired a change.
Long-continued youth; all were to be young, and to keep young; the girls
were to be beautiful and the men strong; he pronounced--he--the
hermit--the anchorite--the celibate who knew not love--a eulogy on the
beauty of women: and he mourned over those men who miss their share of
love.

The hearts of those who heard were uplifted, for this man had the
mesmeric faculty of compelling those who heard him to feel what he
wanted them to feel. Most of them had been accustomed to regard their
Leader as a man of benevolent manners but austere principles. Now he was
tender and human, full of sympathy even with those weak vessels who fall
in love, and for the sake of love are content to be all their lives
slaves--yea, even slaves to Property.

After tea, the tables being cleared, the Chief pronounced his weekly
address or sermon. It was generally a discourse on the principles, which
all professed, of equality and the abolition of Property. To-night, he
carried on the theme on which he had spoken at tea-time, and discoursed
on the part which should be played by Love in the New Humanity. Never
before had he spoken so convincingly. Never had orator an audience more
in sympathy with him.

Shortly after the beginning of the address, there arrived two gentlemen,
young and well dressed, who sat down modestly just within the door and
listened. The people turned and looked at them with interest. They were
not quite the kind of young man peculiar to the street or to the
quarter.

When the lecture was over and the audience crowded together to talk
before they separated, Elsie slipped across to the new-comers and led
them to the lecturer. 'Master,' she said, 'this is my brother
Athelstan.'

Mr. Edmund Gray shook hands with him. 'Why, Elsie,' he said, 'your
brother and I have met already in Gray's Inn.'

'And this is my friend George Austin, Partner of Mr. Dering.'

'Mr. Austin,' said Mr. Edmund Gray, 'I am glad to meet the man who is
about to enter into the most sacred of all bonds with one whom I venture
to love, sir, as much as you yourself can do, though I love her as my
daughter, and you love her as your bride. You will be the happiest of
men. Take care, sir, that you deserve your happiness.'

'This day,' said Elsie, 'you have rendered us all such a service as can
never be acknowledged, or repaid, or forgotten. Yet we hope and pray
that somehow you will never understand how great it is.'




CHAPTER XXXIV

LE CONSEIL DE FAMILLE


'Checkley,' said Mr. Dering on Monday morning, 'here is a note from Miss
Elsie Arundel. She makes an appointment with me at four o'clock this
afternoon. Keep me free for that hour. Her brother Athelstan is coming
with her.--What's the matter, man?'

'It's coming, then. I knew it would come,' Checkley groaned. 'It's all
over at last.'

'What is all over?'

'Everything. But don't you believe it. Tell 'em it's a lie made up to
screen themselves. They can't prove it. Nobody can prove it. I'll back
you up. Only don't you believe it. Mind--it is a lie--a made-up lie.'

'I don't know what has been the matter with you for the last day or two,
Checkley. What am I not to believe? What is a lie? Who is making up a
lie which cannot be proved?'

'Oh! I can't say the word--I can't. It's all over at last--at last.' He
ran out of the room and slammed the door behind him.



'My dear mother'--Hilda drove to Pembridge Square directly after
breakfast--'I have had a most curious letter from Elsie. What does it
mean? She orders--she does not invite--she positively orders--Sir
Samuel--actually orders Sir Samuel!--and myself to attend at Mr.
Dering's office at four. We are ordered to assist, she says, at the
demolition of the structure we have so carefully erected.--What
structure? What does she mean? Here is the letter.'

'I too, dear, have had a letter from her. She says that at four o'clock
this afternoon all the wrongful and injurious suspicions will be cleared
away, and that if I value the affection of my son and herself--the
affection of herself--I must be present.--Hilda, what does this mean? I
am very much troubled about the letter. On Saturday, she came here and
informed me that the wedding would be held on Wednesday just as if
nothing had happened; and she foretold that we should all be present,
and that Athelstan would give her away--Athelstan. It is a very
disquieting letter, because, my dear, do you think we could all of
us--could we possibly be wrong, have been wrong from the very
beginning--in Athelstan's case? Could Sir Samuel be wrong in George's
case?'

'My dear mother, it is impossible. The case, unhappily, is too clear to
admit of any doubt. Sir Samuel, with his long experience, could not be
wrong.'

'Then, Hilda dear, what can Elsie mean?'

'We have been talking about it all through breakfast. The only
conclusion we can come to is, that there is going to be a smothering up
of the whole business. Mr. Dering, who has been terribly put out with
the case, must have consented to smother up the matter. We think that
the papers have been returned with the money received on dividends and
coupons; and that Mr. Dering has agreed to take no further proceedings.
Now, if he would do that, Athelstan of course would come under a kind of
Act of Indemnity; and as the notes were never used by him, but were
returned to their owner, it becomes as easy to recognise his innocence
as that of the other man.--Do you see?'

'Yes. But that will not make them innocent.'

'Certainly not. But it makes all the difference in the world. Oh! there
are families everywhere who have had to smother up things in order to
escape a scandal. Well, I hope you will agree with us, and accept the
invitation.'

'I suppose I must.--But how about removing all the suspicions?'

'Oh! that is only Elsie's enthusiastic way. She will go on, if she
likes, believing that George had nothing to do with it. He will have
every inducement to live honestly for the future. We can easily pretend
to believe that Athelstan was always innocent, and we can persuade
him--at least I hope we can persuade him--to go abroad. Sir Samuel
kindly says that he will advance a hundred pounds in order to get rid of
him. Then there will be no scandal, and everybody will be satisfied. As
for our relations with Elsie and her husband, we can arrange them
afterwards. Perhaps they will agree to live in a distant suburb--say
Redhill, or Chislehurst, or Walthamstow--so that there may be a good
excuse for never having them to the house. Because--smothering or no
smothering--I can no longer have the same feelings towards Elsie as
before. Her obstinate infatuation for that man exasperates me only to
think of it. Nor have I the least intention of being on intimate
relations with a forger who has only just escaped being a convict. Sir
Samuel entirely agrees with me.'

The mother sighed. 'I could have wished that we were mistaken. Perhaps,
after all, there may be something that Elsie has found out, some
unexpected----'

'Say a miracle at once, my dear mother. It is just as likely to happen.'



The first to arrive at the office in the afternoon was Elsie herself,
carrying a handbag.

'You were going to bring your brother, Elsie,' said Mr. Dering. 'Where
is he? And what is your important business with me? I suppose it is
something about this wretched forgery, which really seems destined to
finish me off. I have heard of nothing else--I think of nothing
else--ever since it happened.'

'First, has anything new been discovered?'

'I hardly know,' Mr. Dering replied wearily. 'They seem to have found
the man Edmund Gray; but Checkley has suddenly cooled. Formerly, he
clamoured perpetually that we must lose no time in getting a warrant for
his arrest; he now wants to put it off and put it off. He was going on
very strangely this morning. My dear, I sometimes think that my old
clerk is off his head.'

'And you yourself--have you had any return of your forgetfulness?'

'Worse--worse.--Every day, worse. I now know when to look for a return
of these fits. Every morning I ask myself what I did the day before.
Always there are the same hours of forgetfulness--the morning and the
evening. Last night, where was I? Perhaps somebody will find out for
me--for I cannot remember.'

'Shall I find out for you, Mr. Dering? If I were to tell you where you
spent the evening yesterday, would you--would you?----'

'What? How can you find out?'

Elsie bent her head. The moment had almost arrived, and she was afraid.
She had come with the intention of clearing her brother and her lover at
the cost of letting her guardian know that he was insane. A dreadful
price to pay for their honour. But it had to be paid. And it must be
done in the sight of all, so that there should be no possible margin
left for malignity or suspicion.

'This business,' she said, 'concerns the honour of the two men who are
dearer to me than all the world beside. Remember that--nothing short of
that would make me do what I have been doing--what I am now doing. Their
honour--oh! their honour. Think what it means to them. Self-respect,
dignity, everything: the happiness of their homes: the pride of their
children. Compared with one man's honour, what matters another man's
humiliation? What matters the loss of that man's self-respect? What
matters his loss of dignity? Their honour, Mr. Dering, think of
that--their honour!'

He bowed his head gravely, wondering what was to follow.

'A man's honour, as you say, Elsie, is the greatest thing in the world
to him. Compared with that, another man's self-respect need not, I
should say, as a general principle, be considered at all. Self-respect
may be regained unless honour is lost.'

'Remember that, then, Mr. Dering, when you hear what I have to say.
Promise me to remember that. Oh! if there were a thousand reasons,
formerly, why I would not pain you by a single word, there are ten
thousand now--although you understand them not.'

'Why, Elsie, you are troubling your little head about trifles. You will
not offend me whatever you say.'

'It is so important a thing,' she went on, 'that I have asked my mother
and sister and Sir Samuel to meet us here at four o'clock, in order that
they, too, may hear as well as you. Athelstan is with George. They have
one or two persons to introduce to you.'

'All this seems to promise a meeting of some interest, and so far as one
may judge from the preamble, of more than common importance. Well,
Elsie, I am quite in your hands. If you and your brother between you
will kindly produce the forger and give me back my property, I shall be
truly grateful.'

'You shall see, Mr. Dering. But as for the gratitude----Oh! here is Sir
Samuel.'

The City knight appeared, large and important. He shook hands with Elsie
and his brother, and took up his position on the hearth-rug, behind his
brother's chair. 'Well, Elsie,' he said, 'we are to hear something very
important indeed, if one may judge by the tone of your letter, which was
imperative.'

'Very important indeed, Sir Samuel.'

The next to arrive were Mrs. Arundel and Hilda. They wore thick veils,
and Hilda was dressed in a kind of half-mourning. They took chairs at
the open window, between the historic safe and the equally historic
small table. Lastly, George and Athelstan walked in. They received no
greetings.

Mr. Dering rose. 'Athelstan,' he said, 'it is eight years since you left
us.' He held out his hand.

'Presently, Mr. Dering,' said Athelstan. He looked round the room. His
mother trembled, dropped her head, and put her handkerchief to her eyes,
but said nothing. His sister looked out of window. Sir Samuel took no
notice of him at all. Athelstan took a chair--the clients' chair--and
placed it so as to have his mother and sister at the side. He was not
therefore compelled to look at them across the table. He sat down, and
remained in silence and motionless.

The Court was now complete. Mr. Dering sat in his chair before his
table, expectant, judicial. Sir Samuel stood behind him. Mrs. Arundel
and Hilda, the two ladies, sat at the open window. Elsie stood opposite
to Mr. Dering, on the other side of the table, her handbag before her.
She looked like Counsel about to open the case for plaintiff.
Athelstan--or plaintiff--naturally occupied the clients' chair on Mr.
Dering's left; and George, as naturally--the other plaintiff--stood
behind him.

'Now, Elsie, if you please,' Mr. Dering began.

'I shall want your clerk, Checkley, to be present, if you please.'

Mr. Dering touched his bell. The clerk appeared. He stood before them
like a criminal, pale and trembling. He looked at his master
appealingly. His hands hung beside him. Yet not a word of accusation had
been brought against him.

'Lord! Man alive!' cried Sir Samuel, 'what on earth has come over you?'

Checkley shook his head sadly, but made no reply.

'I want to ask you a question or two, Checkley,' said Elsie, quietly.
'You have told Mr. Dering--you have told Sir Samuel--that you saw my
brother furtively put a parcel--presumably the stolen notes--into the
safe at the very moment when you were charging him with forgery. Now,
consider. That was a very serious thing to say. It was a direct
statement of fact. Before, the charge rested on suspicion alone; but
this is fact. Consider carefully. You may have been mistaken. Any of us
may make a mistake.'

'It was true--Gospel truth--I see him place a parcel--along sideways--in
the safe. The parcel we found afterwards in the safe containing all the
notes.' The words were confident; but the manner was halting.

'Very well. Next, you told Sir Samuel that my brother had been living in
some low suburb of London with profligate companions, and that he had
been even going about in rags and tatters.'

'Yes, I did. I told Sir Samuel what I heard. Mr. Carstone told me. You'd
better ask him. I only told what I heard.'

George went out, and returned, bringing with him Mr. Freddy Carstone. He
looked round the room and stared with surprise at Mr. Dering, but said
nothing. He had been warned to say nothing, except in answer to
questions.

'Now, Mr. Carstone,' Elsie asked him, 'how long is it since you met my
brother after his return to England?'

'About three weeks ago I met him. It was in Holborn. I invited him into
the _Salutation_ Tavern.'

'Did you tell Mr. Checkley here anything about his way of living?'

'I remember saying, foolishly, that he looked too respectable to have
come from America; and I said in joke that I believed he had been in
Camberwell all the time.'

'Nothing about profligacy?'

'Nothing at all.'

'Nothing about rags and tatters?'

'Certainly not. In fact, I knew nothing at all about Athelstan's life
during the eight years that he has been away.'

'Have you anything to say, Checkley? You still stick to the parcel
story, do you? Very well, and to the Camberwell and profligacy story?'

Checkley made no answer.

'Now, then. There is another question. You made a great point about
certain imitations of Mr. Dering's writing found in a drawer of
Athelstan's table?'

'Well, they were there, in your brother's hand.'

'George, you have something to say on this point.'

'Only this. I was not long articled at that time. The table was taken
from the room in which I sat, and placed here for some special work.
Now, the imitations of Mr. Dering's handwriting were made by myself and
another clerk in joke. I remember them perfectly. They were written at
the back of a letter addressed to me.'

Mr. Dering went to the safe and produced the bundle containing all the
papers in the case. He unrolled the bundle and placed the contents on
the table.

Everybody was now serious. Lady Dering looked out of the window no
longer. Mrs. Arundel had drawn her chair to the table.

Elsie picked out the paper containing the imitations. 'Tell me,' she
said, 'if you remember--mind--everybody--this bundle of papers has never
been shown to George--tell me the name of your correspondent?'

'It was Leonard Henryson.'

She gave the paper to Mr. Dering. 'You see,' she said.

The lawyer gave it to his brother, who passed it on to his wife, who
gave it to her mother. Mrs. Arundel laid it on the table and raised her
veil.

'The next point,' said Elsie, 'is about Athelstan's whereabouts during
the last eight years. One letter was received by you, Mr. Dering, four
years ago. You have already shown it to me. Will you let me read this
letter aloud for all to hear?' It was in the bundle with the stopped
notes. He bowed assent--and she read it.

'Twelve thousand pounds!' cried Sir Samuel--'twelve thousand pounds! All
he had! Good Heavens?'

'All he had in the world,' said Elsie. 'And all for a child who refused
to believe that her brother could be a villain! All he had in the
world?' Her eyes filled with tears--but she dashed them aside and went
on.

'He was in the States four years ago. That, I suppose, will no longer be
denied. The next question is--when did he return to this country?'

George left the room again, and returned with a young gentleman.

'This gentleman,' Elsie continued, 'comes from Messrs. Chenery & Sons,
bankers, of New York and London. He has brought a letter with him. Will
you kindly let me see it, sir?--It is,' she explained, 'a letter of
credit brought over by my brother from California. You see the
date--June 20th of this year.'

Mr. Dering read it, and gave it to his brother, who gave it to his wife,
as before.

'It says that Mr. Athelstan Arundel, one of the staff of a certain
Californian paper, will leave New York on June the 21st by the
_Shannon_, and that he is authorised to draw on Messrs. Chenery & Sons
for so much.--Thank you.' The young gentleman retired.

'Now, Mr. Dering, are you satisfied that Athelstan was in America four
years ago--that he left America two months ago, and that he was then on
the staff of a Californian paper?'

'There seems no reason to doubt these facts.--But'--he put his
forefinger on the cheque payable to the order of Edmund Gray--'are we
any nearer to the forger of this cheque?'

'I am coming to that presently. I am going to show you all, so that
there shall be no doubt whatever, who is the forger--the one hand--in
the business. Wait a little.'

Strangely enough, every eye fell upon Checkley, who now trembled and
shook with every sign of terror.

'Sit down, Checkley,' said his master.--'Elsie, do we want this
gentleman any longer? His name I have not the pleasure of knowing.'

'Oh! come,' said Mr. Carstone, who was nearest. 'You know my name,
surely.'

George warned him with a look, and he subsided into silence.

'I think I shall want you, Mr. Carstone,' Elsie replied, 'if you will
kindly take a chair and wait.--Now, Sir Samuel, I think I am right in
saying that your belief in the guilt of George rested entirely on the
supposed complicity of Athelstan. That gone, what becomes of your
charge? Also, there is no doubt, I believe, that one hand, and one hand
alone, has committed the whole long list of letters and forgeries. If,
therefore, Athelstan could not execute the second business, how could he
do the first? But I have more than arguments for you.'

Sir Samuel coughed. Mrs. Arundel sighed.

'As regards the charge against George, apart from his supposed intimacy
with an imaginary criminal, the only suspicious thing is that he may
have had access to the open safe. Well, Checkley also may have had
access.--Don't be afraid, Checkley--we are not going to charge you with
the thing at all. You are not the forger. In fact, there was a third
person who had access to the safe.'

She opened her handbag and took out a packet of papers.

Then she sat down, with these in her hand, and leaning over the table,
she looked straight and full into Mr. Dering's eyes, and began to talk
slowly in a low and murmuring voice. And now, indeed, everybody
understood that something very serious indeed was going to be said and
done. At the last moment a way had occurred to Elsie. She would let them
all see for themselves what had happened, and she would spare her
guardian the bitter shame and pain of being exposed in the presence of
all this company.

'Mr. Dering,' she began, 'you have strangely forgotten that you know Mr.
Edmund Gray. How could you come to forget that? Why, it is ten years at
least since you made his acquaintance. He knows you very well. He does
not pretend to have forgotten you. You are his solicitor. You have the
management of his property--his large private fortune--in your hands.
You are his most intimate friend. It is not well to forget old friends,
is it? You must not say that you forget Edmund Gray.'

Mr. Dering changed colour. His eyes expressed bewilderment. He made no
reply.

'You know that Edmund Gray leaves this room every evening on his way to
Gray's Inn: you remember that. And that he comes here every morning, but
not till eleven or twelve--two hours after the time that you yourself
used to come. His head is always so full of his thoughts and his
teaching, that he forgets the time between twelve and four, just as you
forget the evening and the morning. You are both so much absorbed that
you cannot remember each other.'

Mr. Dering sat upright, the tips of his fingers touching. He listened at
first gravely--though anxiously. Presently a remarkable change passed
over his face; he became full of anxiety. He listened as if he was
trying to remember; as if he was trying to understand.

'Edmund Gray,' he said, speaking slowly. 'Yes, I remember my client
Edmund Gray. I have a letter to write for him. What is it? Excuse me a
moment; I must write that note for him.' He took pen and paper and
hastily wrote a note, which Elsie took from him, read, and gave to Sir
Samuel.

'You want to tell the banker that Mr. Edmund Gray has returned you the
transfers.--Yes.--Thank you. I thought you could not forget that client,
of all others.'

He leaned back smiling--his expression no longer anxious, but pleased
and happy. The change transformed him. He was not Mr. Dering, but
another.

'Go on, child.'

'The rooms of Gray's Inn are quiet all day long. It is a peaceful place
for study, is it not? You sit there, your books before you, the world
forgotten.'

'Quite forgotten,' said Mr. Dering.

'No--no,' cried Checkley, springing to his feet. 'I won't have it done.
I----'

'Sit down.' George pushed him back into his chair. 'Another word, and
you leave the room.'

'It is a peaceful day,' Elsie continued, 'that you pass--for the most
part alone--you with your books. Sometimes you come here to call upon
your old friend and solicitor, Mr. Dering.'

'Sometimes,' he replied. 'We are very old friends. Though his views are
narrow.--Where is he?' He looked about the room. 'You are all waiting to
see him? He will be here directly. He is always here about this time.'

'Yes, directly. You remember what I said to you on Sunday concerning
certain transactions? I told you how important it was to have the exact
truth about them.'

'Certainly. I remember. I wrote an account of them for you.'

'You did. Are these papers what you wrote?'

He looked at them for a moment. 'These are my papers,' he said. 'They
are what I wrote at your request. They contain a perfectly true account
of what happened.'

'Now, before I go on, you will not mind--these people here do not know
Mr. Edmund Gray--you will not mind my asking a few persons to testify
that you are really Mr. Edmund Gray?'

'My dear child, ask all the world if you wish; though I do not
understand why my identity should be doubted.'

'Not quite all the world.--Mr. Carstone, will you tell us the name of
this gentleman?'

'He is Mr. Edmund Gray, my neighbour at No. 22 South Square, Gray's
Inn.'

Mr. Edmund Gray inclined his head and smiled.

George went outside and returned, followed by a small company, who, in
answer to Elsie, stepped forward one after the other and made answer.

Said one: 'I am the landlord of the rooms at 22 South Square tenanted by
Mr. Edmund Gray. He has held the rooms for ten years. This gentleman is
Mr. Edmund Gray, my tenant.'

Said another: 'I am a barrister, and the tenant of the rooms above those
held by Mr. Edmund Gray. I have known him--more or less--for ten years.
This gentleman is Mr. Edmund Gray.'

Said a third: 'I am a commissionaire. I remember this gentleman very
well, though it is eight years since he employed me, and only for one
job then. I went from an hotel in Arundel Street, Strand, to a bank with
a cheque which I was to cash for him in ten-pound notes. He gave me half
a sovereign.'

'Quite so,' said Mr. Edmund Gray. 'I remember you, too. It was a cheque
for seven hundred and twenty pounds, the particulars of which you have
in my statement, Elsie. I well remember this one-armed commissionaire.'

And a fourth: 'I am the laundress who does for Mr. Edmund Gray. I have
done for him for ten years. This gentleman is Mr. Edmund Gray.'

And a fifth: 'I am a news-agent, and I have a shop at the entrance of
Gray's Inn. This gentleman is Mr. Edmund Gray, of 22 South Square. I
have known him in the Inn for ten years.'

To each in turn Mr. Dering nodded with a kindly smile.

'Athelstan,' said Elsie, 'will you tell us when and where you have met
Mr. Edmund Gray?'

'I met him last week in Carstone's rooms on the same landing. He sat
with us for an hour or more.'

'It is quite true,' said Mr. Dering. 'I have had the pleasure of meeting
Mr. Arundel on that occasion.'

'I also saw him,' Athelstan continued, 'at a small Lecture Hall at
Kentish Town on Sunday evening--yesterday.'

'To complete the evidence,' said Elsie, 'I have myself spent many hours
almost daily with Mr. Edmund Gray during the last fortnight or so.--Is
not that true, dear Master?'

'Quite true, my Scholar.'

'Brother--brother'--Sir Samuel touched his arm--'I implore you--rouse
yourself. Shake off this fancy.'

'Let him alone, Sir Samuel,' said George--'let him alone. We have not
done with him yet.'

'Yes,' cried Mrs. Arundel, who had now left her seat and was leaning
over the table, following what was said with breathless interest--'let
us finish out this comedy or tragedy--as the case may be. Let no one
interrupt.'

'I have also met you, sir'--Mr. Dering addressed Checkley, who only
groaned and shook. 'It was outside a tavern. You took me in and offered
me a drink.'

Checkley shook his head, either in sadness or in denial--but replied
not, and at the thought of offering Mr. Dering a drink, everybody
laughed, which was a relief.

'Dear Master,' Elsie went on in her soft voice, 'I am so glad that you
remember all these things. It makes one's task so much easier. Why, your
memory is as strong as ever, in spite of all your work.--Now, I am going
to read the two statements you wrote down yesterday afternoon. Then you
may recall anything else you might like to add. Remember, that as
regards this first affair, the cheque for seven hundred and twenty
pounds, my brother was charged, on suspicion only, with having forged
it. Now listen.' She read the brief statement which you have already
seen concerning the business of the first cheque. 'That is your history
of the affair.'

'Quite so. Dering drew the cheque at my request. I cashed it. I found
that I had no need of the notes, and I returned them. That is very
simple.'

'It is all so simple that nobody ever guessed it before.--Now we come to
the transfers made in the spring of the present year. You wrote a second
statement regarding them. I will read that as well. Please listen very
carefully.'

She read the other statement, which you have also seen already. She read
it very slowly, so that there should be no mistake possible. During the
reading of these documents Sir Samuel's face expressed every possible
shade of surprise. Mrs. Arundel, leaning over the table, followed every
line. Hilda wept--her head gracefully inclined over her
pocket-handkerchief, as if it was an urn.

'This is your account of the business?'

'Certainly. There is nothing more to be added. It is a plain statement
of the facts. I do not understand how they could be in any way doubted
or misrepresented.'

'Would you, Sir Samuel, like to ask Mr. Edmund Gray any question?'

'I don't understand. He says that Mr. Dering wrote a letter for him.'

Elsie showed him the letter they had seen Mr. Dering write, which he was
passing from one to the other.

'Where are the transfers?' Sir Samuel went on. 'He says they were placed
by himself in the safe.'

Mr. Edmund Gray rose and walked to the safe. He laid his hands upon a
packet and took it out. 'These are the papers,' he said.

Sir Samuel opened the roll and looked them over. 'They seem all right,'
he said. 'This is very wonderful.'

'Wonderful--and sad--most lamentable,' whispered Lady Dering.

'Wonderful, indeed!' Mrs. Arundel echoed. 'Most wonderful! most
unexpected!'

'A moment more, and I have done.' Elsie again took up the tale. 'Here is
a cheque to the order of Mr. Dering signed by Mr. Edmund Gray for the
whole of the money lying in his name at the Bank.--You agree, Master,
that it is best for the future that all your affairs should be in the
hands of your solicitor?'

'I quite agree.'

'Here is a letter to the manager of the Bank, requesting him to pay over
Edmund Gray's dividends to the account of Mr. Dering.--And now I think I
have proved my case. Here in the safe were the ten-pound notes received
by Mr. Edmund Gray, and placed there by him. Here were the transfers and
certificates placed there by him: you have heard half-a-dozen people
testify to the fact that you have Edmund Gray before you. His statement
of the business has been read to you. It shows, what no other theory of
the case could show, how the thing was really done. Lastly, it shows the
absolute and complete innocence of my brother and of George.--Have you
anything more to say, Sir Samuel?'

'Nothing--except that I was misled by a statement concerning a
profligate life among low companions, without which no suspicion could
have fallen upon either of you gentlemen. It was'--he pointed to the
unhappy Checkley-'a vile and malignant falsehood. Do you hear, sir? Vile
and malignant. It only remains for us all to make such reparation as we
may--nothing would suffice, I know, but such reparation as we can--by
the expression of the shame and regret that we all feel.'

'Athelstan,' said his mother, 'what can I say? Oh! what can I say?'

Athelstan rose--during the long business he had sat motionless in the
clients' chair, his head in his hand. Now he rose and stepped over to
his mother. 'Hush!' he said. 'Not a word. It is all forgotten--all
forgiven.'

But Hilda sank upon her knees and caught his hands.

'George,' said Sir Samuel, 'forgive me. The case looked black against
you at one time. It did indeed. Forgive me.' He held out his hand.

Then there was great hand-shaking, embracing, and many tears. As for
Checkley, he crept out and vanished in the retreat of his own room. 'It
is all over,' he murmured--'all over. I've lost four hundred pounds a
year. That's gone. All over--all over!'

Mr. Edmund Gray looked on this happy scene of family reconciliation with
benevolence and smiles.

Family reconciliations must not be prolonged; you cannot sit over a
family reconciliation as over a bottle of port. It must be quickly
despatched. Sir Samuel whispered to Hilda that they had better go.

'Come,' said Lady Dering. 'We will all meet again this evening at
Pembridge Square--and to-morrow evening--and on Wednesday
afternoon.--Elsie, you are a witch and a sorceress and a wise woman. You
said that Athelstan should give you away, and he will.--Brother, come
with us. Leave Elsie to George.--Oh! how handsome you are looking, my
poor ill-used brother. Try to forgive us if you can.'

She turned to Mr. Edmund Gray. 'Sir,' she said, 'we ought to be very
grateful to you--indeed, we are--for enabling us to clear away the
odious cloud of suspicion which had rolled over our heads. It was very
good of you to draw out those statements for my sister. But I do think
that if Mr. Dering had told his old friends about you--about Mr. Edmund
Gray--we should have been spared a great deal of trouble and unnecessary
shame.--Good-day, sir.'

Sir Samuel lingered a moment. He looked as if he would appeal to Mr.
Edmund Gray as to a brother. 'Don't speak to him,' Elsie whispered. 'Let
him alone. He will become himself again presently. Let him alone.'

So he went out, and the door was shut, and Edmund Gray was left alone
with George and the Scholar.

'My Master'--Elsie sat down beside him--'I fear you have been
interrupted. But indeed it was necessary. Don't ask why. Things get into
a muddle sometimes, don't they? You have gathered something of the
trouble, too. Now that is all over--past and gone.'

'I am glad for your sake, child.'

'Master--dear Master--I have a confession to make. When I found out who
you were--I mean what manner of man you were--my only thought at first
was to coax you and wheedle you and flatter you till you gave me exactly
the information that I wanted. I confess it. That was my only purpose.
Nay--more--for the sake of my lover and my brother I would do it again.
Well--I found that the only way to win your confidence was to pretend to
be your Scholar and to believe all you taught. So I pretended. So I won
your confidence. So I obtained all I wanted. So I have made it
impossible for even the most malignant creature in the world to pretend
that these two men had anything to do with what they called a forgery.
But--believe me, dear Master--while I pretended, I was punished, because
my pretence is turned to certainty.'

'Child, I knew it. You could not pretend--no woman could pretend so as
to deceive me on a point so simple.'

'Dear Master, you do not know the possibilities of feminine craft. But I
pretend no more. Oh! I care not how you make your attempt, whether you
destroy Property or not. Mr. Dering says that Property is
Civilisation--but I don't care. To me it is enough to dream--to
know--that there is an Earthly Paradise possible, if only men will
think so and will keep it before their eyes, though it be as far off as
the blue hills. It is beautiful only to think of it; the soul is lifted
up only to think that there is such a place. Keep the eyes of your
people on this glorious place, dear Master: make it impossible for
them to forget it or to let it go out of their sight. Then,
half-unconsciously, they will be running, dragging each other, forcing
each other--exhorting each other to hurry along the dusty road which
leads to that Earthly Paradise with its Four-square City of the Jasper
wall. Preach about it, Master. Write about it. Make all men talk about
it and think about it.'

She threw her arms round his neck and kissed him.

'Master, we shall be away for a month or two. Then we shall come back,
and I shall sit at your feet again. You shall come and stay with us. We
will give you love, and you shall give us hope. I have made my
confession. Forgive me.'

They left him sitting alone. Presently he arose, put all the papers back
in the safe, and walked slowly away--to Gray's Inn.

Next morning when he opened his letters he found one marked 'Private.'
It was from Sir Samuel.

     'DEAR EDWARD,' it said--'We are all very glad to tell you
     that the business of the shares and certificates is now
     completely cleared up. Checkley is not in any way concerned
     in it--nor is George Austin. And I am happy to say there is
     a complete solution of the former mystery which entirely
     clears Hilda's brother. Under these circumstances, we are
     agreed that it is best for you not to trouble yourself about
     any further investigations. You will find in the safe the
     transfers, a cheque to yourself of all the money received by
     Edmund Gray, and an order in the Bank concerning the
     dividends. You have been the victim of a very remarkable
     hallucination. I need not explain further. Mr. Edmund Gray,
     however, is undoubtedly insane. I hear, and have myself
     observed, that you have been greatly disturbed and
     distressed by these mysterious events. Now that they are
     settled finally--I may say that only a happy chance set us
     on the right track--we all hope that you will be satisfied
     with our assurance, and that you will not trouble yourself
     any more in the matter.--Your affectionate brother,

  'SAMUEL DERING.'

Mr. Dering, after reading this letter, got up and looked in the safe,
where he found the papers referred to. He rang the bell. 'Checkley, who
has been at my safe?'

'Nobody but you.'

'Don't tell lies. Who put those papers in the safe?'

'They must have been put there yesterday--you were in the room.'

'Yesterday--what happened yesterday?'

Checkley was silent.

'Who was here yesterday?--Go on, Checkley. Don't be afraid.'

'Sir Samuel was here--and Lady Dering--and Mrs. Arundel--and Miss
Elsie--and your Partner--and Mr. Athelstan. Two or three more came in
and went away.'

'That will do. You need tell me no more. I don't want to know the
particulars.--Checkley, my day's work is done. I have thought so for
some time past. Now I am certain, I shall retire.'

'No--no,' cried Checkley, the tears running down his face. 'Not to
retire--after all these years--not to retire.'

'I know now the meaning of my fits of forgetfulness. I have feared and
suspected it for a long time. While I am lost to myself, I am going
about the world, doing I know not what. And I will not ask. I may be
this Edmund Gray who preaches Socialism and gives me his precious
tracts. I may be some one else. I say, Checkley, that I know now what
has happened to me. Deny it if you can--if you can, I say.'

Checkley did not offer any denial. He hung his head. 'This is the
meaning of Elsie's strange hints and queer protestations. Half my time I
am a madman--a madman.--Checkley, ask Mr. Austin to come to me at once.
My day is done.' He closed his open blotting-pad and placed the unopened
letters beside it. Then he rose and pushed back his chair--the chair in
which he had sat for fifty years and more. 'My day is done--my day is
done.'




CHAPTER XXXV

THE LAST


Mr. Dering left his office, went back to Gray's Inn, and sat down again
before the Ivory Gate. Those who have once sat for an hour or two in
this place return to it again and again and never leave it. It is, to
begin with, the most beautiful gate ever erected. The brain and wit and
fancy of man could never conceive such a gate, could never execute such
a conception. It is all of pure ivory, carved with flowers such as never
grew; curving and flowing lines leading nowhere; figures of maidens
lovely beyond all dreams; philosophers whose wisdom reaches unto the
Heavens; statesmen who discern the gathering forces and control the
destinies of a nation; inventors who conquer nature; physicians who
prolong life; ecclesiastics who convert the Carthusian cell into a bower
of delight; poets who here find their fantasies divine; men and women in
a work-a-day dress who wear the faces of the heavenly host.

All the dreamers lie here, not asleep, but dreaming. Their eyes are
open, but they do not see each other; they see these dreams. Those of
the young who are also generous come here and dream until they grow
older and are chained to their work and can dream no more. Men of all
conditions come here--even the little shop-boy--even the maiden who
cleans the knives and polishes the boots--all are here. The young Prince
is here: the little charity boy is here: the lad whose loftiest ambition
is that he may one day stand in the pulpit of the little Baptist village
chapel is here: here is the undergraduate who was Captain of Eton and
will be Senior Classic and Member of Parliament and Minister--even Prime
Minister--and will belong to History. The poet is here, and the painter,
and sometimes hither comes the novelist, and, but more rarely, the
dramatist. Hither comes the musician to lift up his soul with thoughts
that only music can give; and the singer, so that he sings more than is
apparent from the words; and the actor, so that he puts things into the
play never dreamed by him who wrote it. Great is the power, great the
gifts, of this noble Gate of Ivory.

Sitting before that gate, such a dreamer as Edmund Gray receives strange
visions. He sees clearly and near at hand the things which might be, yet
are not, and never can be until man lays down his garb of selfishness
and puts on the white robes of Charity. To that dreamer the Kingdom of
Heaven, which seems to some so far off and to others impossible, so that
they deride the name of it, is actually close at hand--with us--easy to
enter if we only choose. He exhorts his fellows to enter with him. And
they would follow, but they cannot because they are held back by custom
and necessity. They must obey the laws of the multitude, and so they
stay where they are. And when the dreamer passes away, his memory is
quickly lost, and the brightness quickly leaves those dimly-lighted
lives. Yet other dreamers come--every day there arises an Edmund Gray.

Now when Edmund Gray takes the place of Edward Dering, in which guise
does the soul, in the end, leave the earth? Are the dreams of Edmund
Gray perhaps the logical development of the doctrines held by Edward
Dering? Is the present stage of Individual Property--where every man
works for himself and his household--one through which the world must
pass before it can reach the higher level of working each for all? First
men and women hunt, separate: they live apart in hollow trees and caves.
Then they live together, and the man hunts for his wife and children.
Next, they live in communities, which grow into towns and tribes and
nations. Then men rely upon the protection of the law, and work for
themselves again. That is our present stage: it has lasted long--very
long. Perhaps it will break up some day: perhaps sooner than we think.
Who knows? All things are possible--even the crash and wreck of a
civilisation which has taken thousands of years to build up. And upon it
may come--one knows not--that other stage which now belongs to the
dreamer before the Ivory Gate.



The wedding was held then, as Elsie said it should be, shorn of none of
its splendours, and relieved of the cloud which had hung over them so
long and threatened them so gloomily. Athelstan the Exile--Athelstan the
Ne'er-do-well--Athelstan the Profligate--Athelstan the Resident of
Camberwell--Athelstan the Smirched and Soiled--stood beside the altar,
tall and gallant, and gave away the bride for all the world to
see--nobody in the least ashamed of him. There was not any breath of
scandal left. Here he was, returned from his travels, a tall and proper
man, dressed in broadcloth, perhaps with money in purse, prosperous and
successful in the sight of all. His mother gazed upon him when she
should have been looking at the bride or into her Prayer Book. Her eyes
were red, but then a mother is allowed a tear or two when her daughter
leaves the nest. And as to those who had whispered words about family
jars, quarrels and estrangements, or had spoken against the fair fame of
the groom, they were now as mute as mice.

All the richer members of the House of Arundel--the City Arundels--were
present. One of them--chief partner in a leading firm of
accountants--afterwards computed, for the greater increase of the family
glory, how many hundreds of thousands of pounds were gathered together
at one moment beneath that sacred roof. He counted the members, and made
that little addition, during the performance of the ceremony. Those of
the Austins who were not disgracefully poor--there are some branches of
the family, I believe, pretty low down--were also present. And the
company went to Pembridge Square after the service, gazed admiringly at
the wedding presents, and drank the health of the bride and bridegroom,
and gathered with cousinly curiosity round the returned Prodigal. But
they knew nothing--mind you--of his connection with Camberwell. And
nothing about his supposed complicity in the Edmund Gray business. There
had been, happily, no scandal.

Among the company in the church was Mr. Dering. He stood tall and erect,
his coat buttoned, his face keen and hard, the family lawyer stamped by
nature and long custom.

Presently, when the service was about half way through, a change came
over him. His face relaxed: the lines curved just a little laterally,
the austerity vanished, his eyes brightened. He took off his gloves
furtively and opened his coat. He was Edmund Gray. In that capacity he
afterwards drank to the bride and wished her happiness. And he walked
all the way from Pembridge Square to South Square, Gray's Inn.



I see in the future an old man growing feeble: he leans upon the arm of
a girl whom he calls his Scholar, his disciple, and his child. His face
is serene: he is perfectly happy: the Advent of that Kingdom whose
glories he preaches is very nigh at hand. He lives in the house of his
disciple: he has forgotten the very existence of his lawyer: he goes no
more to Lincoln's Inn: always he is lying, night and day, before that
miracle of carven work in Ivory. There he watches--it is his Vision--the
long procession of those who work and sing at their work and are happy,
work they ever so hard, because they work each for all and all for each.
And there is no more sorrow or crying and no more pain. What hath the
Gate of Horn--through which is allowed nothing but what is
true--bitterly true--absolutely true--nakedly, coldly, shiveringly
true--to show in comparison with this? A crowd trampling upon each
other: men who enslave and rob each other: men and women and children
lying in misery--men and women and children starving.--Let us fly, my
brothers--let us swiftly fly--let us hasten--to the Gate of Ivory.




_OPINIONS OF THE PRESS_

ON

THE IVORY GATE.

By WALTER BESANT.


'The novel shows us throughout that Mr. Besant is one of those
fortunates who find fresh material.... Mr. Besant is a popular novelist,
but he shows here an artist's appreciation of whimsical contrast, and an
artist's skill in the delineation of character.... We are inclined to
think "The Ivory Gate" worthy of the past reputation of Mr. Besant, and
indicative of future development.'--SPEAKER.

'It would be impossible to discuss at length the many and great merits
of "The Ivory Gate" without telling the story, and it is certainly a
story to be read, not to be told.... Our interest in the story never
flags for a moment. Neither in the "Golden Butterfly," nor "The Chaplain
of the Fleet," are there any characters to equal the city knight, Sir
Samuel Dering, and his wife Hilda, or the old clerk Checkley.'--SATURDAY
REVIEW.

'The writing in "The Ivory Gate" has that nameless charm which belongs
to everything that comes from Mr. Besant's pen.'--NATIONAL REVIEW.

'The complications arising from the situation are cleverly worked out,
with all the love of detail and the dramatic skill which always
distinguishes Mr. Besant's workmanship.'--TIMES.

'The subject of the novel is a strong one, and it might have been made
most powerful; but the dreams that come to Mr. Dering through the Ivory
Gate are such happy ones, and he himself is so much more lovable
dreaming than awake, that the pathos of the situation does not weigh too
heavily upon the reader.'--GUARDIAN.

'A story told in the author's happiest manner.... The spirit which
pervades the story is akin to that which pervades "All Sorts and
Conditions of Men."... There is a good deal of the feeling of Dickens in
this pleasantly interesting story.'--SPORTING LIFE.

'The story is interesting, imaginative, abounding in matter for thought,
and is in Mr. Besant's happiest style.'--DAILY NEWS.

'Mr. Besant's story is a solid boon, a fantasy in which he half escapes
from the commonplace veracities of existence, and yet keeps his readers'
feet on the London flagstones throughout.'--ATHENAEUM.

'A delightful work.... A charming tale, full of life and interest.... As
a story it is in all respects excellent. It is worked out with skill and
power. There are many very fine passages. "The Ivory Gate" is charming
in its originality, and in the simplicity and force with which the plot
is developed.'--SCOTSMAN.

'There is a good deal that is pleasant in "The Ivory Gate."... Both hero
and heroine are admirable.'--DAILY CHRONICLE.

'Mr. Besant has hit on rather a felicitous subject, which is very well
wrought out----We venture to predict that hours spent over "The Ivory
Gate" will be pleasant.'--SCOTTISH LEADER.

'Mr. Besant illustrates a very curious phase of madness; he preaches a
highly poetical kind of socialism, and he gives us a clear and
attractive picture of ordinary English life.... The story is full of
interesting characters.'--GLASGOW HERALD.

'The story is cleverly planned and thoroughly readable from beginning to
end.'--LEEDS MERCURY.

'"The Ivory Gate" is a novel of considerable interest, and it is a story
that is told in Mr. Besant's best style.'--PALL MALL GAZETTE.

'The story is cleverly told and effective.'--MORNING POST.




[_October, 1892_]

[Illustration]

A List of Books

PUBLISHED BY

CHATTO & WINDUS,

214, Piccadilly, London, W.

_Sold by all Booksellers, or sent post-free for the published price by
the Publishers._



=ABOUT.--THE FELLAH:= An Egyptian Novel. By EDMOND ABOUT. Translated by
SIR RANDAL ROBERTS. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



ADAMS (W. DAVENPORT), WORKS BY.

     =A DICTIONARY OF THE DRAMA.= Being a comprehensive Guide to
     the Plays, Playwrights, Players, and Playhouses of the
     United Kingdom and America. Crown 8vo half-bound, =12s. 6d.=
     [_Preparing._]

     =QUIPS AND QUIDDITIES.= Selected by W. D. ADAMS. Post 8vo,
     cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=



=AGONY COLUMN (THE) OF "THE TIMES,"= from 1800 to 1870. Edited, with an
Introduction, by ALICE CLAY. Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=



=AIDE (HAMILTON), WORKS BY.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =CARR OF CARRLYON.=

     =CONFIDENCES.=



=ALBERT.--BROOKE FINCHLEY'S DAUGHTER.= By MARY ALBERT. Post 8vo, picture
boards, =2s.=; cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=



=ALDEN.--A LOST SOUL.= By W. L. ALDEN. Fcap. 8vo, cl. bds., =1s. 6d.=



=ALEXANDER (MRS.), NOVELS BY.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =MAID, WIFE, OR WIDOW?=

     =VALERIE'S FATE.=



=ALLEN (F. M.).--GREEN AS GRASS.= By F. M. ALLEN, Author of "Through
Green Glasses." With a Frontispiece by JOSEPH SMYTH. Crown 8vo, cloth
extra, =3s. 6d.=



=ALLEN (GRANT), WORKS BY.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.= each.

     =THE EVOLUTIONIST AT LARGE.=

     =COLIN CLOUT'S CALENDAR.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.= each.

     =PHILISTIA.=

     =BABYLON.=

     =STRANGE STORIES.=

     =BECKONING HAND.=

     =FOR MAIMIE'S SAKE.=

     =IN ALL SHADES.=

     =THE DEVIL'S DIE.=

     =THIS MORTAL COIL.=

     =THE TENTS OF SHEM.=

     =THE GREAT TABOO.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each.

     =DUMARESQ'S DAUGHTER.=

     =THE DUCHESS OF POWYSLAND.=

     =BLOOD ROYAL.=



=AMERICAN LITERATURE, A LIBRARY OF,= from the Earliest Settlement to the
Present Time. Compiled and Edited by EDMUND CLARENCE STEDMAN and ELLEN
MACKAY HUTCHINSON. Eleven Vols., royal 8vo, cloth extra, =L6 12s.=



=ARCHITECTURAL STYLES. A HANDBOOK OF=. By A. ROSENGARTEN. Translated by
W. COLLETT-SANDARS. With 639 Illusts. Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., =7s. 6d.=



=ART (THE) OF AMUSING:= A Collection of Graceful Arts, Games, Tricks,
Puzzles, and Charades. By FRANK BELLEW. 300 Illusts. Cr. 8vo, cl. ex.,
=4s. 6d.=



=ARNOLD (EDWIN LESTER), WORKS BY.=

     =THE WONDERFUL ADVENTURES OF PHRA THE PHOENICIAN.= With
     Introduction by Sir EDWIN ARNOLD, and 12 Illusts. by H. M.
     PAGET. Cr. 8vo, cl., =3s. 6d.=

     =THE CONSTABLE OF ST. NICHOLAS.= Crown 8vo, cloth, =3s. 6d.=
     [_Shortly._]

     =BIRD LIFE IN ENGLAND.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=



=ARTEMUS WARD'S WORKS:= The Works of CHARLES FARRER BROWNE, better known
as ARTEMUS WARD. With Portrait and Facsimile. Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
=7s. 6d.=--Also a POPULAR EDITION, post 8vo, picture boards, =2s.=

     =THE GENIAL SHOWMAN:= Life and Adventures of ARTEMUS WARD. By
     EDWARD P. HINGSTON. With a Frontispiece. Crown 8vo, cloth
     extra, =3s. 6d.=



=ASHTON (JOHN), WORKS BY.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.= each.

     =HISTORY OF THE CHAP-BOOKS OF THE 18th CENTURY.= With 334
     Illusts.

     =SOCIAL LIFE IN THE REIGN OF QUEEN ANNE.= With 85
     Illustrations.

     =HUMOUR, WIT, AND SATIRE OF SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.= With 82
     Illusts.

     =ENGLISH CARICATURE AND SATIRE ON NAPOLEON THE FIRST.= 115
     Illusts.

     =MODERN STREET BALLADS.= With 57 Illustrations.



=BACTERIA.-A SYNOPSIS OF THE BACTERIA AND YEAST FUNGI AND ALLIED
SPECIES.= By W. B. GROVE, B.A. With 87 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth
extra, =3s. 6d.=



=BARDSLEY (REV. C. W.), WORKS BY.=

     =ENGLISH SURNAMES:= Their Sources and Significations. Cr. 8vo,
     cloth, =7s. 6d.=

     =CURIOSITIES OF PURITAN NOMENCLATURE.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
     =6s.=



=BARING GOULD (S.,= Author of "John Herring," &c.), =NOVELS BY.= Crown
8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d. each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=
each.

     =RED SPIDER.=

     =EVE.=



=BARRETT (FRANK,= Author of "Lady Biddy Fane,") =NOVELS BY.= Post 8vo,
illustrated boards, =2s.= each; cloth. =2s. 6d.= each.

     =FETTERED FOR LIFE.=

     =THE SIN OF OLGA ZASSOULICH.=

     =BETWEEN LIFE AND DEATH.=

     =FOLLY MORRISON.=

     =HONEST DAVIE.=

     =LIEUT. BARNABAS.=

     =A PRODIGAL'S PROGRESS.=

     =JOHN FORD;= and =HIS HELPMATE.=

     =A RECOILING VENGEANCE.=

     =FOUND GUILTY.=

     =FOR LOVE AND HONOUR.=



=BEACONSFIELD, LORD:= A Biography. By T. P. O'CONNOR, M.P. Sixth
Edition, with an Introduction. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =5s.=



=BEAUCHAMP.--GRANTLEY GRANGE:= A Novel. By SHELSLEY BEAUCHAMP. Post 8vo,
illustrated boards, =2s.=



=BEAUTIFUL PICTURES BY BRITISH ARTISTS:= A Gathering of Favourites from
our Picture Galleries, beautifully engraved on Steel. With Notices of
the Artists by SYDNEY ARMYTAGE, M.A. Imperial 4to. cloth extra, gilt
edges, =21s.=



=BECHSTEIN.--AS PRETTY AS SEVEN,= and other German Stories. Collected by
LUDWIG BECHSTEIN. With Additional Tales by the Brothers GRIMM, and 98
Illustrations by RICHTER. Square 8vo, cloth extra, =6s. 6d.=; gilt
edges, =7s. 6d.=



=BEERBOHM.--WANDERINGS IN PATAGONIA;= or, Life among the Ostrich
Hunters. By JULIUS BEERBOHM. With Illusts. Cr. 8vo, cl. extra, =3s. 6d.=



=BENNETT (W. C., LL.D.), WORKS BY.= Post 8vo, cloth limp. =2s.= each.

     =A BALLAD HISTORY OF ENGLAND.=

     =SONGS FOR SAILORS.=



=BESANT (WALTER), NOVELS BY.=

Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illust. bds., =2s.= each;
cl. limp, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =ALL SORTS AND CONDITIONS OF MEN.= With Illustrations by FRED.
     BARNARD.

     =THE CAPTAINS' ROOM,= &c. With Frontispiece by E. J. WHEELER.

     =ALL IN A GARDEN FAIR.= With 6 Illustrations by HARRY FURNISS.

     =DOROTHY FORSTER.= With Frontispiece by CHARLES GREEN.

     =UNCLE JACK,= and other Stories.

     =CHILDREN OF GIBEON.=

     =THE WORLD WENT VERY WELL THEN.= With 12 Illustrations by A.
     FORESTIER.

     =HERR PAULUS:= His Rise, his Greatness, and his Fall.

     =FOR FAITH AND FREEDOM.= With Illustrations by A. FORESTIER
     and F. WADDY.

     =TO CALL HER MINE,= &c. With 9 Illustrations by A. FORESTIER.

     =THE BELL OF ST. PAUL'S.=

     =THE HOLY ROSE,= &c. With Frontispiece by F. BARNARD.

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each.

     =ARMOREL OF LYONESSE:= A Romance of To-day. With 12 Illusts.
     by F. BARNARD.

     =ST. KATHERINE'S BY THE TOWER.= With 12 page Illustrations by
     C. GREEN.

     =VERBENA CAMELLIA STEPHANOTIS,= &c. Frontispiece by GORDON
     BROWNE.

     =FIFTY YEARS AGO.= With 144 Plates and Woodcuts. Cheaper
     Edition, Revised, with a New Preface, &c. Crown 8vo, cloth
     extra, =5s.=

     =THE EULOGY OF RICHARD JEFFERIES.= With Portrait. Cr. 8vo, cl.
     extra, =6s.=

     =THE ART OF FICTION.= Demy 8vo, =1s.=

     =LONDON.= With 124 Illustrations. Demy 8vo, cloth extra, =18s.=

     =THE IVORY GATE;= A Novel. Three Vols., crown 8vo,



=BESANT (WALTER) AND JAMES RICE, NOVELS BY.=

Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illust. bds., =2s.= each;
cl. limp, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =READY-MONEY MORTIBOY.=

     =MY LITTLE GIRL.=

     =WITH HARP AND CROWN.=

     =THIS SON OF VULCAN.=

     =THE GOLDEN BUTTERFLY.=

     =THE MONKS OF THELEMA.=

     =BY CELIA'S ARBOUR.=

     =THE CHAPLAIN OF THE FLEET.=

     =THE SEAMY SIDE.=

     =THE CASE OF MR. LUCRAFT,= &c.

     ='TWAS IN TRAFALGAR'S BAY=, &c.

     =THE TEN YEARS' TENANT,= &c.

There is also a LIBRARY EDITION of the above Twelve Volumes, handsomely
set in new type, on a large crown 8vo page, and bound in cloth extra,
=6s.= each.



=BEWICK (THOMAS) AND HIS PUPILS.= By AUSTIN DOBSON. With 95
Illustrations. Square 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=



=BIERCE.--IN THE MIDST OF LIFE:= Tales of Soldiers and Civilians. By
AMBROSE BIERCE. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.



=BLACKBURN'S (HENRY) ART HANDBOOKS.=

     =ACADEMY NOTES,= separate years, from 1875-1887, 1889-1891,
     each =1s.=

     =ACADEMY NOTES, 1892.= With Illustrations. =1s.=

     =ACADEMY NOTES, 1875-79.= Complete in One Vol., with 600
     Illusts. Cloth limp, 6s.

     =ACADEMY NOTES, 1880-84.= Complete in One Vol. with 700
     Illusts. Cloth limp, =6s.=

     =GROSVENOR NOTES, 1877.= =6d.=

     =GROSVENOR NOTES,= separate years, from =1878= to =1890=,
     each =1s.=

     =GROSVENOR NOTES, Vol. I., 1877-82.= With 300 illusts. Demy
     8vo, cloth limp, =6s.=

     =GROSVENOR NOTES, Vol. II., 1883-87.= With 300 Illusts. Demy
     8vo, cloth limp, =6s.=

     =THE NEW GALLERY, 1888-1891.= With numerous Illustrations,
     each =1s.=

     =THE NEW GALLERY, 1892.= With Illustrations. =1s.=

     =THE NEW GALLERY, Vol. I., 1888-1892.= With 250 Illusts. Demy
     8vo, cloth, =6s.=

     =ENGLISH PICTURES AT THE NATIONAL GALLERY.= 114 Illustrations.
     =1s.=

     =OLD MASTERS AT THE NATIONAL GALLERY.= 128 Illustrations. =1s.
     6d.=

     =ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE TO THE NATIONAL GALLERY.= 242 Illusts.
     cl., =3s.=

     =THE PARIS SALON, 1892.= With Facsimile Sketches. =3s.=

     =THE PARIS SOCIETY OF FINE ARTS, 1892.= With Sketches. =3s. 6d.=



=BLAKE (WILLIAM):= India-proof Etchings from his Works by WILLIAM BELL
SCOTT. With descriptive Text. Folio, half-bound boards, =21s.=



=BLIND (MATHILDE),= Poems by. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =5s.= each.

     =THE ASCENT OF MAN.=

     =DRAMAS IN MINIATURE.= With a Frontispiece by FORD MADOX
     BROWN.



=BOURNE (H. R. FOX), WORKS BY.=

     =ENGLISH MERCHANTS:= Memoirs in Illustration of the Progress
     of British Commerce. With numerous Illustrations. Crown 8vo,
     cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=

     =ENGLISH NEWSPAPERS:= The History of Journalism. Two Vols.,
     demy 8vo, cl., =25s.=

     =THE OTHER SIDE OF THE EMIN PASHA RELIEF EXPEDITION.= Crown
     8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=



=BOWERS.--LEAVES FROM A HUNTING JOURNAL.= By GEORGE BOWERS. Oblong
folio, half-bound, =21s.=



=BOYLE (FREDERICK), WORKS BY.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =CHRONICLES OF NO-MAN'S LAND.=

     =CAMP NOTES.=

=SAVAGE LIFE.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, picture
boards, =2s.=



=BRAND'S OBSERVATIONS ON POPULAR ANTIQUITIES;= chiefly illustrating the
Origin of our Vulgar Customs, Ceremonies, and Superstitions. With the
Additions of Sir HENRY ELLIS, and Illustrations. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra,
=7s. 6d.=



=BREWER (REV. DR.), WORKS BY.=

     =THE READER'S HANDBOOK OF ALLUSIONS, REFERENCES, PLOTS, AND
     STORIES.= Fifteenth Thousand. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=

     =AUTHORS AND THEIR WORKS, WITH THE DATES:= Being the
     Appendices to "The Reader's Handbook," separately printed.
     Crown 8vo, cloth limp, =2s.=

     =A DICTIONARY OF MIRACLES.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=BREWSTER (SIR DAVID), WORKS BY.= Post 8vo cl. ex. =4s. 6d.= each.

     =MORE WORLDS THAN ONE:= Creed of Philosopher and Hope of
     Christian. Plates.

     =THE MARTYRS OF SCIENCE:= GALILEO, TYCHO BRAHE, and KEPLER.
     With Portraits.

     =LETTERS ON NATURAL MAGIC.= With numerous Illustrations.



=BRILLAT-SAVARIN.--GASTRONOMY AS A FINE ART.= By BRILLAT-SAVARIN.
Translated by R. E. ANDERSON, M.A. Post 8vo, half-bound, =2s.=



=BRET HARTE, WORKS BY.=

LIBRARY EDITION. In Seven Volumes, crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.= each.

     =BRET HARTE'S COLLECTED WORKS.= Arranged and Revised by the
     Author.

     Vol. I. COMPLETE POETICAL AND DRAMATIC WORKS. With Steel
     Portrait.

     Vol. II. LUCK OF ROARING CAMP--BOHEMIAN PAPERS--AMERICAN
     LEGENDS.

     Vol. III. TALES OF THE ARGONAUTS--EASTERN SKETCHES.

     Vol. IV. GABRIEL CONROY.

     Vol. V. STORIES--CONDENSED NOVELS, &c.

     Vol. VI. TALES OF THE PACIFIC SLOPE.

     Vol. VII. TALES OF THE PACIFIC SLOPE--II. With Portrait by
     JOHN PETTIE, R.A.



     =THE SELECT WORKS OF BRET HARTE, in Prose and Poetry.= With
     Introductory Essay by J. M. BELLEW. Portrait of Author, and
     50 Illusts. Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., =7s. 6d.=

     =BRET HARTE'S POETICAL WORKS.= Hand-made paper & buckram. Cr.
     8vo, =4s. 6d.=

     THE QUEEN OF THE PIRATE ISLE. With 28 original Drawings by
     KATE GREENAWAY, reproduced in Colours by EDMUND EVANS. Small
     4to, cloth, =5s.=



Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each.

     =A WAIF OF THE PLAINS.= With 60 Illustrations by STANLEY L.
     WOOD.

     =A WARD OF THE GOLDEN GATE.= With 59 Illustrations by STANLEY
     L. WOOD.

     =A SAPPHO OF GREEN SPRINGS,= &c. With Two Illustrations by
     HUME NISBET.

     =COLONEL STARBOTTLE'S CLIENT, AND SOME OTHER PEOPLE.= With a
     Frontispiece by FRED. BARNARD.

     =SALLY DOWS,= &c. With a Frontispiece.

     =SUSY:= A Novel. With a Frontispiece. [_Shortly._]



Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =GABRIEL CONROY.=

     =AN HEIRESS OF RED DOG,= &c.

     =THE LUCK OF ROARING CAMP,= &c.

     =CALIFORNIAN STORIES.=



Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each; cloth limp, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =FLIP.=

     =MARUJA.=

     =A PHYLLIS OF THE SIERRAS.=



Fcap. 8vo, picture cover, =1s.= each.

     =THE TWINS OF TABLE MOUNTAIN.=

     =SNOW BOUND AT EAGLE'S.=

     =JEFF BRIGGS'S LOVE STORY.=



=BRYDGES.--UNCLE SAM AT HOME.= By HAROLD BRYDGES. Post 8vo, illustrated
boards, =2s.=; cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=



=BUCHANAN'S (ROBERT) WORKS.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.= each.

     =SELECTED POEMS OF ROBERT BUCHANAN.= With Frontispiece by T.
     DALZIEL.

     =THE EARTHQUAKE;= or, Six Days and a Sabbath.

     =THE CITY OF DREAM:= An Epic Poem. With Two Illustrations by
     P. MACNAB.

     =THE OUTCAST:= A Rhyme for the Time. With 15 Illustrations by
     RUDOLF BLIND, PETER MACNAB, and HUME NISBET. Small demy 8vo,
     cloth extra, =8s.=



     =ROBERT BUCHANAN'S COMPLETE POETICAL WORKS.= With Steel-plate
     Portrait. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.= each

     =THE SHADOW OF THE SWORD.=

     =A CHILD OF NATURE.= Frontispiece.

     =GOD AND THE MAN.= With 11 Illustrations by FRED. BARNARD.

     =THE MARTYRDOM OF MADELINE.= With Frontispiece by A. W.
     COOPER.

     =LOVE ME FOR EVER.= Frontispiece.

     =ANNAN WATER.=

     =FOXGLOVE MANOR.=

     =THE NEW ABELARD.=

     =MATT:= A Story of a Caravan. Front.

     =THE MASTER OF THE MINE.= Front.

     =THE HEIR OF LINNE.=



=BURTON (CAPTAIN).--THE BOOK OF THE SWORD:= Being a History of the Sword
and its Use in all Countries, from the Earliest Times. By RICHARD F.
BURTON. With over 400 Illustrations. Square 8vo, cloth extra. =32s.=



=BURTON (ROBERT).=

     =THE ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY:= A New Edition, with translations
     of the Classical Extracts. Demy 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=

     =MELANCHOLY ANATOMISED:= Being an Abridgment, for popular use,
     of BURTON'S ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY. Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s.
     6d.=



=CAINE (T. HALL), NOVELS BY.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each;
post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each; cloth limp, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =SHADOW OF A CRIME.=

     =A SON OF HAGAR.=

     =THE DEEMSTER.=



=CAMERON (COMMANDER).--THE CRUISE OF THE "BLACK PRINCE" PRIVATEER.= By
V. LOVETT CAMERON, R.N., C.B. With Two Illustrations by P. MACNAB. Crown
8vo, cloth extra, =5s.=; post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=CAMERON (MRS. H. LOVETT), NOVELS BY.= Post 8vo, illust. bds., =2s.=
each.

     =JULIET'S GUARDIAN.=

     =DECEIVERS EVER.=



=CARLYLE (THOMAS) ON THE CHOICE OF BOOKS.= With Life by R. H. SHEPHERD,
and Three Illustrations. Post 8vo, cloth extra, =1s. 6d.=

     =THE CORRESPONDENCE OF THOMAS CARLYLE AND RALPH WALDO
     EMERSON, 1834 to 1872.= Edited by CHARLES ELIOT NORTON. With
     Portraits. Two Vols., crown 8vo, cloth extra, =24s.=



=CARLYLE (JANE WELSH), LIFE OF.= By Mrs. ALEXANDER IRELAND. With
Portrait and Facsimile Letter. Small demy 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=CHAPMAN'S (GEORGE) WORKS.= Vol. I. contains the Plays complete,
including the doubtful ones. Vol. II., the Poems and Minor Translations,
with an Introductory Essay by ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE. Vol. III., the
Translations of the Iliad and Odyssey. Three Vols., crown 8vo, cloth
extra, =6s.= each.



=CHATTO AND JACKSON.--A TREATISE ON WOOD ENGRAVING,= Historical and
Practical. By WILLIAM ANDREW CHATTO and JOHN JACKSON. With an Additional
Chapter by HENRY G. BOHN, and 450 fine Illusts. Large 4to. hf.-bd.,
=28s.=



=CHAUCER FOR CHILDREN:= A Golden Key. By Mrs. H. R. HAWEIS. With 8
Coloured Plates and 30 Woodcuts. Small 4to, cloth extra, =6s.=

     =CHAUCER FOR SCHOOLS.= By Mrs. H. R. HAWEIS. Demy 8vo, cloth
     limp, =2s. 6d.=



=CLARE.--FOR THE LOVE OF A LASS:= A Tale of Tynedale. By AUSTIN CLARE.
Post 8vo, picture boards, =2s.=; cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=



=CLIVE (MRS. ARCHER), NOVELS BY.= Post 8vo, illust. boards, =2s.= each.

     =PAUL FERROLL.=

     =WHY PAUL FERROLL KILLED HIS WIFE.=



=CLODD.--MYTHS AND DREAMS.= By EDWARD CLODD, F.R.A.S. Second Edition,
Revised. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=COBBAN--THE CURE OF SOULS:= A Story. By J. MACLAREN COBBAN. Post 8vo,
illustrated boards, =2s.=



=COLEMAN (JOHN), WORKS BY.=

     =PLAYERS AND PLAYWRIGHTS I HAVE KNOWN.= Two Vols., 8vo, cloth,
     =24s.=

     =CURLY:= An Actor's Story. With 21 Illusts. by J. C. DOLLMAN.
     Cr. 8vo, cl., =1s. 6d.=



=COLLINS (C. ALLSTON).--THE BAR SINISTER.= Post 8vo, 2s.



=COLLINS (MORTIMER AND FRANCES), NOVELS BY.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.= each.

     =FROM MIDNIGHT TO MIDNIGHT.=

     =BLACKSMITH AND SCHOLAR.=

     =TRANSMIGRATION.=

     =YOU PLAY ME FALSE.=

     =A VILLAGE COMEDY.=



Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =SWEET ANNE PAGE.=

     =A FIGHT WITH FORTUNE.=

     =SWEET AND TWENTY.=

     =FRANCES.=



=COLLINS (WILKIE), NOVELS BY.=

Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illust. bds., =2s.= each;
cl. limp, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =ANTONINA.= With a Frontispiece by Sir JOHN GILBERT, R.A.

     =BASIL.= Illustrated by Sir JOHN GILBERT, R.A., and J.
     MAHONEY.

     =HIDE AND SEEK.= Illustrated by Sir JOHN GILBERT, R.A., and J.
     MAHONEY.

     =AFTER DARK.= With Illustrations by A. B. HOUGHTON.

     =THE DEAD SECRET.= With a Frontispiece by Sir JOHN GILBERT,
     R.A.

     =QUEEN OF HEARTS.= With a Frontispiece by Sir JOHN GILBERT,
     R.A.

     =THE WOMAN IN WHITE.= With Illusts. by Sir J. GILBERT, R.A.,
     and F. A. FRASER.

     =NO NAME.= With Illustrations by Sir J. E. MILLAIS, R.A., and
     A. W. COOPER.

     =MY MISCELLANIES.= With a Steel-plate Portrait of WILKIE
     COLLINS.

     =ARMADALE.= With Illustrations by G. H. THOMAS.

     =THE MOONSTONE.= With Illustrations by G. DU MAURIER and F. A.
     FRASER.

     =MAN AND WIFE.= With Illustrations by WILLIAM SMALL.

     =POOR MISS FINCH.= Illustrated by G. DU MAURIER and EDWARD
     HUGHES.

     =MISS OR MRS.?= With Illusts. by S. L. FILDES, R.A., and HENRY
     WOODS, A.R.A.

     =THE NEW MAGDALEN.= Illustrated by G. DU MAURIER and C. S.
     REINHARDT.

     =THE FROZEN DEEP.= Illustrated by G. DU MAURIER and J.
     MAHONEY.

     =THE LAW AND THE LADY.= Illusts. by S. L. FILDES, R.A., and
     SYDNEY HALL.

     =THE TWO DESTINIES.=

     =THE HAUNTED HOTEL.= Illustrated by ARTHUR HOPKINS.

     =THE FALLEN LEAVES.=

     =JEZEBEL'S DAUGHTER.=

     =THE BLACK ROBE.=

     =HEART AND SCIENCE.=

     ="I SAY NO."=

     =A ROGUE'S LIFE.=

     =THE EVIL GENIUS.=

     =LITTLE NOVELS.=

     =THE LEGACY OF CAIN.=

     =BLIND LOVE.= With Preface by WALTER BESANT, and Illusts. by
     A. FORESTIER.



=COLLINS (JOHN CHURTON. M.A.), BOOKS BY.=

     =ILLUSTRATIONS OF TENNYSON.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=

     =A MONOGRAPH ON DEAN SWIFT.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =8s.=
     [_Shortly._]



=COLMAN'S HUMOROUS WORKS:= "Broad Grins," "My Nightgown and Slippers,"
and other Humorous Works of GEORGE COLMAN. With Life by G. B. BUCKSTONE,
and Frontispiece by HOGARTH. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=COLMORE.--A VALLEY OF SHADOWS.= By G. COLMORE, Author of "A Conspiracy
of Silence." Two Vols., crown 8vo.



=COLQUHOUN.--EVERY INCH A SOLDIER:= A Novel. By M. J. COLQUHOUN. Post
8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=CONVALESCENT COOKERY:= A Family Handbook. By CATHERINE RYAN. Crown 8vo,
=1s.=; cloth limp, =1s. 6d.=



=CONWAY (MONCURE D.), WORKS BY.=

     =DEMONOLOGY AND DEVIL-LORE.= With 65 Illustrations. Third
     Edition. Two Vols., demy 8vo, cloth extra, =28s.=

     =A NECKLACE OF STORIES.= 25 Illusts. by W. J. HENNESSY. Sq.
     8vo, cloth, =6s.=

     =PINE AND PALM:= A Novel. Two Vols., crown 8vo, cloth extra,
     =21s.=

     =GEORGE WASHINGTON'S RULES OF CIVILITY= Traced to their
     Sources and Restored. Fcap. 8vo, Japanese vellum, =2s. 6d.=



=COOK (DUTTON), NOVELS BY.=

     =PAUL FOSTER'S DAUGHTER.= Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo,
     illust. boards, =2s.=

     =LEO.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=CORNWALL.--POPULAR ROMANCES OF THE WEST OF ENGLAND;= or, The Drolls,
Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall. Collected by ROBERT HUNT,
F.R.S. Two Steel-plates by GEO. CRUIKSHANK. Cr. 8vo, cl., =7s. 6d.=



=COTES.--TWO GIRLS ON A BARGE.= By V. CECIL COTES. With 44 Illustrations
by F. H. TOWNSEND.--Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=CRADDOCK.--THE PROPHET OF THE GREAT SMOKY MOUNTAINS.= By CHARLES EGBERT
CRADDOCK. Post 8vo, illust. bds., =2s.=; cl. limp, =2s. 6d.=



=CRIM.--ADVENTURES OF A FAIR REBEL.= By MATT CRIM. With a Frontispiece
by DAN. BEARD. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=CROKER (B.M.), NOVELS BY.= Post 8vo, =2s.= each; cloth, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =PRETTY MISS NEVILLE.=

     =A BIRD OF PASSAGE.=

     =DIANA BARRINGTON.=

     =PROPER PRIDE.=



=A FAMILY LIKENESS.= Three Vols., crown 8vo.



=CRUIKSHANK'S COMIC ALMANACK.= Complete in TWO SERIES: The FIRST from
1835 to 1843; the SECOND from 1844 to 1853. A Gathering of the BEST
HUMOUR of THACKERAY, HOOD, MAYHEW, ALBERT SMITH, A'BECKETT, ROBERT
BROUGH, &c. With numerous Steel Engravings and Woodcuts by CRUIKSHANK,
HINE, LANDELLS, &c. Two Vols, crown 8vo, cloth gilt, =7s. 6d.= each.

     =THE LIFE OF GEORGE CRUIKSHANK.= By BLANCHARD JERROLD. With 84
     Illustrations and a Bibliography. Crown 8vo, cloth extra =7s.
     6d.=



=CUMMING (C. F. GORDON), WORKS BY.= Demy 8vo, cl. ex., =8s. 6d.= each.

     =IN THE HEBRIDES.= With Autotype Facsimile and 23
     Illustrations.

     =IN THE HIMALAYAS AND ON THE INDIAN PLAINS.= With 42
     Illustrations.



=VIA CORNWALL TO EGYPT.= With Photogravure Frontis. Demy 8vo, cl., =7s.
6d.=



=CUSSANS.--A HANDBOOK OF HERALDRY;= with Instructions for Tracing
Pedigrees and Deciphering Ancient MSS., &c. By JOHN E. CUSSANS. With 408
Woodcuts, Two Coloured and Two Plain Plates. Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
=7s. 6d.=



=CYPLES (W.)--HEARTS of GOLD.= Cr. 8vo, cl., =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, bds.,
=2s.=



=DANIEL.--MERRIE ENGLAND IN THE OLDEN TIME.= By GEORGE DANIEL. With
Illustrations by ROBERT CRUIKSHANK. Crown 8vo, cloth extra =3s. 6d.=



=DAUDET.--THE EVANGELIST;= or, Port Salvation. By ALPHONSE DAUDET. Crown
8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=DAVENANT.--HINTS FOR PARENTS ON THE CHOICE OF A PROFESSION FOR THEIR
SONS.= By F. DAVENANT, M.A. Post 8vo, =1s.=; cl., =1s. 6d.=



=DAVIES (DR. N. E. YORKE-), WORKS BY.=

Crown 8vo, =1s.= each: cloth limp. =1s. 6d.= each.

     =ONE THOUSAND MEDICAL MAXIMS AND SURGICAL HINTS.=

     =NURSERY HINTS:= A Mother's Guide in Health and Disease.

     =FOODS FOR THE FAT:= A Treatise on Corpulency, and a Dietary
     for its Cure.



=AIDS TO LONG LIFE.= Crown 8vo, =2s.=; cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=



=DAVIES' (SIR JOHN) COMPLETE POETICAL WORKS,= for the first time
Collected and Edited, with Memorial-Introduction and Notes, by the Rev.
A. B. GROSART, D.D. Two Vols., crown 8vo, cloth boards, =12s.=



=DAWSON.--THE FOUNTAIN OF YOUTH:= A Novel of Adventure. By ERASMUS
DAWSON, M.B. Edited by PAUL DEVON. With Two Illustrations by HUME
NISBET. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=DE GUERIN.--THE JOURNAL OF MAURICE DE GUERIN.= Edited by G. S.
TREBUTIEN. With a Memoir by SAINTE-BEUVE. Translated from the 20th
French Edition by JESSIE P. FROTHINGHAM. Fcap, 8vo, half-bound, =2s.
6d.=



=DE MAISTRE.-A JOURNEY ROUND MY ROOM=. By XAVIER DE MAISTRE. Translated
by HENRY ATTWELL. Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=



=DE MILLE.--A CASTLE IN SPAIN.= By JAMES DE MILLE. With a Frontispiece.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=DERBY (THE).--THE BLUE RIBBON OF THE TURF:= A Chronicle of the RACE FOR
THE DERBY, from Diomed to Donovan. With Brief Accounts of THE OAKS. By
LOUIS HENRY CURZON. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=



=DERWENT (LEITH), NOVELS BY.= Cr. 8vo, cl., =3s. 6d.= ea.; post 8vo,
bds., =2s.= ea.

     =OUR LADY OF TEARS.=

     =CIRCE'S LOVERS.=



=DICKENS (CHARLES), NOVELS BY.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each

     =SKETCHES BY BOZ.=

     =THE PICKWICK PAPERS.=

     =NICHOLAS NICKLEBY.=

     =OLIVER TWIST.=



     =THE SPEECHES OF CHARLES DICKENS,= 1841-1870. With a New
     Bibliography. Edited by RICHARD HERNE SHEPHERD. Crown 8vo,
     cloth extra. =6s.=--Also a SMALLER EDITION, in the _Mayfair
     Library_, post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=

     =ABOUT ENGLAND WITH DICKENS.= By ALFRED RIMMER. With 57
     Illustrations by C. A. VANDERHOOF, ALFRED RIMMER, and others.
     Sq. 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=DICTIONARIES.=

     =A DICTIONARY OF MIRACLES:= Imitative, Realistic, and
     Dogmatic. By the Rev. E. C. BREWER, LL.D. Crown 8vo, cloth
     extra, =7s. 6d.=

     =THE READER'S HANDBOOK OF ALLUSIONS, REFERENCES, PLOTS, AND
     STORIES.= By the Rev. E. C. BREWER, LL.D. With an ENGLISH
     BIBLIOGRAPHY. Fifteenth Thousand. Crown 8vo, cloth extra =7s.
     6d.=

     =AUTHORS AND THEIR WORKS, WITH THE DATES.= Cr. 8vo, cloth
     limp, =2s.=

     =FAMILIAR SHORT SAYINGS OF GREAT MEN.= With Historical and
     Explanatory Notes. By SAMUEL A. BENT, A M. Crown 8vo, cloth
     extra, =7s. 6d.=

     =SLANG DICTIONARY:= Etymological, Historical, and Anecdotal.
     Cr. 8vo, cl., =6s. 6d.=

     =WOMEN OF THE DAY:= A Biographical Dictionary. By F. HAYS. Cr.
     8vo, cl., =5s.=

     =WORDS, FACTS, AND PHRASES:= A Dictionary of Curious, Quaint,
     and Out-of-the-Way Matters. By =Eliezer Edwards=. Crown 8vo,
     cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=DIDEROT.--THE PARADOX OF ACTING.= Translated, with Annotations from
Diderot's "Le Paradoxe sur le Comedien," by WALTER HERRIES POLLOCK. With
a Preface by HENRY IRVING. Crown 8vo, parchment. =4s. 6d.=



=DOBSON (AUSTIN), WORKS BY.=

     =THOMAS BEWICK & HIS PUPILS.= With 95 Illustrations. Square
     8vo, cloth, =6s.=

     =FOUR FRENCHWOMEN:= MADEMOISELLE DE CORDAY; MADAME ROLAND; THE
     PRINCESS DE LAMBALLE; MADAME DE GENLIS. Fcap. 8vo, hf.
     roxburghe. =2s. 6d.=

     =EIGHTEENTH CENTURY VIGNETTES.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=
     [_Preparing._]



=DOBSON (W. T.), WORKS BY.= Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =LITERARY FRIVOLITIES, FANCIES, FOLLIES, AND FROLICS.=

     =POETICAL INGENUITIES AND ECCENTRICITIES.=



=DONOVAN (DICK), DETECTIVE STORIES BY.=

Post 8vo illustrated boards, 2s. each; cloth limp, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =THE MAN-HUNTER.=

     =WANTED!=

     =CAUGHT AT LAST!=

     =TRACKED AND TAKEN.=

     =WHO POISONED HETTY DUNCAN?=

     =A DETECTIVE'S TRIUMPHS.=

     =IN THE GRIP OF THE LAW.=

     =FROM INFORMATION RECEIVED.=



     =THE MAN FROM MANCHESTER.= With 23 Illustrations. Crown 8vo,
     cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=

     =TRACKED TO DOOM.= With 6 full-page Illustrations by GORDON
     BROWNE. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=DOYLE (CONAN).--THE FIRM OF GIRDLESTONE.= By A. CONAN DOYLE, Author of
"Micah Clarke." Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=DRAMATISTS, THE OLD.= With Vignette Portraits. Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., =6s.=
per Vol.

     =BEN JONSON'S WORKS.= With Notes Critical and Explanatory, and
     a Biographical Memoir by WM. GIFFORD. Edited by Col.
     CUNNINGHAM. Three Vols.

     =CHAPMAN'S WORKS.= Complete in Three Vols. Vol. I. contains
     the Plays complete; Vol. II., Poems and Minor Translations,
     with an Introductory Essay by A. C. SWINBURNE; Vol. III.,
     Translations of the Iliad and Odyssey.

     =MARLOWE'S WORKS.= Edited, with Notes, by Col. CUNNINGHAM. One
     Vol.

     =MASSINGER'S PLAYS.= From GIFFORD's Text. Edit by Col.
     CUNNINGHAM. One Vol.



=DUNCAN (SARA JEANNETTE), WORKS BY.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.= each.

     =A SOCIAL DEPARTURE:= How Orthodocia and I Went round the
     World by Ourselves. With 111 Illustrations by F. H.
     TOWNSEND.

     =AN AMERICAN GIRL IN LONDON.= With 80 Illustrations by F. H.
     TOWNSEND.

     =THE SIMPLE ADVENTURES OF MEM SAHIB.= Numerous Illusts.
     [_Preparing._]



=DYER.--THE FOLK-LORE OF PLANTS.= By Rev. T. F. THISELTON DYER, M.A.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=



=EARLY ENGLISH POETS.= Edited, with Introductions and Annotations, by
Rev. A. B. GROSART, D.D. Crown 8vo, cloth boards, =6s.= per Volume.

     =FLETCHER'S (GILES) COMPLETE POEMS.= One Vol.

     =DAVIES' (SIR JOHN) COMPLETE POETICAL WORKS.= Two Vols.

     =HERRICK'S (ROBERT) COMPLETE COLLECTED POEMS.= Three Vols.

     =SIDNEY'S (SIR PHILIP) COMPLETE POETICAL WORKS.= Three Vols.



=EDGCUMBE.--ZEPHYRUS:= A Holiday in Brazil and on the River Plate. By
E. R. PEARCE EDGCUMBE. With 41 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
=5s.=



=EDWARDES (MRS. ANNIE), NOVELS BY:=

     =A POINT OF HONOUR.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=

     =ARCHIE LOVELL.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.; post 8vo,
     illust. boards, =2s.=

=EDWARDS (ELIEZER).--WORDS, FACTS, AND PHRASES:= A Dictionary of
Curious, Quaint, and Out-of-the-Way Matters. By ELIEZER EDWARDS. Crown
8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=EDWARDS (M. BETHAM-), NOVELS BY.=

     =KITTY.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=; cloth limp, =2s.
     6d.=

     =FELICIA.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=EGERTON.--SUSSEX FOLK & SUSSEX WAYS.= By Rev. J. C. EGERTON. With
Introduction by Rev. DR. H. WACE, and 4 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo, cloth
ex., =5s.=



=EGGLESTON (EDWARD).--ROXY:= A Novel. Post 8vo, illust. bds., =2s.=



=EMANUEL.--ON DIAMONDS AND PRECIOUS STONES:= Their History, Value, and
Properties; with Simple Tests for ascertaining their Reality. By HARRY
EMANUEL, F.R.G.S. With Illustrations, tinted and plain. Cr. 8vo, cl.
ex., =6s.=



ENGLISHMAN'S HOUSE, THE: A Practical Guide to all interested in
Selecting or Building a House; with Estimates of Cost, Quantities, &c.
By C. J. RICHARDSON. With Coloured Frontispiece and 600 illusts. Crown
8vo, cloth, =7s. 6d.=



=EWALD (ALEX. CHARLES, F.S.A.), WORKS BY.=

     =THE LIFE AND TIMES OF PRINCE CHARLES STUART,= Count of Albany
     (THE YOUNG PRETENDER). With a Portrait. Crown 8vo, cloth
     extra =7s. 6d.=

     =STORIES FROM THE STATE PAPERS,= With an Autotype. Crown 8vo,
     cloth, =6s.=



=EYES, OUR:= How to Preserve Them from Infancy to Old Age. By JOHN
BROWNING, F.R.A.S. With 70 Illusts. Eighteenth Thousand. Crown 8vo,
=1s.=



=FAMILIAR SHORT SAYINGS OF GREAT MEN.= By SAMUEL ARTHUR BENT, A.M. Fifth
Edition, Revised and Enlarged. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=FARADAY (MICHAEL), WORKS BY.= Post 8vo, cloth extra, =4s. 6d.= each.

     =THE CHEMICAL HISTORY OF A CANDLE:= Lectures delivered before
     a Juvenile Audience. Edited by WILLIAM CROOKES, F.C.S. With
     numerous Illustrations.

     =ON THE VARIOUS FORCES OF NATURE, AND THEIR RELATIONS TO EACH
     OTHER.= Edited by WILLIAM CROOKES, F.C.S. With Illustrations.



=FARRER (J. ANSON), WORKS BY.=

     =MILITARY MANNERS AND CUSTOMS.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=

     =WAR:= Three Essays, reprinted from "Military Manners." Cr.
     8vo, =1s.=; cl., =1s. 6d.=



=FENN (MANVILLE).--THE NEW MISTRESS:= A Novel. By G. MANVILLE FENN,
Author of "Double Cunning," &c. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=FIN-BEC.--THE CUPBOARD PAPERS:= Observations on the Art of Living and
Dining. By FIN-BEC. Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=



=FIREWORKS, THE COMPLETE ART OF MAKING;= or, The Pyrotechnist's
Treasury. By THOMAS KENTISH. With 267 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo, cl., =5s.=



=FITZGERALD (PERCY, M.A., F.S.A.), WORKS BY.=

     =THE WORLD BEHIND THE SCENES.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=

     =LITTLE ESSAYS:= Passages from Letters of CHARLES LAMB. Post
     8vo, cl., =2s. 6d.=

     =A DAY'S TOUR:= Journey through France and Belgium. With
     Sketches. Cr. 4to, =1s.=

     =FATAL ZERO.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=: post 8vo,
     illustrated boards, =2s.=



Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =BELLA DONNA.=

     =POLLY.=

     =LADY OF BRANTOME.=

     =NEVER FORGOTTEN.=

     =THE SECOND MRS. TILLOTSON.=

     =SEVENTY-FIVE BROOKE STREET.=



     =LIFE OF JAMES BOSWELL (of Auchinleck).= With an Account of
     his Sayings, Doings, and Writings; and Four Portraits. Two
     Vols., demy 8vo, cloth, =24s.=



=FLAMMARION.--URANIA:= A Romance. By CAMILLE FLAMMARION. Translated by
AUGUSTA RICE STETSON. With 87 Illustrations by DE BIELER, MYRBACH, and
GAMBARD. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =5s.=



=FLETCHER'S (GILES, B.D.) COMPLETE POEMS:= Christ's Victorie in Heaven,
Christ's Victorie on Earth, Christ's Triumph over Death, and Minor
Poems. With Notes by Rev. A. B. GROSART, D.D. Crown 8vo, cloth boards,
=6s.=



=FLUDYER (HARRY) AT CAMBRIDGE:= A Series of Family Letters. Post 8vo,
picture cover, =1s.=; cloth limp, =1s. 6d.=



=FONBLANQUE (ALBANY).--FILTHY LUCRE.= Post 8vo, illust. bds., =2s.=



=FRANCILLON (R. E.), NOVELS BY.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra. =3s. 6d.= each: post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.= each.

     =ONE BY ONE.=

     =QUEEN COPHETUA.=

     =A REAL QUEEN.=

     =KING OR KNAVE?=



     =OLYMPIA.= Post 8vo, illust. bds., =2s.=

     =ESTHER'S GLOVE.= Fcap. 8vo, pict. cover, =1s.=

     =ROMANCES OF THE LAW.= Crown 8vo, cloth, =6s.=; post 8vo,
     illust. boards, =2s.=



=FREDERIC (HAROLD), NOVELS BY.=

     =SETH'S BROTHER'S WIFE.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=

     =THE LAWTON GIRL.= With Frontispiece by F. BARNARD. Cr. 8vo,
     cloth ex., =6s.= post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=FRENCH LITERATURE, A HISTORY OF.= By HENRY VAN LAUN. Three Vols., demy
8vo, cloth boards, =7s. 6d.= each.



=FRERE.--PANDURANG HARI;= or, Memoirs of a Hindoo. With Preface by Sir
BARTLE FRERE. Crown 8vo, cloth, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, illust. bds., =2s.=



=FRISWELL (HAIN).--ONE OF TWO:= A Novel. Post 8vo, illust. bds, =2s.=



=FROST (THOMAS), WORKS BY.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each.

     =CIRCUS LIFE AND CIRCUS CELEBRITIES.=

     =LIVES OF THE CONJURERS.=

     =THE OLD SHOWMEN AND THE OLD LONDON FAIRS.=



=FRY'S (HERBERT) ROYAL GUIDE TO THE LONDON CHARITIES.= Showing their
Name, Date of Foundation, Objects, Income, Officials, &c. Edited by JOHN
LANE. Published Annually. Crown 8vo, cloth, =1s. 6d.=



=GARDENING BOOKS.= Post 8vo, =1s.= each; cloth limp, =1s. 6d.= each.

     =A YEAR'S WORK IN GARDEN AND GREENHOUSE:= Practical Advice as
     to the Management of the Flower, Fruit, and Frame Garden. By
     GEORGE GLENNY.

     =HOUSEHOLD HORTICULTURE.= By TOM and JANE JERROLD.
     Illustrated.

     =THE GARDEN THAT PAID THE RENT.= By TOM JERROLD.



     =OUR KITCHEN GARDEN:= The Plants we Grow, and How we Cook
     Them. By TOM JERROLD. Crown 8vo, cloth, =1s. 6d.=

     =MY GARDEN WILD, AND WHAT I GREW THERE.= By FRANCIS G. HEATH.
     Crown 8vo, cloth extra, gilt edges, =6s.=



=GARRETT.--THE CAPEL GIRLS:= A Novel. By EDWARD GARRETT. Crown 8vo,
cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE, THE.= =1s.= Monthly. In addition to the Articles
upon subjects in Literature, Science, and Art, for which this Magazine
has so high a reputation, "=TABLE TALK=" by SVLVANUS URBAN appears
monthly.

_Bound Volumes for recent years kept in stock, =8s. 6d.= each: Cases for
binding, =2s.=_



=GENTLEMAN'S ANNUAL, THE.= Published Annually in November, =1s.= The
1892 Annual, written by =T. W. Speight=, is entitled "=THE LOUDWATER
TRAGEDY=."



=GERMAN POPULAR STORIES.= Collected by the Brothers GRIMM and Translated
by EDGAR TAYLOR. With Introduction by JOHN RUSKIN, and 22 Steel Plates
after GEORGE CRUIKSHANK. Square 8vo, cloth, =6s. 6d.=; gilt edges, =7s.
6d.=



=GIBBON (CHARLES), NOVELS BY.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.= each.

     =ROBIN GRAY.=

     =LOVING A DREAM.=

     =THE FLOWER OF THE FOREST.=

     =THE GOLDEN SHAFT.=

     =OF HIGH DEGREE.=



Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =THE DEAD HEART.=

     =FOR LACK OF GOLD.=

     =WHAT WILL THE WORLD SAY?=

     =FOR THE KING.=

     =A HARD KNOT.=

     =QUEEN OF THE MEADOW.=

     =IN PASTURES GREEN.=

     =IN LOVE AND WAR.=

     =A HEART'S PROBLEM.=

     =BY MEAD AND STREAM.=

     =THE BRAES OF YARROW.=

     =FANCY FREE.=

     =IN HONOUR BOUND.=

     =HEART'S DELIGHT.=

     =BLOOD-MONEY.=



=GIBNEY (SOMERVILLE).--SENTENCED!= Cr. 8vo, =1s.=; cl., =1s. 6d.=



=GILBERT (WILLIAM), NOVELS BY.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards. =2s.=
each.

     =DR. AUSTIN'S GUESTS.=

     =THE WIZARD OF THE MOUNTAIN.=

     =JAMES DUKE, COSTERMONGER.=



=GILBERT (W. S.), ORIGINAL PLAYS BY.= Two Series, =2s. 6d.= each.

     The FIRST SERIES contains: The Wicked World--Pygmalion and
     Galatea--Charity--The Princess--The Palace of Truth--Trial
     by Jury.

     The SECOND SERIES: Broken
     Hearts--Engaged--Sweethearts--Gretchen--Dan'l Druce--Tom
     Cobb--H.M.S. "Pinafore"--The Sorcerer--Pirates of Penzance.



     =EIGHT ORIGINAL COMIC OPERAS= written by W. S. GILBERT.
     Containing: The Sorcerer--H.M.S. "Pinafore"--Pirates of
     Penzance--Iolanthe--Patience--Princess Ida--The Mikado--Trial
     by Jury. Demy 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=

     =THE "GILBERT AND SULLIVAN" BIRTHDAY BOOK:= Quotations for
     Every Day in the Year, Selected from Plays by W. S. GILBERT
     set to Music by Sir A. SULLIVAN. Compiled by ALEX. WATSON.
     Royal 16mo, Jap. leather, =2s. 6d.=



=GLANVILLE (ERNEST), NOVELS BY.=

     =THE LOST HEIRESS:= A Tale of Love, Battle and Adventure. With
     2 Illusts. by HUME NISBET. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=;
     post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=

     =THE FOSSICKER:= A Romance of Mashonaland. With Frontispiece
     and Vignette by HUME NISBET. Second Edition. Crown 8vo,
     cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=GLENNY.--A YEAR'S-WORK IN GARDEN AND GREENHOUSE:= Practical Advice to
Amateur Gardeners as to the Management of the Flower, Fruit, and Frame
Garden. By GEORGE GLENNY. Post 8vo, =1s.=; cloth limp, =1s. 6d.=



=GODWIN.--LIVES OF THE NECROMANCERS.= By WILLIAM GODWIN. Post 8vo, cloth
limp, =2s.=



=GOLDEN TREASURY OF THOUGHT, THE:= An Encyclopaedia of QUOTATIONS. Edited
by THEODORE TAYLOR. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, =7s. 6d.=



=GOODMAN--THE FATE OF HERBERT WAYNE.= By E. J. GOODMAN, Author of "Too
Curious." Crown 8vo, cloth, =3s. 6d.=



=GOWING.--FIVE THOUSAND MILES IN A SLEDGE:= A Midwinter Journey Across
Siberia. By LIONEL F. GOWING. With 30 Illustrations by C. J. UREN, and a
Map by E. WELLER. Large crown 8vo, cloth extra, =8s.=



=GRAHAM.--THE PROFESSOR'S WIFE:= A Story. By LEONARD GRAHAM. Fcap. 8vo,
picture cover, =1s.=



=GREEKS AND ROMANS, THE LIFE OF THE,= described from Antique Monuments.
By ERNST GUHL and W. KONER. Edited by Dr. F. HUEFFER. With 545
Illustrations. Large crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=GREENWOOD (JAMES), WORKS BY.= Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each.

     =THE WILDS OF LONDON.=

     =LOW-LIFE DEEPS.=



=GREVILLE (HENRY), NOVELS BY:=

     =NIKANOR.= Translated by ELIZA E. CHASE. With 8 Illustrations.
     Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
     =2s.=

     =A NOBLE WOMAN.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =5s.=; post 8vo,
     illustrated boards, =2s.=



=GRIFFITH.--CORINTHIA MARAZION:= A Novel. By CECIL GRIFFITH, Author of
"Victory 'Deane," &c. Crown, 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=HABBERTON (JOHN,= Author of "Helen's Babies"), =NOVELS BY.=

Post 8vo, illustrated boards =2s.= each; cloth limp, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =BRUETON'S BAYOU.=

     =COUNTRY LUCK.=



=HAIR, THE:= Its Treatment in Health, Weakness, and Disease. Translated
from the German of Dr. J. PINCUS. Crown 8vo, =1s.=



=HAKE (DR. THOMAS GORDON), POEMS BY.= Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., =6s.= each.

     =NEW SYMBOLS.=

     =LEGENDS OF THE MORROW.=

     =THE SERPENT PLAY.=



     =MAIDEN ECSTASY.= Small 4to, cloth extra, =8s.=



=HALL.--SKETCHES OF IRISH CHARACTER.= By Mrs. =S. C. Hall=. With
numerous Illustrations on Steel and Wood by MACLISE, GILBERT, HARVEY,
and GEORGE CRUIKSHANK. Medium 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=HALLIDAY (ANDR.).--EVERY-DAY PAPERS.= Post 8vo, bds., =2s.=



=HANDWRITING, THE PHILOSOPHY OF.= With over 100 Facsimiles and
Explanatory Text. By DON FELIX DE SALAMANCA. Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s.
6d.=



=HANKY-PANKY:= A Collection of Very Easy Tricks, Very Difficult Tricks,
White Magic, Sleight of Hand., &c. Edited by W. H. CREMER. With 200
Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =4s. 6d.=



=HARDY (LADY DUFFUS).--PAUL WYNTER'S SACRIFICE.= By Lady DUFFUS HARDY.
Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=HARDY (THOMAS).--UNDER THE GREENWOOD TREE.= By THOMAS HARDY, Author of
"Far from the Madding Crowd." With Portrait and 15 Illustrations. Crown
8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=HARPER.--THE BRIGHTON ROAD:= Old Times and New on a Classic Highway. By
CHARLES G. HARPER. With a Photogravure Frontispiece and 90
Illustrations. Demy 8vo, cloth extra, =16s.=



=HARWOOD--THE TENTH EARL.= By J. BERWICK HARWOOD. Post 8vo, illustrated
boards, =2s.=



=HAWEIS (MRS. H. R.), WORKS BY.= Square 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.= each.

     =THE ART OF BEAUTY.= With Coloured Frontispiece and 91
     Illustrations.

     =THE ART OF DECORATION.= With Coloured Frontispiece and 74
     Illustrations.

     =CHAUCER FOR CHILDREN.= With 8 Coloured Plates and 30
     Woodcuts.



     =THE ART OF DRESS.= With 32 Illustrations. Post 8vo, =1s.=:
     cloth, =1s. 6d.=

     =CHAUCER FOR SCHOOLS.= Demy 8vo; cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=



=HAWEIS (Rev. H. R., M.A.).--AMERICAN HUMORISTS:= WASHINGTON IRVING,
OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES, JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL, ARTEMUS WARD, MARK TWAIN,
and BRET HARTE. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=



=HAWLEY SMART.-WITHOUT LOVE OR LICENCE:= A Novel. By HAWLEY SMART. Crown
8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=HAWTHORNE.--OUR OLD HOME;= By NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE; Annotated with
Passages from the Author's Note-book, and Illustrated with 31
Photogravures. Two Vols., crown 8vo, buckram, gilt top, =15s.=



=HAWTHORNE (JULIAN), NOVELS BY.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.= each.

     =GARTH.=

     =ELLICE QUENTIN.=

     =SEBASTIAN STROME.=

     =FORTUNE'S FOOL.=

     =BEATRIX RANDOLPH.=

     =DUST.=

     =DAVID POINDEXTER.=

     =THE SPECTRE OF THE CAMERA.=



Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =MISS CADOGNA.= =LOVE--OR A NAME.=



     =MRS. GAINSBOROUGH'S DIAMONDS.= Fcap. 8vo, illustrated cover,
     =1s.=



=HEATH.--MY GARDEN WILD, AND WHAT I GREW THERE.= By FRANCIS GEORGE
HEATH. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, gilt edges, =6s.=



=HELPS (SIR ARTHUR), WORKS BY.= Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =ANIMALS AND THEIR MASTERS.=

     =SOCIAL PRESSURE.=



     =IVAN DE BIRON:= A Novel. Cr. 8vo, cl. extra, =3s. 6d.=; post
     8vo, illust. bds., =2s.=



=HENDERSON.--AGATHA PAGE:= A Novel. By ISAAC HENDERSON. Crown 8vo, cloth
extra, =3s. 6d.=



=HERMAN.--A LEADING LADY.= By HENRY HERMAN, joint-Author of "The
Bishops' Bible." Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=; cloth extra, =2s.
6d.=



=HERRICK'S (ROBERT) HESPERIDES, NOBLE NUMBERS, AND COMPLETE COLLECTED
POEMS.= With Memorial-Introduction and Notes by the Rev. A. B. GROSART,
D.D.; Steel Portrait, &c. Three Vols., crown 8vo, cl. bds., =18s.=



=HERTZKA.--FREELAND:= A Social Anticipation. By Dr. THEODOR HERTZKA.
Translated by ARTHUR RANSOM. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=



=HESSE-WARTEGG.--TUNIS:= The Land and the People. By Chevalier ERNST VON
HESSE-WARTEGG. With 22 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=HILL.--TREASON-FELONY:= A Novel. By JOHN HILL. Two Vols.



=HINDLEY (CHARLES), WORKS BY.=

     =TAVERN ANECDOTES AND SAYINGS:= Including Reminiscences
     connected with Coffee Houses, Clubs, &c. With Illustrations.
     Crown 8vo, cloth, =3s. 6d.=

     =THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF A CHEAP JACK.= By ONE OF THE
     FRATERNITY. Edited by CHARLES HINDLEY. Crown 8vo, cloth
     extra, =3s. 6d.=



=HOEY.--THE LOVER'S CREED.= By Mrs. CASHEL HOEY. Post 8vo, =2s.=



=HOLLINGSHEAD (JOHN).--NIAGARA SPRAY.= Crown 8vo, =1s.=

=HOLMES.--THE SCIENCE OF VOICE PRODUCTION AND VOICE PRESERVATION.= By
GORDON HOLMES, M.D. Crown 8vo, =1s.=; cloth, =1s. 6d.=



=HOLMES (OLIVER WENDELL), WORKS BY.=

     =THE AUTOCRAT OF THE BREAKFAST-TABLE.= Illustrated by J.
     GORDON THOMSON. Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=--Another
     Edition, in smaller type, with an Introduction by G. A.
     SALA. Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s.=

     =THE PROFESSOR AT THE BREAKFAST-TABLE.= Post 8vo, cloth limp,
     =2s.=



=HOOD'S (THOMAS) CHOICE WORKS,= in Prose and Verse. With Life of the
Author, Portrait, and 200 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s.
6d.=

     =HOOD'S WHIMS AND ODDITIES.= With 85 Illustrations. Post 8vo,
     printed on laid paper and half-bound, =2s.=



=HOOD (TOM).--FROM NOWHERE TO THE NORTH POLE:= A Noah's Arkaeological
Narrative. By TOM HOOD. With 25 Illustrations by W. BRUNTON and E. C.
BARNES. Square 8vo, cloth extra, gilt edges, =6s.=



=HOOK'S (THEODORE) CHOICE HUMOROUS WORKS;= including his Ludicrous
Adventures, Bons Mots, Puns, and Hoaxes. With Life of the Author,
Portraits, Facsimiles, and Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s.
6d.=



=HOOPER. THE HOUSE OF RABY:= A Novel. By Mrs. GEORGE HOOPER. Post 8vo,
illustrated boards, =2s.=



=HOPKINS.--"'TWIXT LOVE AND DUTY:"= A Novel. By TIGHE HOPKINS. Post 8vo,
illustrated boards, =2s.=



=HORNE.--ORION:= An Epic Poem. By RICHARD HENGIST HORNE. With
Photographic Portrait by SUMMERS. Tenth Edition. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra,
=7s.=



=HORSE (THE) AND HIS RIDER:= An Anecdotic Medley. By "THORMANBY." Crown
8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=



=HUNGERFORD (MRS.),= Author of "Molly Bawn," =NOVELS BY.=

Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =A MAIDEN ALL FORLORN.=

     =IN DURANCE VILE.=

     =A MENTAL STRUGGLE.=

     =MARVEL.=

     =A MODERN CIRCE.=



=HUNT.--ESSAYS BY LEIGH HUNT:= A TALE FOR A CHIMNEY CORNER, &c. Edited
by EDMUND OLLIER. Post 8vo, printed on laid paper and half-bd. =2s.=




=HUNT (MRS. ALFRED), NOVELS BY.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each: post 8vo, illustrated boards.
=2s.= each.

     =THE LEADEN CASKET.=

     =SELF-CONDEMNED.=

     =THAT OTHER PERSON.=



     =THORNICROFT'S MODEL.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=

     =MRS. JULIET.= Three Vols., crown 8vo.



=HUTCHISON.--HINTS ON COLT-BREAKING.= By W. M. HUTCHISON. With 25
Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=HYDROPHOBIA:= An Account of M. PASTEUR's System; Technique of his
Method, and Statistics. By RENAUD SUZOR, M.B. Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
=6s.=



=IDLER (THE):= A Monthly Magazine. Edited by JEROME K. JEROME and ROBERT
E. BARR. Profusely Illustrated. Sixpence Monthly.--Vol. I. now ready,
cloth extra, price =5s.=; Cases for Binding, =1s. 6d.=



=INGELOW (JEAN).--FATED TO BE FREE.= With 24 Illustrations by G. J.
PINWELL. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.=



=INDOOR PAUPERS.= By ONE OF THEM. Crown 8vo, =1s.=; cloth, =1s. 6d.=



=IRISH WIT AND HUMOUR, SONGS OF.= Collected and Edited by A. PERCEVAL
GRAVES. Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=



=JAMES.--A ROMANCE OF THE QUEEN'S HOUNDS.= By CHARLES JAMES. Post 8vo,
picture cover, =1s.=; cloth limp, =1s. 6d.=



=JANVIER.--PRACTICAL KERAMICS FOR STUDENTS.= By =Catherine A. Janvier=.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=



=JAY (HARRIETT), NOVELS BY.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =THE DARK COLLEEN.=

     =THE QUEEN OF CONNAUGHT.=



=JEFFERIES (RICHARD), WORKS BY.= Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =NATURE NEAR LONDON.=

     =THE LIFE OF THE FIELDS.=

     =THE OPEN AIR.=



     =THE EULOGY OF RICHARD JEFFERIES.= By WALTER BESANT. Second
     Edition. With a Photograph Portrait. Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
     =6s.=



=JENNINGS (H. J.), WORKS BY.=

     =CURIOSITIES OF CRITICISM.= Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=

     =LORD TENNYSON:= A Biographical Sketch. With a Photograph. Cr.
     8vo, cl., =6s.=



=JEROME.--STAGELAND.= By JEROME K. JEROME. With 64 Illustrations by J.
BERNARD PARTRIDGE. Square 8vo, picture cover, =1s.=; cloth limp, =2s.=



=JERROLD.--THE BARBER'S CHAIR; & THE HEDGEHOG LETTERS.= By DOUGLAS
JERROLD. Post 8vo, printed on laid paper and half-bound, =2s.=



=JERROLD (TOM), WORKS BY.= Post 8vo, =1s.= each; cloth limp, =1s. 6d.=
each.

     =THE GARDEN THAT PAID THE RENT.=

     =HOUSEHOLD HORTICULTURE:= A Gossip about Flowers. Illustrated.



     =OUR KITCHEN GARDEN:= The Plants, and How we Cook Them. Cr.
     8vo, cl., =1s. 6d.=



=JESSE.--SCENES AND OCCUPATIONS OF A COUNTRY LIFE.= By EDWARD JESSE.
Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s.=



=JONES (WILLIAM, F.S.A.) WORKS BY.= Cr. 8vo, cl. extra, =7s. 6d.= each.

     =FINGER-RING LORE:= Historical, Legendary, and Anecdotal. With
     nearly 300 Illustrations. Second Edition, Revised and
     Enlarged.

     =CREDULITIES, PAST AND PRESENT.= Including the Sea and Seamen,
     Miners, Talismans, Word and Letter Divination, Exorcising
     and Blessing of Animals, Birds, Eggs, Luck, &c. With an
     Etched Frontispiece.

     =CROWNS AND CORONATIONS:= A History of Regalia. With 100
     Illustrations.



=JONSON'S (BEN) WORKS.= With Notes Critical and Explanatory and a
Biographical Memoir by WILLIAM GIFFORD. Edited by Colonel CUNNINGHAM.
Three Vols., crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.= each.



=JOSEPHUS, THE COMPLETE WORKS OF.= Translated by WHISTON. Containing
"The Antiquities of the Jews" and "The Wars of the Jews." With 52
Illustrations and Maps. Two Vols., demy 8vo, half-bound, =12s. 6d.=



=KEMPT.--PENCIL AND PALETTE:= Chapters on Art and Artists. By ROBERT
KEMPT. Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=



=KERSHAW.--COLONIAL FACTS AND FICTIONS:= Humorous Sketches. By MARK
KERSHAW. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=; cloth, =2s. 6d.=



=KEYSER.--CUT BY THE MESS:= A Novel. By ARTHUR KEYSER. Crown 8vo,
picture cover, =1s.=; cloth limp, =1s. 6d.=



=KING (R. ASHE), NOVELS BY.= Cr. 8vo, cl., 3s. 6d. ea.; Post 8vo, bds.,
=2s.= ea.

     =A DRAWN GAME.=

     ="THE WEARING OF THE GREEN."=



Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =PASSION'S SLAVE.=

     =BELL BARRY.=




=KNIGHTS (THE) OF THE LION:= A Romance of the Thirteenth Century.
Edited, with an Introduction, by the MARQUESS OF LORNE, K.T. Cr. 8vo,
cl. ex., =6s.=



=KNIGHT.--THE PATIENT'S VADE MECUM:= How to Get Most Benefit from
Medical Advice. By WILLIAM KNIGHT, M.R.C.S., and EDWARD KNIGHT, L.R.C.P.
Crown 8vo, =1s.=; cloth limp, =1s. 6d.=



=LAMB'S (CHARLES) COMPLETE WORKS,= in Prose and Verse, including "Poetry
for Children" and "Prince Dorus." Edited, with Notes and Introduction,
by R. H. SHEPHERD. With Two Portraits and Facsimile of a page of the
"Essay on Roast Pig." Crown 8vo, half-bound, =7s. 6d.=

     =THE ESSAYS OF ELIA.= Post 8vo, printed on laid paper and
     half-bound, =2s.=

     =LITTLE ESSAYS:= Sketches and Characters by =Charles Lamb=,
     selected from his Letters by PERCY FITZGERALD. Post 8vo,
     cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=

     =THE DRAMATIC ESSAYS OF CHARLES LAMB.= With Introduction and
     Notes by BRANDER MATTHEWS, and Steel-plate Portrait. Fcap.
     8vo, hf.-bd., =2s. 6d.=



=LANDOR.--CITATION AND EXAMINATION OF WILLIAM SHAKSPEARE,= &c., before
Sir THOMAS LUCY, touching Deer-stealing, 19th September, 1582. To which
Is added, =A CONFERENCE OF MASTER EDMUND SPENSER= with the Earl of
Essex, touching the State of Ireland, 1595. By WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR.
Fcap. 8vo, half-Roxburghe, =2s. 6d.=



=LANE.--THE THOUSAND AND ONE NIGHTS,= commonly called in England =THE
ARABIAN NIGHTS' ENTERTAINMENTS=. Translated from the Arabic, with Notes,
by EDWARD WILLIAM LANE. Illustrated by many hundred Engravings from
Designs by HARVEY. Edited by EDWARD STANLEY POOLE. With a Preface by
STANLEY LANE-POOLE. Three Vols., demy 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.= each.



=LARWOOD (JACOB), WORKS BY.=

     =THE STORY OF THE LONDON PARKS.= With Illusts. Cr. 8vo, cl.
     extra, =3s 6d.=

     =ANECDOTES OF THE CLERGY:= The Antiquities, Humours, and
     Eccentricities of the Cloth. Post 8vo, printed on laid paper
     and half-bound, 2s.



Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =FORENSIC ANECDOTES.=

     =THEATRICAL ANECDOTES.=



=LEIGH (HENRY S.), WORKS BY.=

     =CAROLS OF COCKAYNE.= Printed on hand-made paper, bound in
     buckram, =5s.=

     =JEUX D'ESPRIT.= Edited by HENRY S. LEIGH. Post 8vo, cloth
     limp, =2s. 6d.=



=LEYS (JOHN).--THE LINDSAYS:= A Romance. Post 8vo, illust. bds., =2s.=



=LIFE IN LONDON;= or, The History of JERRY HAWTHORN and CORINTHIAN TOM.
With CRUIKSHANK's Coloured Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s.
6d.= [_New Edition preparing._]



=LINTON (E. LYNN), WORKS BY.= Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =WITCH STORIES.=

     =OURSELVES:= ESSAYS ON WOMEN.



Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.= each.

     =SOWING THE WIND.=

     =PATRICIA KEMBALL.=

     =ATONEMENT OF LEAM DUNDAS.=

     =THE WORLD WELL LOST.=

     =UNDER WHICH LORD?=

     ="MY LOVE!"=

     =IONE.=

     =PASTON CAREW,= Millionaire & Miser.



Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =THE REBEL OF THE FAMILY.=

     =WITH A SILKEN THREAD.=



     =FREESHOOTING:= Extracts from the Works of Mrs. LYNN LINTON.
     Post 8vo, cloth, =2s. 6d.=



=LONGFELLOW'S POETICAL WORKS.= With numerous Illustrations on Steel and
Wood. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=LUCY.--GIDEON FLEYCE:= A Novel. By HENRY W. LUCY. Crown 8vo, cloth
extra, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=LUSIAD (THE) OF CAMOENS.= Translated into English Spenserian Verse by
ROBERT FFRENCH DUFF. With 14 Plates. Demy 8vo, cloth boards, =18s.=



=MACALPINE (AVERY), NOVELS BY.=

     =TERESA ITASCA,= and other Stories. Crown 8vo, bound in
     canvas, =2s. 6d.=

     =BROKEN WINGS.= With 6 Illusts. by W. J. HENNESSY. Crown 8vo,
     cloth extra, =6s.=



=MACCOLL (HUGH), NOVELS BY.=

     =MR. STRANGER'S SEALED PACKET.= Second Edition. Crown 8vo, cl.
     extra, =5s.=

     =EDNOR WHITLOCK,= Crown 8vo, cloth extra. =6s.=



=MACDONELL.--QUAKER COUSINS:= A Novel. By AGNES MACDONELL. Crown 8vo,
cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=McCARTHY (JUSTIN, M.P.), WORKS BY.=

     =A HISTORY OF OUR OWN TIMES,= from the Accession of Queen
     Victoria to the General Election of 1880. Four Vols, demy
     8vo, cloth extra, =12s.= each.--Also a POPULAR EDITION, in
     Four Vols., crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.= each.--And a Jubilee
     Edition, with an Appendix of Events to the end of 1886, in
     Two Vols., large crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.= each.

     =A SHORT HISTORY OF OUR OWN TIMES.= One Vol., crown 8vo, cloth
     extra, =6s.=--Also a CHEAP POPULAR EDITION, post 8vo, cloth
     limp, =2s. 6d.=

     =A HISTORY OF THE FOUR GEORGES.= Four Vols, demy 8vo, cloth
     extra, =12s.= each. [Vols. I. & II. _ready_.]



Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards.
=2s.= each.

     =THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS.=

     =MY ENEMY'S DAUGHTER.=

     =A FAIR SAXON.=

     =LINLEY ROCHFORD.=

     =DEAR LADY DISDAIN.=

     =MISS MISANTHROPE.=

     =DONNA QUIXOTE.=

     =THE COMET OF A SEASON.=

     =MAID OF ATHENS.=

     =CAMIOLA:= A Girl with a Fortune.



     ="THE RIGHT HONOURABLE."= By JUSTIN MCCARTHY, M.P., and Mrs.
     CAMPBELL-PRAED. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=



=McCARTHY (JUSTIN H., M.P.), WORKS BY.=

     =THE FRENCH REVOLUTION.= Four Vols., 8vo, =12s.= each. [Vols. I.
     & II. _ready_.]

     =AN OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY OF IRELAND.= Crown 8vo, =1s.=; cloth,
     =1s. 6d.=

     =IRELAND SINCE THE UNION:= Irish History, 1798-1886. Crown
     8vo, cloth, =6s.=



     =HAFIZ IN LONDON:= Poems. Small 8vo, gold cloth, =3s. 6d.=

     =HARLEQUINADE:= Poems. Small 4to, Japanese vellum, =8s.=



     =OUR SENSATION NOVEL.= Crown 8vo, picture cover, =1s.=; cloth
     limp, =1s. 6d.=

     =DOOM!= An Atlantic Episode. Crown 8vo, picture cover, =1s.=

     =DOLLY:= A Sketch. Crown 8vo, picture cover. =1s.=; cloth limp,
     =1s. 6d.=

     =LILY LASS:= A Romance. Crown 8vo, picture cover, =1s.=; cloth
     limp, =1s. 6d.=

     =THE THOUSAND AND ONE DAYS:= Persian Tales. Edited by JUSTIN
     H. MCCARTHY. With 2 Photogravures by STANLEY L. WOOD. Two
     Vols., crown 8vo, half-bound, =12s.=



=MACDONALD (GEORGE, LL.D.), WORKS BY.=

     =WORKS OF FANCY AND IMAGINATION.= Ten Vols., cl. extra, gilt
     edges, in cloth case, =21s.= Or the Vols. may be had
     separately, in grolier cl., at =2s. 6d.= each.

     Vol. I. WITHIN AND WITHOUT.--THE HIDDEN LIFE.

     Vol. II. THE DISCIPLE.--THE GOSPEL WOMEN.--BOOK OF
     SONNETS.--ORGAN SONGS.

     Vol. III. VIOLIN SONGS.--SONGS OF THE DAYS AND NIGHTS.--A
     BOOK OF DREAMS.--ROADSIDE POEMS.--POEMS FOR CHILDREN.

     Vol. IV. PARABLES.--BALLADS.--SCOTCH SONGS.

     Vol. V. & VI. PHANTASTES: A Faerie Romance.

     Vol. VII. THE PORTENT.

     Vol. VIII. THE LIGHT PRINCESS.--THE GIANT'S HEART.--SHADOWS.

     Vol. IX. CROSS PURPOSES.--THE GOLDEN KEY.--THE
     CARASOYN.--LITTLE DAYLIGHT.

     Vol. X. THE CRUEL PAINTER.--THE WOW O' RIVVEN.--THE
     CASTLE.--THE BROKEN SWORDS.--THE GRAY WOLF.--UNCLE
     CORNELIUS.



     =THE POETICAL WORKS OF DR. GEORGE MACDONALD.= Collected and
     arranged by the Author. 2 vols., crown 8vo, buckram, =12s.=
     [_Shortly._]

     =A THREEFOLD CORD.= Poems by Three Friends. Edited by Dr.
     GEORGE MACDONALD. Post 8vo, cloth, =5s.=

     =HEATHER AND SNOW:= A Novel. 2 vols., crown 8vo, [_Shortly._]



=MACGREGOR.--PASTIMES AND PLAYERS:= Notes on Popular Games. By ROBERT
MACGREGOR. Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=



=MACKAY.--INTERLUDES AND UNDERTONES;= or, Music at Twilight. By CHARLES
MACKAY, LL.D. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=



=MACLISE PORTRAIT GALLERY (THE) OF ILLUSTRIOUS LITERARY CHARACTERS: 85
PORTRAITS;= with Memoirs--Biographical, Critical, Bibliographical, and
Anecdotal--illustrative of the Literature of the former half of the
Present Century, by WILLIAM BATES, B.A. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s.
6d.=



=MACQUOID (MRS.), WORKS BY.= Square 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.= each.

     =IN THE ARDENNES.= With 50 Illustrations by THOMAS R.
     MACQUOID.

     =PICTURES AND LEGENDS FROM NORMANDY AND BRITTANY.= With 34
     Illustrations by THOMAS R. MACQUOID.

     =THROUGH NORMANDY.= With 92 Illustrations by T. R. MACQUOID,
     and a Map.

     =THROUGH BRITTANY.= With 35 Illustrations by T. R. MACQUOID,
     and a Map.

     =ABOUT YORKSHIRE=. With 67 Illustrations by T. R. MACQUOID.



Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =THE EVIL EYE,= and other Stories.

     =LOST ROSE.=



=MAGIC LANTERN, THE,= and its Management: including full Practical
Directions for producing the Limelight, making Oxygen Gas, and preparing
Lantern Slides. By T. C. HEPWORTH. With 10 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo,
=1s.=; cloth, =1s. 6d.=



=MAGICIAN'S OWN BOOK, THE:= Performances with Cups and Balls, Eggs,
Hats, Handkerchiefs, &c. All from actual Experience. Edited by W. H.
CREMER. With 200 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =4s. 6d.=



=MAGNA CHARTA:= An Exact Facsimile of the Original in the British Museum,
3 feet by 2 feet, with Arms and Seals emblazoned in Gold and Colours,
=5s.=



=MALLOCK (W. H.), WORKS BY.=

     =THE NEW REPUBLIC.= Post 8vo, picture cover, =2s.=; cloth limp,
     =2s. 6d.=

     =THE NEW PAUL & VIRGINIA:= Positivism on an Island. Post 8vo,
     cloth, =2s. 6d.=

     =POEMS.= Small 4to, parchment, =8s.=

     =IS LIFE WORTH LIVING?= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=

     =A ROMANCE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.= Crown 8vo, cloth, =6s.=
     [_Shortly._]



=MALLORY'S (SIR THOMAS) MORT D'ARTHUR:= The Stories of King Arthur and
of the Knights of the Round Table. (A Selection.) Edited by B.
MONTGOMERIE RANKING. Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s.=



=MARK TWAIN, WORKS BY.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.= each.

     =THE CHOICE WORKS OF MARK TWAIN.= Revised and Corrected
     throughout by the Author. With Life, Portrait, and numerous
     Illustrations.

     =ROUGHING IT,= and =INNOCENTS AT HOME.= With 200 Illusts. by
     F. A. FRASER.

     =MARK TWAIN'S LIBRARY OF HUMOUR.= With 197 Illustrations.

     =A YANKEE AT THE COURT OF KING ARTHUR.= With 220 Illusts. by
     BEARD.



Crown 8vo, cloth extra (illustrated), =7s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illust.
boards, =2s.= each.

     =THE INNOCENTS ABROAD;= or, New Pilgrim's Progress. With 234
     Illustrations. (The Two-Shilling Edition is entitled =MARK
     TWAIN'S PLEASURE TRIP=.)

     =THE GILDED AGE.= By MARK TWAIN and C. D. WARNER. With 212
     Illustrations.

     =THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.= With 111 Illustrations.

     =A TRAMP ABROAD.= With 314 Illustrations.

     =THE PRINCE AND THE PAUPER.= With 190 Illustrations.

     =LIFE ON THE MISSISSIPPI.= With 300 Illustrations.

     =ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.= With 174 Illusts. by E. W.
     KEMBLE.



     =MARK TWAIN'S SKETCHES.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=

     =THE STOLEN WHITE ELEPHANT,= &c. Cr. 8vo, cl., =6s.=; post 8vo,
     illust. bds., =2s.=

     =THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT.= With 81 Illustrations by HAL HURST
     and DAN BEARD. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=MARLOWE'S WORKS.= Including his Translations. Edited, with Notes and
Introductions, by Col. CUNNINGHAM. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=



=MARRYAT (FLORENCE), NOVELS BY.= Post 8vo, illust. boards, =2s.= each.

     =A HARVEST OF WILD OATS.=

     =OPEN! SESAME!=

     =FIGHTING THE AIR.=

     =WRITTEN IN FIRE.=



=MASSINGER'S PLAYS.= From the Text of WILLIAM GIFFORD. Edited by Col.
CUNNINGHAM. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=



=MASTERMAN.--HALF-A-DOZEN DAUGHTERS:= A Novel. By J. MASTERMAN. Post
8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=MATTHEWS.--A SECRET OF THE SEA,= &c. By BRANDER MATTHEWS. Post 8vo,
illustrated boards, =2s.=; cloth limp, =2s. 6d.=



=MAYHEW.--LONDON CHARACTERS AND THE HUMOROUS SIDE OF LONDON LIFE.= By
HENRY MAYHEW. With Illusts. Crown 8vo, cloth, =3s. 6d.=



=MENKEN.--INFELICIA:= Poems by ADAH ISAACS MENKEN. With Illustrations by
F. E. LUMMIS and F. O. C. DARLEY. Small 4to, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=MERRICK.--THE MAN WHO WAS GOOD.= By LEONARD MERRICK, Author of "Violet
Moses," &c.--Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= [_Shortly._]



=MEXICAN MUSTANG (ON A),= through Texas to the Rio Grande. By A. E.
SWEET and J. ARMOY KNOX. With 265 Illusts. Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, =7s.
6d.=



=MIDDLEMASS (JEAN), NOVELS BY.= Post 8vo, illust. boards, =2s.= each.

     =TOUCH AND GO.=

     =MR. DORILLION.=



=MILLER.--PHYSIOLOGY FOR THE YOUNG;= or, The House of Life: Human
Physiology, with its application to the Preservation of Health. By Mrs.
F. FENWICK-MILLER. With numerous Illustrations. Post 8vo, cloth limp,
=2s. 6d.=



=MILTON (J. L.), WORKS BY.= Post 8vo, =1s.= each; cloth, =1s. 6d.= each.

     =THE HYGIENE OF THE SKIN.= With Directions for Diet, Soaps,
     Baths, &c.

     =THE BATH IN DISEASES OF THE SKIN.=

     =THE LAWS OF LIFE, AND THEIR RELATION TO DISEASES OF THE
     SKIN.=



     =THE SUCCESSFUL TREATMENT OF LEPROSY.= Demy 8vo, =1s.=



=MINTO (WM.)--WAS SHE GOOD OR BAD?= Cr. 8vo, =1s.=; cloth, =1s. 6d.=



=MOLESWORTH (MRS.), NOVELS BY.=

     =HATHERCOURT RECTORY.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=

     =THAT GIRL IN BLACK.= Crown 8vo, cloth, =1s. 6d.=



=MOORE (THOMAS), WORKS BY.=

     =THE EPICUREAN; and ALCIPHRON.= Post 8vo, half-bound, =2s.=

     =PROSE AND VERSE,= Humorous, Satirical, and Sentimental, by
     THOMAS MOORE; with Suppressed Passages from the MEMOIRS OF
     LORD BYRON. Edited by R. HERNE SHEPHERD. With Portrait.
     Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=MUDDOCK (J. E.), STORIES BY.=

     =STORIES WEIRD AND WONDERFUL.= Post 8vo, illust. boards, =2s.=;
     cloth, =2s. 6d.=

     =THE DEAD MAN'S SECRET;= or, The Valley of Gold. With
     Frontispiece by F. BARNARD. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =5s.=;
     post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=

     =MAID MARIAN AND ROBIN HOOD:= A Romance of Old Sherwood
     Forest. With 12 Illustrations by STANLEY L. WOOD. Crown 8vo,
     cloth extra, =5s.=



=MURRAY (D. CHRISTIE), NOVELS BY.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.= each.

     =A LIFE'S ATONEMENT.=

     =JOSEPH'S COAT.=

     =COALS OF FIRE.=

     =VAL STRANGE.=

     =HEARTS.=

     =WAY OF THE WORLD.=

     =A MODEL FATHER.=

     =OLD BLAZER'S HERO.=

     =BY THE GATE OF THE SEA.=

     =A BIT OF HUMAN NATURE.=

     =FIRST PERSON SINGULAR.=

     =CYNIC FORTUNE.=



     =BOB MARTIN'S LITTLE GIRL.= Three Vols., crown 8vo, [_Sept._]



=MURRAY (D. CHRISTIE) & HENRY HERMAN, WORKS BY.=

     =ONE TRAVELLER RETURNS.= Cr. 8vo, cl. extra, =6s.=; post 8vo,
     illust. bds., =2s.=



Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.= each.

     =PAUL JONES'S ALIAS.= With 13 Illustrations by A. FORESTIER
     and G. NICOLET.

     =THE BISHOPS' BIBLE.=



=MURRAY (HENRY), NOVELS BY.=

     =A GAME OF BLUFF.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=; cloth,
     =2s. 6d.=

     =A SONG OF SIXPENCE.= Post 8vo, cloth extra, =2s. 6d.=



=NEWBOLT.--TAKEN FROM THE ENEMY.= By HENRY NEWBOLT. Fcap. 8vo, cloth
boards, =1s. 6d.=



=NISBET (HUME) BOOKS BY.=

     ="BAIL UP!"= A Romance of BUSHRANGERS AND BLACKS. Cr. 8vo, cl.
     ex., =3s. 6d.=

     =LESSONS IN ART.= With 21 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth
     extra, =2s. 6d.=

     =WHERE ART BEGINS.= With 27 Illusts. Square 8vo, cloth extra,
     =7s. 6d.= [_Shortly._]



=NOVELISTS.--HALF-HOURS WITH THE BEST NOVELISTS OF THE CENTURY.= Edit.
by H. T. MACKENZIE BELL. Cr. 8vo, cl., =3s. 6d.= [_Preparing._]



=O'HANLON (ALICE), NOVELS BY.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =THE UNFORESEEN.=

     =CHANCE? OR FATE?=



=OHNET (GEORGES), NOVELS BY.=

     =DOCTOR RAMEAU.= 9 Illusts. by E. BAYARD. Cr. 8vo, cl., =6s.=;
     post 8vo, bds., =2s.=

     =A LAST LOVE.= Crown 8vo, cloth, =5s.=; post 8vo, boards, =2s.=

     =A WEIRD GIFT.= Crown 8vo, cloth, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, boards,
     =2s.=



=OLIPHANT (MRS.), NOVELS BY.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =THE PRIMROSE PATH.=

     =THE GREATEST HEIRESS IN ENGLAND.=



     =WHITELADIES.= With Illustrations by ARTHUR HOPKINS and HENRY
     WOODS, A.R.A. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo,
     illustrated boards, =2s.=



=O'REILLY (HARRINGTON).--FIFTY YEARS ON THE TRAIL:= Adventures of JOHN
Y. NELSON. 100 Illusts. by P. FRENZENY. Crown 8vo, =3s. 6d.=



=O'REILLY (MRS.).-PHOEBE'S FORTUNES.= Post 8vo, illust. bds., =2s.=



=O'SHAUGHNESSY (ARTHUR), POEMS BY.=

     =LAYS OF FRANCE.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =10s. 6d.=

     =MUSIC AND MOONLIGHT.= Fcap. 8vo, cloth extra. =7s. 6d.=

     =SONGS OF A WORKER.= Fcap. 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=OUIDA, NOVELS BY.= Cr. 8vo, cl., =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illust.
bds., =2s.= each.

     =HELD IN BONDAGE.=

     =TRICOTRIN.=

     =STRATHMORE.=

     =CHANDOS.=

     =CECIL CASTLEMAINE'S GAGE.=

     =IDALIA.=

     =UNDER TWO FLAGS.=

     =PUCK.=

     =FOLLE-FARINE.=

     =A DOG OF FLANDERS.=

     =PASCAREL.=

     =TWO LITTLE WOODEN SHOES.=

     =SIGNA.=

     =IN A WINTER CITY.=

     =ARIADNE.=

     =FRIENDSHIP.=

     =MOTHS.=

     =PIPISTRELLO.=

     =A VILLAGE COMMUNE.=

     =IN MAREMMA.=

     =BIMBI.=

     =SYRLIN.=

     =WANDA.=

     =FRESCOES.=

     =OTHMAR.=

     =PRINCESS NAPRAXINE.=

     =GUILDEROY.=

     =RUFFINO.=



     =BIMBI.= Presentation Edition, with Nine Illustrations by
     EDMUND H. GARRETT. Square 8vo, cloth, =5s.=

     =SANTA BARBARA,= &c. Second Edition. Square 8vo, cloth, =6s.=;
     cr. 8vo, =3s. 6d.=

     =WISDOM, WIT, AND PATHOS,= selected from the Works of OUIDA by
     F. SYDNEY MORRIS. Post 8vo, cloth extra, =5s.= CHEAP EDITION,
     illustrated boards, =2s.=



=PAGE (H.A.) WORKS BY.=

     =THOREAU:= His Life and Aims. With Portrait. Post 8vo, cloth
     limp, =2s. 6d.=

     =ANIMAL ANECDOTES.= Arranged on a New Principle. Crown 8vo,
     cloth extra, =5s.=



=PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS AND ELECTIONEERING, A HISTORY OF,= from the
Stuarts to Queen Victoria. By JOSEPH GREGO. A New Edition, with 93
Illustrations. Demy 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=PASCAL'S PROVINCIAL LETTERS.= A New Translation, with Historical
Introduction and Notes by T. M'CRIE, D.D. Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s.=



=PAUL.--GENTLE AND SIMPLE.= By MARGARET A. PAUL. With Frontispiece by
HELEN PATERSON. Crown 8vo, cloth, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, illust. boards,
=2s.=



=PAYN (JAMES), NOVELS BY.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra. =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards.
=2s.= each.

     =LOST SIR MASSINGBERD.=

     =WALTER'S WORD.=

     =LESS BLACK THAN WE'RE PAINTED.=

     =BY PROXY.=

     =HIGH SPIRITS.=

     =UNDER ONE ROOF.=

     =A CONFIDENTIAL AGENT.=

     =A GRAPE FROM A THORN.=

     =FROM EXILE.=

     =THE CANON'S WARD.=

     =THE TALK OF THE TOWN.=

     =HOLIDAY TASKS.=

     =GLOW-WORM TALES.=

     =THE MYSTERY OF MIRBRIDGE.=

     =THE WORD AND THE WILL.=



Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =HUMOROUS STORIES.=

     =THE FOSTER BROTHERS.=

     =THE FAMILY SCAPEGRACE.=

     =MARRIED BENEATH HIM.=

     =BENTINCK'S TUTOR.=

     =A PERFECT TREASURE.=

     =A COUNTY FAMILY.=

     =LIKE FATHER, LIKE SON.=

     =A WOMAN'S VENGEANCE.=

     =CARLYON'S YEAR.=

     =CECIL'S TRYST.=

     =MURPHY'S MASTER.=

     =AT HER MERCY.=

     =THE CLYFFARDS OF CLYFFE.=

     =FOUND DEAD.=

     =GWENDOLINE'S HARVEST.=

     =A MARINE RESIDENCE.=

     =MIRK ABBEY.=

     =SOME PRIVATE VIEWS.=

     =NOT WOOED, BUT WON.=

     =TWO HUNDRED POUNDS REWARD.=

     =THE BEST OF HUSBANDS.=

     =HALVES.=

     =THE BURNT MILLION.=

     =FALLEN FORTUNES.=

     =WHAT HE COST HER.=

     =KIT: A MEMORY.=

     =FOR CASH ONLY.=

     =A PRINCE OF THE BLOOD.=



Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each.

     =IN PERIL AND PRIVATION:= Stories of MARINE ADVENTURE. With 17
     Illusts.

     =SUNNY STORIES, and some SHADY ONES.= Frontispiece by FRED.
     BARNARD.



     =NOTES FROM THE "NEWS."= Crown 8vo, portrait cover, =1s.=;
     cloth, =1s. 6d.=



=PENNELL (H. CHOLMONDELEY), WORKS BY.= Post 8vo, cl., =2s. 6d.= each.

     =PUCK ON PEGASUS.= With Illustrations.

     =PEGASUS RE-SADDLED.= With Ten full-page Illustrations by G.
     DU MAURIER.

     =THE MUSES OF MAYFAIR.= Vers de Societe, Selected by H. C.
     PENNELL.



=PHELPS (E. STUART), WORKS BY.= Post 8vo, =1s.= each: cloth, =1s. 6d.=
each.

     =BEYOND THE GATES.= By the Author of "The Gates Ajar."

     =AN OLD MAID'S PARADISE.=

     =BURGLARS IN PARADISE.=



     =JACK THE FISHERMAN.= Illustrated by C. W. REED. Cr. 8vo, =1s.=;
     cloth, =1s. 6d.=



=PIRKIS (C. L.), NOVELS BY.=

     =TROOPING WITH CROWS.= Fcap. 8vo, picture cover, =1s.=

     =LADY LOVELACE.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=PLANCHE (J. R.), WORKS BY.=

     =THE PURSUIVANT OF ARMS;= or, Heraldry Founded upon Facts.
     With Coloured Frontispiece, Five Plates, and 209 Illusts.
     Crown 8vo, cloth, =7s. 6d.=

     =SONGS AND POEMS,= 1819-1879. Introduction by Mrs. MACKARNESS.
     Cr. 8vo, cl., =6s.=



=PLUTARCH'S LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN.= Translated from the Greek, with
Notes Critical and Historical, and a Life of Plutarch, by JOHN and
WILLIAM LANGHORNE. With Portraits. Two Vols., demy 8vo, half-bound,
=10s. 6d.=



=POE'S (EDGAR ALLAN) CHOICE WORKS,= in Prose and Poetry. Introduction by
CHAS. BAUDELAIRE, Portrait, and Facsimiles. Cr. 8vo, cloth, =7s. 6d.=

     =THE MYSTERY OF MARIE ROGET,= &c. Post 8vo, illustrated
     boards, =2s.=

=POPE'S POETICAL WORKS.= Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s.=



=PRICE (E. C.), NOVELS BY.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards.
=2s.= each.

     =VALENTINA.=

     =THE FOREIGNERS.=

     =MRS. LANCASTER'S RIVAL.=



     =GERALD.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=PRINCESS OLGA.--RADNA;= or, The Great Conspiracy of 1881. By the
Princess OLGA. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=



=PROCTOR (RICHARD A., B.A.), WORKS BY.=

     =FLOWERS OF THE SKY.= With 55 Illusts. Small crown 8vo, cloth
     extra, =3s. 6d.=

     =EASY STAR LESSONS.= With Star Maps for Every Night in the
     Year, Drawings of the Constellations, &c. Crown 8vo, cloth
     extra, =6s.=

     =FAMILIAR SCIENCE STUDIES.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=

     =SATURN AND ITS SYSTEM.= With 13 Steel Plates. Demy 8vo, cloth
     ex., =10s. 6d.=

     =MYSTERIES OF TIME AND SPACE.= With Illustrations. Cr. 8vo,
     cloth extra, =6s.=

     =THE UNIVERSE OF SUNS.= With numerous Illustrations. Cr. 8vo,
     cloth ex., =6s.=

     =WAGES AND WANTS OF SCIENCE WORKERS.= Crown 8vo, =1s. 6d.=



=PRYCE.--MISS MAXWELL'S AFFECTIONS.= By RICHARD PRYCE, Author of "No
Impediment." With a Frontispiece by HAL LUDLOW. Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
=3s. 6d.=



=RAMBOSSON.--POPULAR ASTRONOMY.= By J. RAMBOSSON, Laureate of the
Institute of France. With numerous Illusts. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s.
6d.=



=RANDOLPH.--AUNT ABIGAIL DYKES:= A Novel. By Lt.-Colonel GEORGE
RANDOLPH, U.S.A. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=READE (CHARLES), NOVELS BY.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, illustrated, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illust.
bds., =2s.= each.

     =PEG WOFFINGTON.= Illustrated by S. L. FILDES, R.A.--Also a
     POCKET EDITION, set in New Type, in Elzevir style, fcap.
     8vo, half-leather, =2s. 6d.=

     =CHRISTIE JOHNSTONE.= Illustrated by WILLIAM SMALL.--Also a
     POCKET EDITION, set in New Type, in Elzevir style, fcap.
     8vo, half-leather, =2s. 6d.=

     =IT IS NEVER TOO LATE TO MEND.= Illustrated by G. J. PINWELL.

     =THE COURSE OF TRUE LOVE NEVER DID RUN SMOOTH.= Illustrated by
     HELEN PATERSON.

     =THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A THIEF,= &c. Illustrated by MATT
     STRETCH.

     =LOVE ME LITTLE, LOVE ME LONG.= Illustrated by M. ELLEN
     EDWARDS.

     =THE DOUBLE MARRIAGE.= Illusts. by Sir JOHN GILBERT, R.A., and
     C. KEENE.

     =THE CLOISTER AND THE HEARTH.= Illustrated by CHARLES KEENE.

     =HARD CASH.= Illustrated by F. W. LAWSON.

     =GRIFFITH GAUNT.= Illustrated by S. L. FILDES, R.A., and
     WILLIAM SMALL.

     =FOUL PLAY.= Illustrated by GEORGE DU MAURIER.

     =PUT YOURSELF IN HIS PLACE.= Illustrated by ROBERT BARNES.

     =A TERRIBLE TEMPTATION.= Illustrated by EDWARD HUGHES and
     A. W. COOPER.

     =A SIMPLETON.= Illustrated by KATE CRAUFURD.

     =THE WANDERING HEIR.= Illustrated by HELEN PATERSON, S. L.
     FILDES, R.A., C. GREEN, and HENRY WOODS, A.R.A.

     =A WOMAN-HATER.= Illustrated by THOMAS COULDERY.

     =SINGLEHEART AND DOUBLEFACE.= Illustrated by P. MACNAB.

     =GOOD STORIES OF MEN AND OTHER ANIMALS.= Illustrated by E. A.
     ABBEY, PERCY MACQUOID, R.W.S., and JOSEPH NASH.

     =THE JILT,= and other Stories. Illustrated by JOSEPH NASH.

     =A PERILOUS SECRET.= Illustrated by FRED. BARNARD.

     =READIANA.= With a Steel-plate Portrait of CHARLES READE.



     =BIBLE CHARACTERS:= Studies of David, Paul, &c. Fcap. 8vo,
     leatherette, =1s.=



     =SELECTIONS FROM THE WORKS OF CHARLES READE.= With an
     Introduction by Mrs. ALEX. IRELAND, and a Steel-Plate
     Portrait. Crown 8vo, buckram, =6s.=



=RIDDELL (MRS. J. H.), NOVELS BY.=

     Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each: post 8vo, illustrated
     boards, =2s.= each.

     =THE PRINCE OF WALES'S GARDEN PARTY.=

     =WEIRD STORIES.=



Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =THE UNINHABITED HOUSE.=

     =MYSTERY IN PALACE GARDENS.=

     =FAIRY WATER.=

     =HER MOTHER'S DARLING.=

     =THE NUN'S CURSE.=

     =IDLE TALES.=



=RIMMER (ALFRED), WORKS BY.= Square 8vo, cloth gilt, =7s. 6d.= each.

     =OUR OLD COUNTRY TOWNS.= With 55 Illustrations.

     =RAMBLES ROUND ETON AND HARROW.= With 50 Illustrations.

     =ABOUT ENGLAND WITH DICKENS.= With 58 Illusts. by C. A.
     VANDERHOOF, &c.



=RIVES (Amelie).--BARBARA DERING.= By AMELIE RIVES, Author of "The Quick
or the Dead?" Two Vols., crown 8vo.



=ROBINSON CRUSOE.= By DANIEL DEFOE. (MAJOR'S EDITION.) With 37
Illustrations by GEORGE CRUIKSHANK. Post 8vo, half-bound, =2s.=



=ROBINSON (F. W.), NOVELS BY.=

     =WOMEN ARE STRANGE.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=

     =THE HANDS OF JUSTICE.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=; post
     8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=ROBINSON (PHIL), WORKS BY.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.= each.

     =THE POETS' BIRDS.=

     =THE POETS' BEASTS.=

     =THE POETS AND NATURE: REPTILES, FISHES, INSECTS.=
     [_Preparing._]



=ROCHEFOUCAULD'S MAXIMS AND MORAL REFLECTION.= With Notes, and an
Introductory Essay by SAINTE-BEUVE. Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s.=



=ROLL OF BATTLE-ABBEY, THE:= A List of the Principal Warriors who came
from Normandy with William the Conqueror, and Settled in this Country,
A.D. 1066-7. With Arms emblazoned in Gold and Colours. Handsomely
printed, =5s.=



=ROWLEY (HON. HUGH), WORKS BY.= Post 8vo, cloth, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =PUNIANA: RIDDLES AND JOKES.= With numerous Illustrations.

     =MORE PUNIANA.= Profusely Illustrated.



=RUNCIMAN (JAMES), STORIES BY.= Post 8vo, bds., =2s.= ea.; cl., =2s.
6d.= ea.

     =SKIPPERS AND SHELLBACKS.=

     =SCHOOLS AND SCHOLARS.=

     =GRACE BALMAIGN'S SWEETHEART.=



=RUSSELL (W. CLARK), BOOKS AND NOVELS BY:=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=
each.

     =ROUND THE GALLEY-FIRE.=

     =IN THE MIDDLE WATCH.=

     =A VOYAGE TO THE CAPE.=

     =A BOOK FOR THE HAMMOCK.=

     =MYSTERY OF THE "OCEAN STAR."=

     =THE ROMANCE OF JENNY HARLOWE.=



Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.= each.

     =AN OCEAN TRAGEDY.=

     =MY SHIPMATE LOUISE.=



     =ALONE ON A WIDE WIDE SEA.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=

     =ON THE FO'K'SLE HEAD.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=SAINT AUBYN (ALAN), NOVELS BY.=

     =A FELLOW OF TRINITY.= With a Note by OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES
     and a Frontispiece. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=; post
     8vo, illust. boards, =2s.=

     =THE JUNIOR DEAN.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



Fcap. 8vo, cloth boards, =1s. 6d.= each.

     =THE OLD MAID'S SWEETHEART.=

     =MODEST LITTLE SARA.=



=SALA (G. A.).--GASLIGHT AND DAYLIGHT.= Post 8vo, boards, =2s.=



=SANSON.--SEVEN GENERATIONS OF EXECUTIONERS:= Memoirs of the Sanson
Family (1688 to 1847). Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=SAUNDERS (JOHN), NOVELS BY.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.= each.

     =GUY WATERMAN.=

     =THE LION IN THE PATH.=

     =THE TWO DREAMERS.=



     =BOUND TO THE WHEEL.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=SAUNDERS (KATHARINE), NOVELS BY.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.= each.

     =MARGARET AND ELIZABETH.=

     =THE HIGH MILLS.=

     =HEART SALVAGE.=

     =SEBASTIAN.=



     =JOAN MERRYWEATHER.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=

     =GIDEON'S ROCK.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=SCIENCE-GOSSIP:= An Illustrated Medium of Interchange for Students and
Lovers of Nature. Edited by Dr. J. E. TAYLOR, F.L.S., &c. Devoted to
Geology, Botany, Physiology, Chemistry, Zoology, Microscopy, Telescopy,
Physiography, Photography, &c. Price =4d.= Monthly; or =5s.= per year,
post-free. Vols. I. to XIX. may be had, =7s. 6d.= each; Vols. XX. to
date, =5s.= each. Cases for Binding, =1s. 6d.=



=SECRET OUT, THE:= One Thousand Tricks with Cards; with Entertaining
Experiments in Drawing-room or "White Magic." By W. H. CREMER. With 300
Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =4s. 6d.=



=SEGUIN (L. G.), WORKS BY:=

     =THE COUNTRY OF THE PASSION PLAY (OBERAMMERGAU)= and the
     Highlands of Bavaria. With Map and 37 Illustrations. Crown
     8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=

     =WALKS IN ALGIERS.= With 2 Maps and 16 Illusts. Crown 8vo,
     cloth extra, =6s.=



=SENIOR (WM.).--BY STREAM AND SEA.= Post 8vo, cloth, =2s. 6d.=



=SHAKESPEARE FOR CHILDREN: LAMB'S TALES FROM SHAKESPEARE.= With
Illustrations, coloured and plain, by J. MOYR SMITH. Cr. 4to, =6s.=



=SHARP.--CHILDREN OF TO-MORROW:= A Novel. By WILLIAM SHARP. Crown 8vo,
cloth extra, =6s.=



=SHARP (LUKE)--IN A STEAMER CHAIR.= By LUKE SHARP (R. E. BARR). With Two
Illusts. by DEMAIN HAMMOND. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=SHELLEY.--THE COMPLETE WORKS IN VERSE AND PROSE OF PERCY BYSSHE
SHELLEY.= Edited, Prefaced, and Annotated by R. HERNE SHEPHERD. Five
Vols., crown 8vo, cloth boards, =3s. 6d.= each.

     =POETICAL WORKS,= in Three Vols.:

     Vol. I. Introduction by the Editor; Posthumous Fragments of
     Margaret Nicholson; Shelley's Correspondence with Stockdale;
     The Wandering Jew; Queen Mab, with the Notes; Alastor, and
     other Poems; Rosalind and Helen; Prometheus Unbound;
     Adonais, &c.

     Vol. II. Laon and Cythna; The Cenci; Julian and Maddalo;
     Swellfoot the Tyrant; The Witch of Atlas; Epipsychidion:
     Hellas.

     Vol. III. Posthumous Poems; The Masque of Anarchy; and other
     Pieces.

     =PROSE WORKS,= in Two Vols.:

     Vol. I. The Two Romances of Zastrozzi and St. Irvyne; the
     Dublin and Marlow Pamphlets; A Refutation of Deism; Letters
     to Leigh Hunt, and some Minor Writings and Fragments.

     Vol. II. The Essays; Letters from Abroad; Translations and
     Fragments. Edited by Mrs. SHELLEY. With a Bibliography of
     Shelley, and an Index of the Prose Works.



=SHERARD.--ROGUES:= A Novel. By R. H. SHEPARD. Crown 8vo, picture cover,
=1s.=; cloth, =1s. 6d.=



=SHERIDAN (GENERAL).--PERSONAL MEMOIRS OF GENERAL P. H. SHERIDAN.= With
Portraits and Facsimiles. Two Vols., demy 8vo, cloth, =24s.=



=SHERIDAN'S (RICHARD BRINSLEY) COMPLETE WORKS.= With Life and Anecdotes.
Including his Dramatic Writings, his Works in Prose and Poetry.
Translations, Speeches and Jokes. 10 Illusts. Cr. 8vo, hf.-bound, =7s.
6d.=

     =THE RIVALS, THE SCHOOL FOR SCANDAL,= and other Plays. Post
     8vo, printed on laid paper and half-bound. =2s.=

     =SHERIDAN'S COMEDIES: THE RIVALS= and =THE SCHOOL FOR SCANDAL.=
     Edited, with an Introduction and Notes to each Play, and a
     Biographical Sketch, by BRANDER MATTHEWS. With
     Illustrations. Demy 8vo, half-parchment, =12s. 6d.=



=SIDNEY'S (SIR PHILIP) COMPLETE POETICAL WORKS,= including all those in
"Arcadia." With Portrait, Memorial Introduction, Notes, &c. by the Rev.
A. B. GROSART, D.D. Three Vols., crown 8vo, cloth boards, =18s.=



=SIGNBOARDS:= Their History. With Anecdotes of Famous Taverns and
Remarkable Characters. By JACOB LARWOOD and JOHN CAMDEN HOTTEN. With
Coloured Frontispiece and 94 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s.
6d.=



=SIMS (GEORGE R.), WORKS BY.=

Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each; cloth limp, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =ROGUES AND VAGABONDS.=

     =THE RING O' BELLS.=

     =MARY JANE'S MEMOIRS.=

     =MARY JANE MARRIED.=

     =TALES OF TODAY.=

     =DRAMAS OF LIFE.= With 60 Illustrations.

     =TINKLETOP'S CRIME.= With a Frontispiece by MAURICE
     GREIFFENHAGEN.

     =ZEPH:= A Circus Story, &c.



Crown 8vo, picture cover, =1s.= each; cloth. =1s. 6d.= each.

     =HOW THE POOR LIVE;= and =HORRIBLE LONDON.=

     =THE DAGONET RECITER AND READER:= being Readings and
     Recitations in Prose and Verse, selected from his own Works
     by GEORGE R. SIMS.

     =DAGONET DITTIES.= From the _Referee_.

     =THE CASE OF GEORGE CANDLEMAS.=



=SISTER DORA:= A Biography. By MARGARET LONSDALE. With Four
Illustrations. Demy 8vo, picture cover, =4d.=; cloth, =6d.=



=SKETCHLEY.--A MATCH IN THE DARK.= By ARTHUR SKETCHLEY. Post 8vo,
illustrated boards, =2s.=



=SLANG DICTIONARY (THE):= Etymological, Historical, and Anecdotal. Crown
8vo, cloth extra, =6s. 6d.=



=SMITH (J. MOYR), WORKS BY.=

     =THE PRINCE OF ARGOLIS.= With 130 Illusts. Post 8vo, cloth
     extra, =3s. 6d.=

     =TALES OF OLD THULE.= With numerous Illustrations. Crown 8vo,
     cloth gilt, =6s.=

     =THE WOOING OF THE WATER WITCH.= Illustrated. Post 8vo, cloth,
     =6s.=



=SOCIETY IN LONDON.= By A FOREIGN RESIDENT. Crown 8vo, =1s.=; cloth,
=1s. 6d.=



=SOCIETY IN PARIS:= The Upper Ten Thousand. A Series of Letters from
Count PAUL VASILI to a Young French Diplomat. Crown 8vo, cloth, =6s.=



=SOMERSET.--SONGS OF ADIEU.= By Lord HENRY SOMERSET. Small 4to, Japanese
vellum, =6s.=



=SPALDING.--ELIZABETHAN DEMONOLOGY:= An Essay on the Belief in the
Existence of Devils. By T. A. SPALDING, LL.B. Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
=5s.=



=SPEIGHT (T. W.), NOVELS BY.=

Post 8vo, illustrated boards. =2s.= each.

     =THE MYSTERIES OF HERON DYKE.=

     =DEVIOUS WAYS,= &c.

     =THE GOLDEN HOOP.=

     =HOODWINKED;= and =THE SANDYCROFT MYSTERY.=

     =BACK TO LIFE.=



Post 8vo, cloth limp, =1s. 6d.= each.

     =A BARREN TITLE.=

     =WIFE OR NO WIFE?=



     =THE SANDYCROFT MYSTERY.= Crown 8vo, picture cover, =1s.=



=SPENSER FOR CHILDREN.= By M. H. TOWRY. With Illustrations by WALTER J.
MORGAN. Crown 4to, cloth gilt, =6s.=



=STARRY HEAVENS (THE):= A POETICAL BIRTHDAY BOOK. Royal 16mo, cloth
extra, =2s. 6d.=



=STAUNTON.--THE LAWS AND PRACTICE OF CHESS.= With an Analysis of the
Openings. By HOWARD STAUNTON. Edited by ROBERT B. WORMALD. Crown 8vo,
cloth extra, =5s.=



=STEDMAN (E. C.), WORKS BY.=

     =VICTORIAN POETS.= Thirteenth Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
     =9s.=

     =THE POETS OF AMERICA.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =9s.=



=STERNDALE.--THE AFGHAN KNIFE:= A Novel. By ROBERT ARMITAGE STERNDALE.
Cr. 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, illust. boards. =2s.=



=STEVENSON (R. LOUIS), WORKS BY.= Post 8vo, cl. limp, =2s. 6d.= each.

     =TRAVELS WITH A DONKEY.= Seventh Edit. With a Frontis. by
     WALTER CRANE.

     =AN INLAND VOYAGE.= Fourth Edition. With a Frontispiece by
     WALTER CRANE.



Crown 8vo, buckram, gilt top, =6s.= each.

     =FAMILIAR STUDIES OF MEN AND BOOKS.= Sixth Edition.

     =THE SILVERADO SQUATTERS.= With a Frontispiece. Third Edition.

     =THE MERRY MEN.= Third Edition.

     =UNDERWOODS:= Poems. Fifth Edition.

     =MEMORIES AND PORTRAITS.= Third Edition.

     =VIRGINIBUS PUERISQUE,= and other Papers. Seventh Edition.

     =BALLADS.=

     =ACROSS THE PLAINS,= with other Memories and Essays.



     =NEW ARABIAN NIGHTS.= Eleventh Edition. Crown 8vo, buckram,
     gilt top, =6s.=; post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=

     =THE SUICIDE CLUB;= and =THE RAJAH'S DIAMOND.= From NEW ARABIAN
     NIGHTS. With Six Illustrations by J. BERNARD PARTRIDGE.
     Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =5s.=

     =PRINCE OTTO.= Sixth Edition. Post 8vo, illustrated boards,
     =2s.=

     =FATHER DAMIEN:= An Open Letter to the Rev. Dr. Hyde. Second
     Edition. Crown 8vo, hand-made and brown paper, =1s.=



=STODDARD.--SUMMER CRUISING IN THE SOUTH SEAS.= By C. WARREN STODDARD.
Illustrated by WALLIS MACKAY. Cr. 8vo, cl. extra, =3s. 6d.=



=STORIES FROM FOREIGN NOVELISTS.= With Notices by HELEN and ALICE
ZIMMERN. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, illustrated
boards, =2s.=



=STRANGE MANUSCRIPT (A) FOUND IN A COPPER CYLINDER.= With 19
Illustrations by GILBERT GAUL. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth extra,
=5s.=



=STRANGE SECRETS.= Told by CONAN DOYLE, PERCY FITZGERALD, FLORENCE
MARRYAT, &c. Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., Eight Illusts., =6s.=; post 8vo, illust.
bds., =2s.=



=STRUTT'S SPORTS AND PASTIMES OF THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND;= including the
Rural and Domestic Recreations, May Games, Mummeries, Shows, &c., from
the Earliest Period to the Present Time. Edited by WILLIAM HONE. With
140 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=SUBURBAN HOMES (THE) OF LONDON:= A Residential Guide. With a Map, and
Notes on Rental, Rates, and Accommodation. Crown 8vo, cloth, =7s. 6d.=



=SWIFT'S (DEAN) CHOICE WORKS,= in Prose and Verse. With Memoir,
Portrait, and Facsimiles of the Maps in "Gulliver's Travels." Cr. 8vo,
cl., =7s. 6d.=

     =GULLIVER'S TRAVELS,= and =A TALE OF A TUB.= Post 8vo,
     half-bound, =2s.=

     =A MONOGRAPH ON SWIFT.= By J. CHURTON COLLINS. Cr. 8vo,
     cloth, =8s.= [_Shortly._]



=SWINBURNE (ALGERNON C.), WORKS BY.=

     =SELECTIONS FROM POETICAL WORKS OF A. C. SWINBURNE.= Fcap.
     8vo, =6s.=

     =ATALANTA IN CALYDON.= Crown 8vo, =6s.=

     =CHASTELARD:= A Tragedy. Cr. 8vo, =7s.=

     =NOTES ON POEMS AND REVIEWS.= Demy 8vo, =1s.=

     =POEMS AND BALLADS.= FIRST SERIES. Crown 8vo or fcap. 8vo, =9s.=

     =POEMS AND BALLADS.= SECOND SERIES. Crown 8vo or fcap. 8vo,
     =9s.=

     =POEMS AND BALLADS.= THIRD SERIES. Crown 8vo, =7s.=

     =SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE.= Crown 8vo, =10s. 6d.=

     =BOTHWELL:= A Tragedy. Crown 8vo, =12s. 6d.=

     =SONGS OF TWO NATIONS.= Cr. 8vo, =6s.=

     =GEORGE CHAPMAN.= (_See_ Vol. II. of G. CHAPMAN's Works.)
     Crown 8vo, =6s.=

     =ESSAYS AND STUDIES.= Cr. 8vo, =12s.=

     =ERECHTHEUS:= A Tragedy. Cr. 8vo, =6s.=

     =SONGS OF THE SPRINGTIDES.= Crown 8vo, =6s.=

     =STUDIES IN SONG.= Crown 8vo, =7s.=

     =MARY STUART:= A Tragedy. Cr. 8vo, =8s.=

     =TRISTRAM OF LYONESSE.= Cr. 8vo, =9s.=

     =A CENTURY OF ROUNDELS.= Sm. 4to, =8s.=

     =A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY.= Cr. 8vo, =7s.=

     =MARINO FALIERO:= A Tragedy. Crown 8vo, =6s.=

     =A STUDY OF VICTOR HUGO.= Cr. 8vo, =6s.=

     =MISCELLANIES.= Crown 8vo, =12s.=

     =LOCRINE:= A Tragedy. Cr. 8vo, =6s.=

     =A STUDY OF BEN JONSON.= Cr. 8vo, =7s.=

     =THE SISTERS:= A Tragedy. Cr. 8vo, =6s.=



=SYMONDS.--WINE, WOMEN, AND SONG:= Mediaeval Latin Students' Songs. With
Essay and Trans. by J. ADDINGTON SYMONDS. Fcap. 8vo, parchment, =6s.=



=SYNTAX'S (DR.) THREE TOURS:= In Search of the Picturesque, in Search of
Consolation, and in Search of a Wife. With ROWLANDSON's Coloured
Illustrations, and Life of the Author by J. C. HOTTEN. Crown 8vo, cloth
extra, =7s. 6d.=



=TAINE'S HISTORY OF ENGLISH LITERATURE.= Translated by HENRY VAN LAUN.
Four Vols., small demy 8vo, cl. bds., =30s.=--POPULAR EDITION, Two
Vols., large crown 8vo, cloth extra, =15s.=



=TAYLOR'S (BAYARD) DIVERSIONS OF THE ECHO CLUB:= Burlesques of Modern
Writers. Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s.=



=TAYLOR (DR. J. E., F.L.S.), WORKS BY.= Cr. 8vo, cl. ex., =7s. 6d.=
each.

     =THE SAGACITY AND MORALITY OF PLANTS:= A Sketch of the Life
     and Conduct of the Vegetable Kingdom. With a Coloured
     Frontispiece and 100 Illustrations.

     =OUR COMMON BRITISH FOSSILS,= and Where to Find Them. 331
     Illustrations.



     =THE PLAYTIME NATURALIST.= With 360 Illustrations. Crown 8vo,
     cloth, =5s.=



=TAYLOR'S (TOM) HISTORICAL DRAMAS.= Containing "Clancarty." "Jeanne
Darc," "'Twixt Axe and Crown," "The Fool's Revenge," "Arkwright's Wife,"
"Anne Boleyn," "Plot and Passion." Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=

The Plays may also be had separately, at =1s.= each.



=TENNYSON (LORD):= A Biographical Sketch. By H. J. JENNINGS. With a
Photograph-Portrait. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=



=THACKERAYANA:= Notes and Anecdotes. Illustrated by Hundreds of Sketches
by WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=



=THAMES.--A NEW PICTORIAL HISTORY OF THE THAMES.= By A. S. KRAUSSE. With
340 Illustrations Post 8vo, =1s.=; cloth, =1s. 6d.=



=THOMAS (BERTHA) NOVELS BY.= Cr. 8vo, cl., =3s. 6d.= ea.; post 8vo,
=2s.= ea.

     =THE VIOLIN-PLAYER.=

     =PROUD MAISIE.=



     =CRESSIDA.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=



=THOMSON'S SEASONS,= and =CASTLE OF INDOLENCE.= With Introduction by
ALLAN CUNNINGHAM, and 48 Illustrations. Post 8vo, half-bound, =2s.=



=THORNBURY (WALTER), WORKS BY.= Cr. 8vo, cl. extra, =7s. 6d.= each.

     =THE LIFE AND CORRESPONDENCE OF J. M. W. TURNER.= Founded upon
     Letters and Papers furnished by his Friends. With
     Illustrations in Colours.

     =HAUNTED LONDON.= Edit. by E. WALFORD, M.A. Illusts. by =F. W.
     Fairholt=, F.S.A.



Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =OLD STORIES RE-TOLD.=

     =TALES FOR THE MARINES.=



=TIMBS (JOHN), WORKS BY.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.= each.

     =THE HISTORY OF CLUBS AND CLUB LIFE IN LONDON:= Anecdotes of
     its Famous Coffee-houses, Hostelries, and Taverns. With 42
     Illustrations.

     =ENGLISH ECCENTRICS AND ECCENTRICITIES:= Stories of Delusions,
     Impostures, Sporting Scenes, Eccentric Artists, Theatrical
     Folk, &c. 48 Illustrations.



=TROLLOPE (ANTHONY), NOVELS BY.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.= each.

     =THE WAY WE LIVE NOW.=

     =KEPT IN THE DARK.=

     =FRAU FROHMANN.=

     =MARION FAY.=

     =MR. SCARBOROUGH'S FAMILY.=

     =THE LAND-LEAGUERS.=



Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =GOLDEN LION OF GRANPERE.=

     =JOHN CALDIGATE.=

     =AMERICAN SENATOR.=



=TROLLOPE (FRANCES E.), NOVELS BY.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.= each.

     =LIKE SHIPS UPON THE SEA.=

     =MABELS PROGRESS.=

     =ANNE FURNESS.=



=TROLLOPE (T. A.).--DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND.= Post 8vo, illust. bds., =2s.=



=TROWBRIDGE.--FARNELL'S FOLLY:= A Novel. By J. T. TROWBRIDGE. Post 8vo,
illustrated boards, =2s.=



=TYTLER (C. C. FRASER-).--MISTRESS JUDITH:= A Novel. By C. C.
FRASER-TYTLER. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=; post 8vo, illust.
boards, =2s.=



=TYTLER (SARAH), NOVELS BY.=

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each; post 8vo, illustrated boards,
=2s.= each.

     =THE BRIDE'S PASS.=

     =NOBLESSE OBLIGE.=

     =LADY BELL.=

     =BURIED DIAMONDS.=

     =THE BLACKHALL GHOSTS.=



Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =WHAT SHE CAME THROUGH.=

     =CITOYENNE JACQUELINE.=

     =SAINT MUNGO'S CITY.=

     =BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.=

     =DISAPPEARED.=

     =THE HUGUENOT FAMILY.=



=VILLARI.--A DOUBLE BOND.= By LINDA VILLARI. Fcap. 8vo, picture cover,
=1s.=



=WALT WHITMAN, POEMS BY.= Edited, with Introduction, by =William M.
Rossetti=. With Portrait. Cr. 8vo, hand-made paper and buckram, =6s.=



=WALTON AND COTTON'S COMPLETE ANGLER;= or, The Contemplative Man's
Recreation, by IZAAK WALTON; and Instructions how to Angle for a Trout
or Grayling in a clear Stream, by CHARLES COTTON. With Memoirs and Notes
by SIR HARRIS NICOLAS, and 61 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth antique,
=7s. 6d.=



=WARD (HERBERT), WORKS BY.=

     =FIVE YEARS WITH THE CONGO CANNIBALS.= With 92 Illustrations
     by the Author, VICTOR PERARD, and W. B. DAVIS. Third ed.
     Roy. 8vo, cloth ex., =14s.=

     =MY LIFE WITH STANLEY'S REAR GUARD.= With a Map by F. S.
     WELLER, F.R.G.S. Post 8vo, =1s.=; cloth, =1s. 6d.=



=WARNER.--A ROUNDABOUT JOURNEY.= By CHARLES DUDLEY WARNER. Crown 8vo,
cloth extra, =6s.=



=WARRANT TO EXECUTE CHARLES I.= A Facsimile, with the 59 Signatures and
Seals. Printed on paper 22 in. by 14 in. =2s.=

     =WARRANT TO EXECUTE MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS.= A Facsimile,
     including Queen Elizabeth's Signature and the Great Seal.
     =2s.=



=WASSERMANN--THE DAFFODILS:= A Novel. By LILLIAS WASSERMANN. Crown 8vo,
=1s.=; cloth, =1s. 6d.=



=WATSON.--THE MARQUIS OF CARABAS:= A Novel. By AARON WATSON and LILIAS
WASSERMANN. 3 vols., crown 8vo.



=WALFORD (EDWARD, M.A.), WORKS BY.=

     =WALFORD'S COUNTY FAMILIES OF THE UNITED KINGDOM (1892).=
     Containing the Descent, Birth, Marriage, Education, &c., of
     12,000 Heads of Families, their Heirs, Offices, Addresses,
     Clubs, &c. Royal 8vo, cloth gilt, =50s.=

     =WALFORD'S WINDSOR PEERAGE, BARONETAGE, AND KNIGHTAGE (1892).=
     Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =12s. 6d.=

     =WALFORD'S SHILLING PEERAGE (1892).= Containing a List of the
     House of Lords, Scotch and Irish Peers, &c. 32mo, cloth. =1s.=

     =WALFORD'S SHILLING BARONETAGE (1892).= Containing a List of
     the Baronets of the United Kingdom, Biographical Notices,
     Addresses, &c. 32mo, cloth, =1s.=

     =WALFORD'S SHILLING KNIGHTAGE (1892).= Containing a List of
     the Knights of the United Kingdom, Biographical Notices,
     Addresses, &c. 32mo, cloth, =1s.=

     =WALFORD'S SHILLING HOUSE OF COMMONS (1892).= Containing a
     List of all Members of the New Parliament, their Addresses,
     Clubs, &c. 32mo, cloth, =1s.=

     =WALFORD'S COMPLETE PEERAGE, BARONETAGE, KNIGHTAGE, AND HOUSE
     OF COMMONS (1892).= Royal 32mo, cloth extra, gilt edges, =5s.=



     =TALES OF OUR GREAT FAMILIES.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=WEATHER, HOW TO FORETELL THE, WITH POCKET SPECTROSCOPE.= By F. W.
CORY.--With 10 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo, =1s.=; cloth, =1s. 6d.=



=WESTALL (William).--TRUST-MONEY.= Three Vols., crown 8vo.



=WESTROPP.--HANDBOOK OF POTTERY AND PORCELAIN.= By HODDER M. WESTROPP.
With Illusts. and List of Marks. Cr. 8vo, cloth, =4s. 6d.=



=WHIST.-HOW TO PLAY SOLO WHIST.= By ABRAHAM S. WILKS and CHARLES F.
PARDON. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=WHISTLER'S (MR.) TEN O'CLOCK.= Cr. 8vo, hand-made paper, =1s.=



=WHITE.--THE NATURAL HISTORY OF SELBORNE.= By GILBERT WHITE, M.A. Post
8vo, printed on laid paper and half-bound, =2s.=



=WILLIAMS (W. MATTIEU, F.R.A.S.), WORKS BY.=

     =SCIENCE IN SHORT CHAPTERS.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=

     =A SIMPLE TREATISE ON HEAT.= With Illusts. Cr. 8vo, cloth
     limp, =2s. 6d.=

     =THE CHEMISTRY OF COOKERY.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =6s.=

     =THE CHEMISTRY OF IRON AND STEEL MAKING.= Crown 8vo, cloth
     extra, =9s.=



=WILLIAMSON (MRS. F. H.).--A CHILD WIDOW.= Post 8vo, bds., =2s.=



=WILSON (DR. ANDREW, F.R.S.E.), WORKS BY.=

     =CHAPTERS ON EVOLUTION.= With 259 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo,
     cloth extra, =7s. 6d.=

     =LEAVES FROM A NATURALIST'S NOTE-BOOK.= Post 8vo, cloth limp,
     =2s. 6d.=

     =LEISURE-TIME STUDIES.= With Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth
     extra, =6s.=

     =STUDIES IN LIFE AND SENSE.= With numerous Illusts. Cr. 8vo,
     cl. ex., =6s.=

     =COMMON ACCIDENTS: HOW TO TREAT THEM.= Illusts. Cr. 8vo, =1s.=;
     cl., =1s. 6d.=

     =GLIMPSES OF NATURE.= With 35 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth
     extra, =3s. 6d.=



=WINTER (J. S.), STORIES BY.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =CAVALRY LIFE.=

     =REGIMENTAL LEGENDS.=



     =A SOLDIER'S CHILDREN.= With 34 Illustrations by E. G. THOMSON
     and E. STUART HARDY. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=WISSMANN.--MY SECOND JOURNEY THROUGH EQUATORIAL AFRICA.= By HERMANN VON
WISSMANN. With 92 Illusts. Demy 8vo, =16s.=



=WOOD.--SABINA:= A Novel. By Lady WOOD. Post 8vo, boards, =2s.=



=WOOD (H. F.), DETECTIVE STORIES BY.= Cr. 8vo, =6s.= ea.; post 8vo, bds
=2s.=

     =PASSENGER FROM SCOTLAND YARD.=

     =ENGLISHMAN OF THE RUE CAIN.=



=WOOLLEY.--RACHEL ARMSTRONG;= or, Love and Theology. By CELIA PARKER
WOOLLEY. Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.=; cloth, =2s. 6d.=



=WRIGHT (THOMAS), WORKS BY.= Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =7s. 6d.= each.

     =CARICATURE HISTORY OF THE GEORGES.= With 400 Caricatures,
     Squibs, &c.

     =HISTORY OF CARICATURE AND OF THE GROTESQUE IN ART,
     LITERATURE, SCULPTURE, AND PAINTING.= Illustrated by F. W.
     FAIRHOLT, F.S.A.



=WYNMAN.--MY FLIRTATIONS.= By MARGARET WYNMAN. With 13 Illustrations by
J. BERNARD PARTRIDGE. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.=



=YATES (EDMUND), NOVELS BY.= Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

     =LAND AT LAST.=

     =THE FORLORN HOPE.=

     =CASTAWAY.=



=ZOLA.--THE DOWNFALL.= By EMILE ZOLA. Translated by E. A. VIZETELLY.
Crown 8vo, cloth, =3s. 6d.=




LISTS OF BOOKS CLASSIFIED IN SERIES.



_For fuller cataloguing, see alphabetical arrangement._



THE MAYFAIR LIBRARY.

Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s. 6d.= per Volume.

  =A Journey Round My Room.= By XAVIER DE MAISTRE.
  =Quips and Quiddities.= By W. D. ADAMS.
  =The Agony Column of "The Times."=
  =Melancholy Anatomised:= Abridgment of "Burton's Anatomy of
      Melancholy."
  =The Speeches of Charles Dickens.=
  =Literary Frivolities, Fancies, Follies, and Frolics.= By W. T.
      DOBSON.
  =Poetical Ingenuities.= By W. T. DOBSON.
  =The Cupboard Papers.= By FIN-BEC.
  =W. S. Gilbert's Plays.= FIRST SERIES.
  =W. S. Gilbert's Plays.= SECOND SERIES.
  =Songs of Irish Wit and Humour.=
  =Animals and Masters.= By Sir A. HELPS.
  =Social Pressure.= By Sir A. HELPS.
  =Curiosities of Criticism.= H. J. JENNINGS.
  =Holmes's Autocrat of Breakfast-Table.=
  =Pencil and Palette.= By R. KEMPT.
  =Little Essays:= from LAMB's Letters.
  =Forensic Anecdotes.= By JACOB LARWOOD.
  =Theatrical Anecdotes.= JACOB LARWOOD.
  =Jeux d'Esprit.= Edited by HENRY S. LEIGH.
  =Witch Stories.= By E. LYNN LINTON.
  =Ourselves.= By E. LYNN LINTON.
  =Pastimes & Players.= By R. MACGREGOR.
  =New Paul and Virginia.= W. H. MALLOCK.
  =New Republic.= By W. H. MALLOCK.
  =Puck on Pegasus.= By H. C. PENNELL.
  =Pegasus Re-Saddled.= By H. C. PENNELL.
  =Muses of Mayfair.= Ed. H. C. PENNELL.
  =Thoreau:= His Life & Aims. By H. A. PAGE.
  =Puniana.= By Hon. HUGH ROWLEY.
  =More Puniana.= By Hon. HUGH ROWLEY.
  =The Philosophy of Handwriting.=
  =By Stream and Sea.= By WM. SENIOR.
  =Leaves from a Naturalist's Note-Book.= By Dr. ANDREW WILSON.



THE GOLDEN LIBRARY.

Post 8vo, cloth limp, =2s.= per Volume.

  =Bayard Taylor's Diversions of the Echo Club.=
  =Bennett's Ballad History of England.=
  =Bennett's Songs for Sailors.=
  =Godwin's Lives of the Necromancers.=
  =Pope's Poetical Works.=
  =Holmes's Autocrat of Breakfast Table.=
  =Holmes's Professor at Breakfast Table.=
  =Jesse's Scenes of Country Life.=
  =Leigh Hunt's Tale for a Chimney Corner.=
  =Mallory's Mort d'Arthur:= Selections.
  =Pascal's Provincial Letters.=
  =Rochefoucauld's Maxims & Reflections.=



THE WANDERER'S LIBRARY.

Crown 8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each.

  =Wanderings In Patagonia.= By JULIUS BEERBOHM. Illustrated.
  =Camp Notes.= By FREDERICK BOYLE.
  =Savage Life.= By FREDERICK BOYLE.
  =Merrie England in the Olden Time.= By G. DANIEL. Illustrated
      by CRUIKSHANK.
  =Circus Life.= By THOMAS FROST.
  =Lives of the Conjurers.= THOMAS FROST.
  =The Old Showmen and the Old London Fairs.= By THOMAS FROST.
  =Low-Life Deeps.= By JAMES GREENWOOD.
  =Wilds of London.= JAMES GREENWOOD.
  =Tunis.= Chev. HESSE-WARTEGG. 22 Illusts.
  =Life and Adventures of a Cheap Jack.=
  =World Behind the Scenes.= P. FITZGERALD.
  =Tavern Anecdotes and Sayings.=
  =The Genial Showman.= By E. P. HINGSTON.
  =Story of London Parks.= JACOB LARWOOD.
  =London Characters.= By HENRY MAYHEW.
  =Seven Generations of Executioners.=
  =Summer Cruising in the South Seas.= By C. WARREN STODDARD.
      Illustrated.



POPULAR SHILLING BOOKS.

  =Harry Fludyer at Cambridge.=
  =Jeff Briggs's Love Story.= BRET HARTE.
  =Twins of Table Mountain.= BRET HARTE.
  =Snow-bound at Eagle's.= By BRET HARTE.
  =A Day's Tour.= By PERCY FITZGERALD.
  =Esther's Glove.= By R. E. FRANCILLON.
  =Sentenced!= By SOMERVILLE GIBNEY.
  =The Professor's Wife.= By L. GRAHAM.
  =Mrs. Gainsborough's Diamonds.= By JULIAN HAWTHORNE.
  =Niagara Spray.= By J. HOLLINGSHEAD.
  =A Romance of the Queen's Hounds.= By CHARLES JAMES.
  =The Garden that Paid the Rent.= By TOM JERROLD.
  =Cut by the Mess.= By ARTHUR KEYSER.
  =Our Sensation Novel.= J. H. MCCARTHY.
  =Doom!= By JUSTIN H. MCCARTHY, M.P.
  =Dolly.= By JUSTIN H. MCCARTHY, M.P.
  =Lily Lass.= JUSTIN H. MCCARTHY, M.P.
  =Was She Good or Bad?= By W. MINTO.
  =Notes from the "News."= By JAS. PAYN.
  =Beyond the Gates.= By E. S. PHELPS.
  =Old Maid's Paradise.= By E. S. PHELPS.
  =Burglars In Paradise.= By E. S. PHELPS.
  =Jack the Fisherman.= By E. S. PHELPS.
  =Trooping with Crows.= By C. L. PIRKIS.
  =Bible Characters.= By CHARLES READE.
  =Rogues.= By R. H. SHERARD.
  =The Dagonet Reciter.= By G. R. SIMS.
  =How the Poor Live.= By G. R. SIMS.
  =Case of George Candlemas.= G. R. SIMS.
  =Sandycroft Mystery.= T. W. SPEIGHT.
  =Hoodwinked.= By T. W. SPEIGHT.
  =Father Damien.= By R. L. STEVENSON.
  =A Double Bond.= By LINDA VILLARI.
  =My Life with Stanley's Rear Guard.= By HERBERT WARD.



HANDY NOVELS.

Fcap. 8vo, cloth boards, =1s. 6d.= each.

  =The Old Maid's Sweetheart.= A. ST. AUBYN.
  =Modest Little Sara.= ALAN ST. AUBYN.
  =Taken from the Enemy.= H. NEWBOLT.
  =A Lost Soul.= By W. L. ALDEN.



MY LIBRARY.

Choice Works, printed on laid paper, bound half-Roxburghe, =2s. 6d.=
each.

  =Four Frenchwomen.= By AUSTIN DOBSON.
  =Citation and Examination of William Shakspeare.= By W. S. LANDOR.
  =The Journal of Maurice de Guerin.=
  =Christie Johnstone.= By CHARLES READE. With a Photogravure
      Frontispiece.
  =Peg Woffington.= By CHARLES READE.
  =The Dramatic Essays of Charles Lamb.=



THE POCKET LIBRARY.

Post 8vo, printed on laid paper and hf.-bd., =2s.= each.

  =The Essays of Elia.= By CHARLES LAMB.
  =Robinson Crusoe.= Edited by JOHN MAJOR. With 37 Illusts. by GEORGE
      CRUIKSHANK.
  =Whims and Oddities.= By THOMAS HOOD. With 85 Illustrations.
  =The Barber's Chair,= and =The Hedgehog Letters=. By DOUGLAS JERROLD.
  =Gastronomy as a Fine Art.= By BRILLAT-SAVARIN. Trans. R. E. ANDERSON,
      M.A.
  =The Epicurean,= &c. By THOMAS MOORE.
  =Leigh Hunt's Essays.= Ed. E. OLLIER.
  =White's Natural History of Selborne.=
  =Gulliver's Travels,= and =The Tale of a Tub.= By DEAN SWIFT.
  =The Rivals, School for Scandal,= and other Plays by RICHARD BRINSLEY
      SHERIDAN.
  =Anecdotes of the Clergy.= J. LARWOOD.
  =Thomson's Seasons.= Illustrated.



THE PICCADILLY NOVELS.

LIBRARY EDITIONS OF NOVELS BY THE BEST AUTHORS, many Illustrated, crown
8vo, cloth extra, =3s. 6d.= each.

By F. M. ALLEN.

  The Green Bird.

By GRANT ALLEN.

  Philistia.
  Babylon.
  Strange Stories.
  Beckoning Hand.
  In all Shades.
  Dumaresq's Daughter.
  The Duchess of Powysland.
  The Tents of Shem.
  For Maimie's Sake.
  The Devil's Die.
  This Mortal Coil.
  The Great Taboo.
  Blood Royal.

By EDWIN L. ARNOLD.

  Phra the Phoenician.

By ALAN ST. AUBYN.

  A Fellow of Trinity.

By Rev. S. BARING GOULD.

  Red Spider.
  Eve.

By W. BESANT & J. RICE.

  My Little Girl.
  Case of Mr. Lucraft.
  This Son of Vulcan.
  Golden Butterfly.
  By Celia's Arbour.
  Monks of Thelema.
  The Seamy Side.
  Ten Years' Tenant.
  Ready-Money Mortiboy.
  With Harp and Crown.
  'Twas in Trafalgar's Bay.
  The Chaplain of the Fleet.

By WALTER BESANT.

  All Sorts and Conditions of Men.
  The Captains' Room.
  Herr Paulus.
  All in a Garden Fair
  The World Went Very Well Then.
  For Faith and Freedom.
  Dorothy Forster.
  Uncle Jack.
  Children of Gibeon.
  Bell of St. Paul's.
  To Call Her Mine.
  The Holy Rose.
  Armorel of Lyonesse.
  St. Katherine's by the Tower.

By ROBERT BUCHANAN.

  The Shadow of the Sword.
  A Child of Nature.
  Matt.
  Heir of Linne.
  The Martyrdom of Madeline.
  God and the Man.
  Love Me for Ever.
  Annan Water.
  The New Abelard.
  Foxglove Manor.
  Master of the Mine.

By HALL CAINE.

  The Shadow of a Crime.
  A Son of Hagar.
  The Deemster.

MORT. & FRANCES COLLINS.

  Transmigration.
  From Midnight to Midnight.
  Blacksmith and Scholar.
  Village Comedy.
  You Play Me False.

By WILKIE COLLINS.

  Armadale.
  After Dark.
  No Name.
  Antonina.
  Basil.
  Hide and Seek.
  The Dead Secret.
  Queen of Hearts.
  My Miscellanies.
  Woman in White.
  The Moonstone.
  Man and Wife.
  Poor Miss Finch.
  Miss or Mrs?
  New Magdalen.
  The Frozen Deep.
  The Two Destinies.
  Law and the Lady.
  Haunted Hotel.
  The Fallen Leaves.
  Jezebel's Daughter.
  The Black Robe.
  Heart and Science.
  "I Say No."
  Little Novels.
  The Evil Genius.
  The Legacy of Cain.
  A Rogue's Life.
  Blind Love.

By DUTTON COOK.

  Paul Foster's Daughter.

By MATT CRIM.

  Adventures of a Fair Rebel.

By WILLIAM CYPLES.

  Hearts of Gold.

By ALPHONSE DAUDET.

  The Evangelist; or, Port Salvation.

By ERASMUS DAWSON.

  The Fountain of Youth.

By JAMES DE MILLE.

  A Castle in Spain.

By J. LEITH DERWENT.

  Our Lady of Tears.
  Circe's Lovers.

By DICK DONOVAN.

  Tracked to Doom.

By Mrs. ANNIE EDWARDES.

  Archie Lovell.

By G. MANVILLE FENN.

  The New Mistress.

By PERCY FITZGERALD.

  Fatal Zero.

By R. E. FRANCILLON.

  Queen Cophetua.
  One by One.
  A Real Queen.
  King or Knave.

Pref. by Sir BARTLE FRERE.

  Pandurang Hari.

By EDWARD GARRETT.

  The Capel Girls.

By CHARLES GIBBON.

  Robin Gray.
  Loving a Dream.
  The Golden Shaft.
  Of High Degree.
  The Flower of the Forest.

By E. GLANVILLE.

  The Lost Heiress.
  The Fossicker.

By CECIL GRIFFITH.

  Corinthia Marazion.

By THOMAS HARDY.

  Under the Greenwood Tree.

By BRET HARTE.

  A Waif of the Plains.
  A Ward of the Golden Gate.
  A Sappho of Green Springs.
  Colonel Starbottle's Client.

By JULIAN HAWTHORNE.

  Garth.
  Ellice Quentin.
  Sebastian Strome.
  Dust.
  Fortune's Fool.
  Beatrix Randolph.
  David Poindexter's Disappearance.
  The Spectre of the Camera.

By Sir A. HELPS.

  Ivan de Biron.

By ISAAC HENDERSON.

  Agatha Page.

By Mrs. ALFRED HUNT.

  The Leaden Casket.
  Self-Condemned.
  That other Person.

By JEAN INGELOW.

  Fated to be Free.

By R. ASHE KING.

  A Drawn Game.
  "The Wearing of the Green."

By E. LYNN LINTON.

  Patricia Kemball.
  Under which Lord?
  "My Love!"
  Ione.
  Paston Carew.
  Sowing the Wind.
  The Atonement of Leam Dundas.
  The World Well Lost.

By HENRY W. LUCY.

  Gideon Fleyce.

By Justin McCarthy.

  A Fair Saxon.
  Linley Rochford.
  Miss Misanthrope.
  Donna Quixote.
  Maid of Athens.
  Camiola.
  The Waterdale Neighbours.
  My Enemy's Daughter.
  Dear Lady Disdain.
  The Comet of a Season.

By AGNES MACDONELL.

  Quaker Cousins.

By D. CHRISTIE MURRAY.

  Life's Atonement.
  Joseph's Coat.
  Coals of Fire.
  Val Strange.
  Hearts.
  A Model Father.
  Old Blazer's Hero.
  By the Gate of the Sea.
  A Bit of Human Nature.
  First Person Singular.
  Cynic Fortune.
  The Way of the World.

By MURRAY & HERMAN.

  The Bishops' Bible.
  Paul Jones's Alias.

By HUME NISBET.

  "Bail Up!"

By GEORGES OHNET.

  A Weird Gift.

By Mrs. OLIPHANT.

  Whiteladies.

By OUIDA.

  Held In Bondage.
  Strathmore.
  Chandos.
  Under Two Flags.
  Idalia.
  Cecil Castlemaine's Gage.
  Tricotrin.
  Puck.
  Folle Farine.
  A Dog of Flanders.
  Pascarel.
  Signa.
  Princess Napraxine.
  Two Little Wooden Shoes.
  In a Winter City.
  Ariadne.
  Friendship.
  Moths.
  Ruffino.
  Pipistrello.
  A Village Commune.
  Bimbi.
  Wanda.
  Frescoes.
  Othmar.
  In Maremma.
  Syrlin.
  Guilderoy.
  Santa Barbara.

By MARGARET A. PAUL.

  Gentle and Simple.

By JAMES PAYN.

  Lost Sir Massingberd.
  Less Black than We're Painted.
  A Confidential Agent.
  A Grape from a Thorn.
  In Peril and Privation.
  The Mystery of Mirbridge.
  The Canon's Ward.
  Walter's Word.
  By Proxy.
  High Spirits.
  Under One Roof.
  From Exile.
  Glow-worm Tales.
  Talk of the Town.
  Holiday Tasks.
  The Burnt Million.
  The Word and the Will.
  Sunny Stories.

By E. C. PRICE.

  Valentina.
  The Foreigners.
  Mrs. Lancaster's Rival.

By RICHARD PRYCE.

  Miss Maxwell's Affections.

By CHARLES READE.

  It Is Never Too Late to Mend.
  The Double Marriage.
  Love Me Little, Love Me Long.
  The Cloister and the Hearth.
  The Course of True Love.
  The Autobiography of a Thief.
  Put Yourself in his Place.
  A Terrible Temptation.
  Singleheart and Doubleface.
  Good Stories of Men and other Animals.
  Hard Cash.
  Peg Woffington.
  Christie Johnstone.
  Griffith Gaunt.
  Foul Play.
  A Perilous Secret.
  Wandering Heir.
  A Woman-Hater.
  A Simpleton.
  Readiana.
  The Jilt.

By Mrs. J. H. RIDDELL.

  The Prince of Wales's Garden Party.
  Weird Stories.

By F. W. ROBINSON.

  Women are Strange.
  The Hands of Justice.

By W. CLARK RUSSELL.

  An Ocean Tragedy.
  My Shipmate Louise.
  Alone on a Wide Wide Sea.

By JOHN SAUNDERS.

  Guy Waterman.
  Two Dreamers.
  Bound to the Wheel.
  The Lion in the Path.

By KATHARINE SAUNDERS.

  Margaret and Elizabeth.
  Gideon's Rock.
  The High Mills.
  Heart Salvage.
  Sebastian.

By LUKE SHARP.

  In a Steamer Chair.

By HAWLEY SMART.

  Without Love or Licence.

By R. A. STERNDALE.

  The Afghan Knife.

By BERTHA THOMAS.

  Proud Maisie.
  The Violin-player.

By FRANCES E. TROLLOPE.

  Like Ships upon the Sea.
  Anne Furness.
  Mabel's Progress.

By IVAN TURGENIEFF, &c.

  Stories from Foreign Novelists.

By ANTHONY TROLLOPE.

  Frau Frohmann.
  Marion Fay.
  Kept in the Dark.
  Land-Leaguers.
  The Way We Live Now.
  Mr. Scarborough's Family.

By C. C. FRASER-TYTLER.

  Mistress Judith.

By SARAH TYTLER.

  The Bride's Pass.
  Noblesse Oblige.
  Lady Bell.
  Buried Diamonds.
  The Blackhall Ghosts.

By MARK TWAIN.

  The American Claimant.

By. J. S. WINTER.

  A Soldier's Children.



CHEAP EDITIONS OF POPULAR NOVELS.

Post 8vo, illustrated boards, =2s.= each.

By ARTEMUS WARD.

  Artemus Ward Complete.

By EDMOND ABOUT.

  The Fellah.

By HAMILTON AIDE.

  Carr of Carrlyon.
  Confidences.

By MARY ALBERT.

  Brooke Finchley's Daughter.

By Mrs. ALEXANDER.

  Maid, Wife, or Widow?
  Valerie's Fate.

By GRANT ALLEN.

  Strange Stories.
  Philistia.
  Babylon.
  The Devil's Die.
  This Mortal Coil.
  In all Shades.
  The Beckoning Hand.
  For Maimie's Sake.
  Tents of Shem.
  The Great Taboo.

By ALAN ST. AUBYN.

  A Fellow of Trinity.

By Rev. S. BARING GOULD.

  Red Spider.
  Eve.

By FRANK BARRETT.

  Fettered for Life.
  Between Life and Death.
  The Sin of Olga Zassoulich.
  Folly Morrison.
  Honest Davie.
  Lieut. Barnabas.
  A Prodigal's Progress.
  Found Guilty.
  A Recoiling Vengeance.
  For Love and Honour.
  John Ford; and His Helpmate.

By W. BESANT & J. RICE.

  This Son of Vulcan.
  My Little Girl.
  Case of Mr. Lucraft.
  Golden Butterfly.
  By Celia's Arbour.
  Monks of Thelema.
  The Seamy Side.
  Ten Years' Tenant.
  Ready-Money Mortiboy.
  With Harp and Crown.
  'Twas in Trafalgar's Bay.
  The Chaplain of the Fleet.

By WALTER BESANT.

  Dorothy Forster.
  Children of Gibeon.
  Uncle Jack.
  Herr Paulus.
  All Sorts and Conditions of Men.
  The Captains' Room.
  All In a Garden Fair.
  The World Went Very Well Then.
  For Faith and Freedom.
  To Call Her Mine.
  The Bell of St. Paul's.
  The Holy Rose.

By SHELSLEY BEAUCHAMP.

  Grantley Grange.

By FREDERICK BOYLE.

  Camp Notes.
  Savage Life.
  Chronicles of No-man's Land.

By BRET HARTE.

  Flip.
  Maruja.
  Californian Stories.
  Gabriel Conroy.
  An Heiress of Red Dog.
  The Luck of Roaring Camp.
  A Phyllis of the Sierras.

By HAROLD BRYDGES.

  Uncle Sam at Home.

By ROBERT BUCHANAN.

  The Shadow of the Sword.
  A Child of Nature.
  God and the Man.
  Love Me for Ever.
  Foxglove Manor.
  The Martyrdom of Madeline.
  Annan Water.
  The New Abelard.
  Matt.
  The Heir of Linne.
  The Master of the Mine.

By HALL CAINE.

  The Shadow of a Crime.
  A Son of Hagar.
  The Deemster.

By Commander CAMERON.

  The Cruise of the "Black Prince."

By Mrs. LOVETT CAMERON.

  Deceivers Ever.
  Juliet's Guardian.

By AUSTEN CLARE.

  For the Love of a Lass.

By Mrs. ARCHER CLIVE.

  Paul Ferroll.
  Why Paul Ferroll Killed his Wife.

By MACLAREN COBBAN.

  The Cure of Souls.

By C. ALLSTON COLLINS.

  The Bar Sinister.

MORT. & FRANCES COLLINS.

  Sweet Anne Page.
  Transmigration.
  From Midnight to Midnight.
  A Fight with Fortune.
  Sweet and Twenty.
  Frances.
  Village Comedy.
  You Play me False.
  Blacksmith and Scholar.

By WILKIE COLLINS.

  Armadale.
  After Dark.
  No Name.
  Antonina.
  Basil.
  Hide and Seek.
  The Dead Secret.
  Queen of Hearts.
  Miss or Mrs?
  New Magdalen.
  The Frozen Deep.
  Law and the Lady.
  The Two Destinies.
  Haunted Hotel.
  A Rogue's Life.
  My Miscellanies.
  Woman in White.
  The Moonstone.
  Man and Wife.
  Poor Miss Finch.
  The Fallen Leaves.
  Jezebel's Daughter.
  The Black Robe.
  Heart and Science.
  "I Say No."
  The Evil Genius.
  Little Novels.
  Legacy of Cain.
  Blind Love.

By M. J. COLQUHOUN.

  Every Inch a Soldier.

By DUTTON COOK.

  Leo.
  Paul Foster's Daughter.

By C. EGBERT CRADDOCK.

  Prophet of the Great Smoky Mountains.

By R. M. CROKER.

  Pretty Miss Neville.
  A Bird of Passage.
  Diana Barrington.
  Proper Pride.

By WILLIAM CYPLES.

  Hearts of Gold.

By ALPHONSE DAUDET.

  The Evangelist; or, Port Salvation.

By JAMES DE MILLE.

  A Castle in Spain.

By J. LEITH DERWENT.

  Our Lady of Tears.
  Circe's Lovers.

By CHARLES DICKENS.

  Sketches by Boz.
  Pickwick Papers.
  Oliver Twist.
  Nicholas Nickleby.

By DICK DONOVAN.

  The Man-Hunter.
  Caught at Last!
  Tracked and Taken.
  Who Poisoned Hetty Duncan?
  The Man from Manchester.
  A Detective's Triumphs.
  In the Grip of the Law.

By Mrs. ANNIE EDWARDES.

  A Point of Honour.
  Archie Lovell.

By M. BETHAM-EDWARDS.

  Felicia.
  Kitty.

By EDWARD EGGLESTON.

  Roxy.

By PERCY FITZGERALD.

  Bella Donna.
  Never Forgotten.
  Polly.
  Fatal Zero.
  The Second Mrs. Tillotson.
  Seventy-five Brooke Street.
  The Lady of Brantome.

By PERCY FITZGERALD and others.

  Strange Secrets.

ALBANY DE FONBLANQUE.

  Filthy Lucre.

By R. E. FRANCILLON.

  Olympia.
  One by One.
  A Real Queen.
  Queen Cophetua.
  King or Knave?
  Romances of Law.

By HAROLD FREDERICK.

  Seth's Brother's Wife.
  The Lawton Girl.

Pref. by Sir BARTLE FRERE.

  Pandurang Hari.

By HAIN FRISWELL.

  One of Two.

By EDWARD GARRETT.

  The Capel Girls.

By CHARLES GIBBON.

  Robin Gray.
  Fancy Free.
  For Lack of Gold.
  What will the World Say?
  In Love and War.
  For the King.
  In Pastures Green.
  Queen of Meadow.
  A Heart's Problem.
  The Dead Heart.
  In Honour Bound.
  Flower of Forest.
  Braes of Yarrow.
  The Golden Shaft.
  Of High Degree.
  Mead and Stream.
  Loving a Dream.
  A Hard Knot.
  Heart's Delight.
  Blood-Money.

By WILLIAM GILBERT.

  Dr. Austin's Guests.
  James Duke.
  The Wizard of the Mountain.

By ERNEST GLANVILLE.

  The Lost Heiress.

By HENRY GREVILLE.

  A Noble Woman.
  Nikanor.

By JOHN HABBERTON.

  Brueton's Bayou.
  Country Luck.

By ANDREW HALLIDAY.

  Every-Day Papers.

By Lady DUFFUS HARDY.

  Paul Wynter's Sacrifice.

By THOMAS HARDY.

  Under the Greenwood Tree.

By J. BERWICK HARWOOD.

  The Tenth Earl.

By JULIAN HAWTHORNE.

  Garth.
  Ellice Quentin.
  Fortune's Fool.
  Miss Cadogna.
  Sebastian Strome.
  Dust.
  Beatrix Randolph.
  Love--or a Name.
  David Poindexter's Disappearance.
  The Spectre of the Camera.

By Sir ARTHUR HELPS.

  Ivan de Biron.

By HENRY HERMAN.

  A Leading Lady.

By Mrs. CASHEL HOEY.

  The Lover's Creed.

By Mrs. GEORGE HOOPER.

  The House of Raby.

By TIGHE HOPKINS.

  'Twixt Love and Duty.

By Mrs. HUNGERFORD.

  A Maiden all Forlorn.
  In Durance Vile.
  Marvel.
  A Mental Struggle.
  A Modern Circe.

By Mrs. ALFRED HUNT.

  Thornicroft's Model.
  That Other Person.
  Self Condemned.
  Leaden Casket.

By JEAN INGELOW.

  Fated to be Free.

By HARRIETT JAY

  The Dark Colleen.
  The Queen of Connaught.

By MARK KERSHAW.

  Colonial Facts and Fictions.

By R. ASHE KING.

  A Drawn Game.
  Passion's Slave.
  "The Wearing of the Green."
  Bell Barry

By JOHN LEYS.

  The Lindsays.

By E. LYNN LINTON.

  Patricia Kemball.
  World Well Lost.
  Under which Lord?
  Paston Carew.
  "My Love!"
  Ione.
  The Atonement of Leam Dundas.
  With a Silken Thread.
  The Rebel of the Family.
  Sowing the Wind.

By HENRY W. LUCY.

  Gideon Fleyce.

By JUSTIN McCARTHY.

  A Fair Saxon.
  Linley Rochford.
  Miss Misanthrope.
  Donna Quixote.
  Maid of Athens.
  Camiola.
  Dear Lady Disdain.
  The Waterdale Neighbours.
  My Enemy's Daughter.
  The Comet of a Season.

By AGNES MACDONELL.

  Quaker Cousins.

KATHARINE S. MACQUOID.

  The Evil Eye.
  Lost Rose.

By W. H. MALLOCK.

  The New Republic.

By FLORENCE MARRYAT.

  Open! Sesame!
  Fighting the Air.
  A Harvest of Wild Oats.
  Written in Fire.

By J. MASTERMAN.

  Half-a-dozen Daughters.

By BRANDER MATTHEWS.

  A Secret of the Sea.

By LEONARD MERRICK.

  The Man who was Good.

By JEAN MIDDLEMASS.

  Touch and Go.
  Mr. Dorillion.

By Mrs. MOLESWORTH.

  Hathercourt Rectory.

By J. E. MUDDOCK.

  Stories Weird and Wonderful.
  The Dead Man's Secret.

By D. CHRISTIE MURRAY.

  A Model Father.
  Joseph's Coat.
  Coals of Fire.
  Val Strange.
  Old Blazer's Hero.
  Hearts.
  Way of the World.
  Cynic Fortune.
  A Life's Atonement.
  By the Gate of the Sea.
  A Bit of Human Nature.
  First Person Singular.

By MURRAY and HERMAN.

  One Traveller Returns.
  Paul Jones's Alias.
  The Bishops' Bible.

By HENRY MURRAY.

  A Game of Bluff.

By ALICE O'HANLON.

  The Unforeseen.
  Chance? or Fate?

By GEORGES OHNET.

  Doctor Rameau.
  A Weird Gift.
  A Last Love.

By Mrs. OLIPHANT.

  Whiteladies.
  The Primrose Path
  The Greatest Heiress in England.

By Mrs. ROBERT O REILLY.

  Phoebe's Fortunes.

By OUIDA.

  Held In Bondage.
  Strathmore.
  Chandos.
  Under Two Flags.
  Idalia.
  Cecil Castlemaine's Gage.
  Tricotrin.
  Puck.
  Folle Farine.
  A Dog of Flanders.
  Pascarel.
  Signa.
  Princess Napraxine.
  In a Winter City.
  Ariadne.
  Two Little Wooden Shoes.
  Friendship.
  Moths.
  Pipistrello.
  A Village Commune.
  Bimbi.
  Wanda.
  Frescoes.
  In Maremma.
  Othmar.
  Guilderoy.
  Ruffino.
  Syrlin.
  Ouida's Wisdom, Wit, and Pathos.

MARGARET AGNES PAUL.

  Gentle and Simple.

By JAMES PAYN.

  Bentinck's Tutor.
  Murphy's Master.
  A County Family.
  At Her Mercy.
  Cecil's Tryst.
  Clyffards of Clyffe.
  Foster Brothers.
  Found Dead.
  Best of Husbands.
  Walter's Word.
  Halves.
  Fallen Fortunes.
  Humorous Stories.
  L200 Reward.
  Marine Residence.
  Mirk Abbey.
  By Proxy.
  Under One Roof.
  High Spirits.
  Carlyon's Year.
  From Exile.
  For Cash Only.
  Kit.
  The Canon's Ward
  Talk of the Town.
  Holiday Tasks.
  Lost Sir Massingberd.
  A Perfect Treasure.
  A Woman's Vengeance.
  The Family Scapegrace.
  What He Cost Her.
  Gwendoline's Harvest.
  Like Father, Like Son.
  Married Beneath Him.
  Not Wooed, but Won.
  Less Black than We're Painted.
  A Confidential Agent.
  Some Private Views.
  A Grape from a Thorn.
  Glow-worm Tales.
  The Mystery of Mirbridge.
  The Burnt Million.
  The Word and the Will.
  A Prince of the Blood.

By C. L. PIRKIS.

  Lady Lovelace.

By EDGAR A. POE.

  The Mystery of Marie Roget.

By E. C. PRICE.

  Valentina.
  The Foreigners
  Mrs. Lancaster's Rival.
  Gerald.

By CHARLES READE.

  It is Never Too Late to Mend.
  Christie Johnstone.
  Put Yourself in His Place.
  The Double Marriage.
  Love Me Little, Love Me Long.
  The Cloister and the Hearth.
  The Course of True Love.
  Autobiography of a Thief.
  A Terrible Temptation.
  The Wandering Heir.
  Singleheart and Doubleface.
  Good Stories of Men and other Animals.
  Hard Cash.
  Peg Woffington.
  Griffith Gaunt.
  Foul Play.
  A Simpleton.
  Readiana.
  A Woman-Hater.
  The Jilt.
  A Perilous Secret.

By Mrs. J. H. RIDDELL.

  Weird Stories.
  Fairy Water.
  Her Mother's Darling.
  Prince of Wales's Garden Party.
  The Uninhabited House.
  The Mystery in Palace Gardens.
  The Nun's Curse.
  Idle Tales.

By F. W. ROBINSON.

  Women are Strange.
  The Hands of Justice.

By JAMES RUNCIMAN.

  Skippers and Shellbacks.
  Grace Balmaign's Sweetheart.
  Schools and Scholars.

By W. CLARK RUSSELL.

  Round the Galley Fire.
  On the Fo'k'sle Head.
  In the Middle Watch.
  A Voyage to the Cape.
  A Book for the Hammock.
  The Mystery of the "Ocean Star."
  The Romance of Jenny Harlowe.
  An Ocean Tragedy.
  My Shipmate Louise.

GEORGE AUGUSTUS SALA.

  Gaslight and Daylight.

By JOHN SAUNDERS.

  Guy Waterman.
  Two Dreamers.
  The Lion in the Path.

By KATHARINE SAUNDERS.

  Joan Merryweather.
  The High Mills.
  Heart Salvage.
  Sebastian.
  Margaret and Elizabeth.

By GEORGE R. SIMS.

  Rogues and Vagabonds.
  The Ring o' Bells.
  Mary Jane's Memoirs.
  Mary Jane Married.
  Tales of To-day.
  Dramas of Life.
  Tinkletop's Crime.
  Zeph: A Circus Story.

By ARTHUR SKETCHLEY.

  A Match in the Dark.

By HAWLEY SMART.

  Without Love or Licence.

By T. W. SPEIGHT.

  The Mysteries of Heron Dyke.
  The Golden Hoop.
  Hoodwinked, &c.
  By Devious Ways.
  Back to Life.

By R. A. STERNDALE.

  The Afghan Knife.

By R. LOUIS STEVENSON.

  New Arabian Nights.
  Prince Otto.

BY BERTHA THOMAS.

  Cressida.
  Proud Maisie.
  The Violin-player.

By WALTER THORNBURY.

  Tales for the Marines.
  Old Stories Re-told.

T. ADOLPHUS TROLLOPE.

  Diamond Cut Diamond.

By F. ELEANOR TROLLOPE.

  Like Ships upon the Sea.
  Anne Furness.
  Mabel's Progress.

By ANTHONY TROLLOPE.

  Frau Frohmann.
  Marion Fay.
  Kept In the Dark.
  John Caldigate.
  The Way We Live Now.
  The American Senator.
  Mr. Scarborough's Family.
  The Land-Leaguers.
  The Golden Lion of Granpere.

By J. T. TROWBRIDOE.

  Farnell's Folly.

By IVAN TURGENIEFF, &c.

  Stories from Foreign Novelists.

By MARK TWAIN.

  A Pleasure Trip on the Continent.
  The Gilded Age.
  Mark Twain's Sketches.
  Tom Sawyer.
  A Tramp Abroad.
  The Stolen White Elephant.
  Huckleberry Finn.
  Life on the Mississippi.
  The Prince and the Pauper.

By C. C. FRASER-TYTLER.

  Mistress Judith.

By SARAH TYTLER.

  The Bride's Pass.
  Buried Diamonds.
  Saint Mungo's City.
  Lady Bell.
  Noblesse Oblige.
  Disappeared.
  Huguenot Family.
  Blackhall Ghosts.
  What She Came Through.
  Beauty and the Beast.
  Citoyenne Jaqueline.

By Mrs. F. H. WILLIAMSON.

  A Child Widow.

By J. S. WINTER.

  Cavalry Life.
  Regimental Legends.

By H. F. WOOD.

  The Passenger from Scotland Yard.
  The Englishman of the Rue Cain.

By Lady WOOD.

  Sabina.

CELIA PARKER WOOLLEY.

  Rachel Armstrong; or, Love & Theology.

By EDMUND YATES.

  The Forlorn Hope.
  Castaway.
  Land at Last.