#Consonants.#

8. There is little difference between the values of Old English
consonants and those of Modern English. The following distinctions,
however, require notice:

The digraph #th# is represented in Old English texts by ð and þ, no
consistent distinction being made between them. In the works of Alfred,
ð (capital, Ð) is the more common: #ðâs#, _those_; #ðæt#, _that_;
#bindeð#, _he binds_.

The consonant #c# had the hard sound of _k_, the latter symbol being
rare in West Saxon: #cyning#, _king_; #cwên#, _queen_; #cûð#, _known_.
When followed by a palatal vowel sound,--_e_, _i_, _æ_, _ea_, _eo_,
long or short,--a vanishing _y_ sound was doubtless interposed (_cf._
dialectic _k^{y}ind_ for _kind_). In Modern English the combination
has passed into _ch_: #cealc#, _chalk_; #cîdan#, _to chide_; #læ:ce#,
_leech_; #cild#, _child_; #cêowan#, _to chew_. This change (_c_ > _ch_)
is known as Palatalization. The letter g, pronounced as in Modern
English _gun_, has also a palatal value before the palatal vowels
(_cf._ dialectic _g^{y}irl_ for _girl_).

The combination #cg#, which frequently stands for #gg#, had probably the
sound of _dge_ in Modern English _edge_: #ecg#, _edge_; #secgan#, _to
say_; #brycg#, _bridge_. Initial #h# is sounded as in Modern English:
#habban#, _to have_; #hâlga#, _saint_. When closing a syllable it has
the sound of German _ch_: #slôh#, _he slew_; #hêah#, _high_; #ðurh#,
_through_.


9. An important distinction is that between voiced (or sonant) and
voiceless (or surd) consonants.[2] In Old English they are as follows:

  VOICED.                    VOICELESS.

    g                          h, c
    d                          t
    ð, þ (as in _th_ough)      ð, þ (as in _th_in)
    b                          p
    f (= v)                    f
    s (= z)                    s

It is evident, therefore, that ð (þ), f, and s have double values in Old
English. If voiced, they are equivalent to _th_ (in _th_ough), _v_, and
_z_. Otherwise, they are pronounced as _th_ (in _th_in), _f_ (in _f_in),
and _s_ (in _s_in). The syllabic environment will usually compel the
student to give these letters their proper values. When occurring
between vowels, they are always voiced: #ôðer#, _other_; #ofer#, _over_;
#rîsan#, _to rise_.

  NOTE.--The general rule in Old English, as in Modern English, is,
  that voiced consonants have a special affinity for other voiced
  consonants, and voiceless for voiceless. This is the law of
  Assimilation. Thus when _de_ is added to form the preterit of a
  verb whose stem ends in a voiceless consonant, the d is unvoiced,
  or assimilated, to t: #settan#, _to set_, #sette# (but #treddan#,
  _to tread_, has #tredde#); #slæ:pan#, _to sleep_, #slæ:pte#;
  #drencan#, _to drench_, #drencte#; #cyssan#, _to kiss_, #cyste#.
  See § 126, Note 1.

    [Footnote 2: A little practice will enable the student to see
    the appropriateness of calling these consonants voiced and
    voiceless. Try to pronounce a voiced consonant,--_d_ in _den_,
    for example, but without the assistance of _en_,--and there will
    be heard a gurgle, or _vocal_ murmur. But in _t_, of _ten_,
    there is no sound at all, but only a feeling of tension in the
    organs.]


#Syllables.#

10. A syllable is usually a vowel, either alone or in combination with
consonants, uttered with a single impulse of stress; but certain
consonants may form syllables: _oven_ (= _ov-n_), _battle_ (= _bæt-l_);
(_cf._ also the vulgar pronunciation of _elm_).

A syllable may be (1) weak or strong, (2) open or closed, (3) long or
short.

(1) A weak syllable receives a light stress. Its vowel sound is often
different from that of the corresponding strong, or stressed, syllable.
_Cf._ weak and strong _my_ in "I want my lárge hat" and "I want m[´y]
hat."

(2) An open syllable ends in a vowel or diphthong: #dê-man#, _to deem_;
#ðû#, _thou_; #sca-can#, _to shake_; #dæ-ges#, _by day_. A closed
syllable ends in one or more consonants: #ðing#, _thing_; #gôd#, _good_;
#glæd#, _glad_.

(3) A syllable is long (_a_) if it contains a long vowel or a long
diphthong: #drî-fan#, _to drive_; #lû-can#, _to lock_; #slæ:-pan#, _to
sleep_; #cêo-san#, _to choose_; (_b_) if its vowel or diphthong is
followed by more than one consonant:[3] #cræft#, _strength_; #heard#,
_hard_; #lib-ban#, _to live_; #feal-lan#, _to fall_. Otherwise, the
syllable is short: #ðe#, _which_; #be-ran#, _to bear_; #ðæt#, _that_;
#gie-fan#, _to give_.

  NOTE 1.--A single consonant belongs to the following syllable:
  #hâ-lig#, _holy_ (not #hâl-ig#); #wrî-tan#, _to write_; #fæ-der#,
  _father_.

  NOTE 2.--The student will notice that the syllable may be long and
  the vowel short; but the vowel cannot be long and the syllable
  short.

  NOTE 3.--Old English short vowels, occurring in open syllables,
  have regularly become long in Modern English: #we-fan#, _to
  weave_; #e-tan#, _to eat_; #ma-cian#, _to make_; #na-cod#,
  _naked_; #a-can#, _to ache_; #o-fer#, _over_. And Old English long
  vowels, preceding two or more consonants, have generally been
  shortened: #brêost#, _breast_; #hæ:lð#, _health_; #slæ:pte#,
  _slept_; #læ:dde#, _led_.

    [Footnote 3: Taken separately, every syllable ending in a single
    consonant is long. It may be said, therefore, that all closed
    syllables are long; but in the natural flow of language, the
    single final consonant of a syllable so often blends with a
    following initial vowel, the syllable thus becoming open and
    short, that such syllables are not recognized as prevailingly
    long. _Cf._ Modern English _at all_ (= _a-tall_).]


#Accentuation.#

11. The accent in Old English falls usually on the radical syllable,
never on the inflectional ending: #bríngan#, _to bring_; #st[´â]nas#,
_stones_; #bérende#, _bearing_; #[´î]delnes#, _idleness_;
#fr[´ê]ondscipe#, _friendship_.

But in the case of compound nouns, adjectives, and adverbs the first
member of the compound (unless it be ge- or be-) receives the stronger
stress: #héofon-rîce#, _heaven-kingdom_; #ónd-giet#, _intelligence_;
#sôð-fæst#, _truthful_; #gód-cund#, _divine_; #éall-unga#, _entirely_;
#bl[´î]ðe-lîce#, _blithely_. But #be-h[´â]t#, _promise_; #ge-béd#,
_prayer_; #ge-f[´ê]alîc#, _joyous_; #be-sóne#, _immediately_.

Compound verbs, however, have the stress on the radical syllable:
#for-gíefan#, _to forgive_; #of-línnan#, _to cease_; #â-cn[´â]wan#, _to
know_; #wið-stóndan#, _to withstand_; #on-sácan#, _to resist_.

  NOTE.--The tendency of nouns to take the stress on the prefix,
  while verbs retain it on the root, is exemplified in many Modern
  English words: _préference_, _prefér_; _cóntract_ (noun),
  _contráct_ (verb); _ábstinence_, _abstaín_; _pérfume_ (noun),
  _perfúme_ (verb).




CHAPTER III.

INFLECTIONS.


#Cases.#

12. There are five cases in Old English: the nominative, the genitive,
the dative, the accusative, and the instrumental.[1] Each of them,
except the nominative, may be governed by prepositions. When used
without prepositions, they have, in general, the following functions:

(_a_) The nominative, as in Modern English, is the case of the subject
of a finite verb.

(_b_) The genitive (the possessive case of Modern English) is the case
of the possessor or source. It may be called the _of_ case.

(_c_) The dative is the case of the indirect object. It may be called
the _to_ or _for_ case.

(_d_) The accusative (the objective case of Modern English) is the case
of the direct object.

(_e_) The instrumental, which rarely differs from the dative in form, is
the case of the means or the method. It may be called the _with_ or _by_
case.

The following paradigm of #mûð#, _the mouth_, illustrates the several
cases (the article being, for the present, gratuitously added in the
Modern English equivalents):

       _Singular._                  _Plural._

  _N._ mûð = _the mouth._           mûð-as = _the mouths._

  _G._ mûð-es[2] = _of the mouth_   mûð-a = _of the mouths_
         (= _the mouth's_).           (= _the mouths'_).

  _D._ mûð-e = _to_ or _for the     mûð-um = _to_ or _for the mouths._
         mouth._

  _A._ mûð = _the mouth._           mûð-as = _the mouths._

  _I._ mûðe = _with_ or _by means   mûð-um = _with_ or _by means
         of the mouth._               of the mouths._

    [Footnote 1: Most grammars add a sixth case, the vocative. But
    it seems best to consider the vocative as only a _function_ of
    the nominative _form_.]

    [Footnote 2: Of course our "apostrophe and _s_" (= _'s_) comes
    from the Old English genitive ending -es. The _e_ is preserved
    in _Wednesday_ (= Old English #Wôdnes dæg#). But at a very early
    period it was thought that _John's book_, for example, was a
    shortened form of _John his book_. Thus Addison (_Spectator_,
    No. 135) declares _'s_ a survival of _his_. How, then, would he
    explain the _s_ of _his_? And how would he dispose of _Mary's
    book_?]


#Gender.#

13. The gender of Old English nouns, unlike that of Modern English,
depends partly on meaning and partly on form, or ending. Thus #mûð#,
_mouth_, is masculine; #tunge#, _tongue_, feminine; #êage#, _eye_,
neuter.

No very comprehensive rules, therefore, can be given; but the gender of
every noun should be learned with its meaning. Gender will be indicated
in the vocabularies by the different gender forms of the definite
article, #sê# for the masculine, #sêo# for the feminine, and #ðæt# for
the neuter: #sê mûð#, #sêo tunge#, #ðæt êage# = _the mouth_, _the
tongue_, _the eye_.

All nouns ending in #-dôm#, #-hâd#, #-scipe#, or #-ere# are masculine
(_cf._ Modern English wis_dom_, child_hood_, friend_ship_, work_er_).
Masculine, also, are nouns ending in -a.

Those ending in #-nes# or #-ung# are feminine (_cf._ Modern English
good_ness_, and gerundial forms in _-ing_: see_ing_ is believ_ing_).

Thus #sê wîsdôm#, _wisdom_; #sê cildhâd#, _childhood_; #sê frêondscipe#,
_friendship_; #sê fiscere#, _fisher(man)_; #sê hunta#, _hunter_; #sêo
gelîcnes#, _likeness_; #sêo leornung#, _learning_.


#Declensions.#

14. There are two great systems of declension in Old English, the Vowel
Declension and the Consonant Declension. A noun is said to belong to the
Vowel Declension when the final letter of its stem is a vowel, this
vowel being then known as the _stem-characteristic_; but if the
stem-characteristic is a consonant, the noun belongs to the Consonant
Declension. There might have been, therefore, as many subdivisions of
the Vowel Declension in Old English as there were vowels, and as many
subdivisions of the Consonant Declension as there were consonants. All
Old English nouns, however, belonging to the Vowel Declension, ended
their stems originally in a, ô, i, or u. Hence there are but four
subdivisions of the Vowel Declension: a-stems, ô-stems, i-stems, and
u-stems.

The Vowel Declension is commonly called the Strong Declension, and its
nouns Strong Nouns.

  NOTE.--The terms Strong and Weak were first used by Jacob Grimm
  (1785-1863) in the terminology of verbs, and thence transferred to
  nouns and adjectives. By a Strong Verb, Grimm meant one that could
  form its preterit out of its own resources; that is, without
  calling in the aid of an additional syllable: Modern English
  _run_, _ran_; _find_, _found_; but verbs of the Weak Conjugation
  had to borrow, as it were, an inflectional syllable: _gain_,
  _gained_; _help_, _helped_.


15. The stems of nouns belonging to the Consonant Declension ended,
with but few exceptions, in the letter n (_cf._ Latin _homin-em_,
_ration-em_, Greek +poimen-a+). They are called, therefore, n-stems,
the Declension itself being known as the n-Declension, or the Weak
Declension. The nouns, also, are called Weak Nouns.


16. If every Old English noun had preserved the original Germanic
stem-characteristic (or final letter of the stem), there would be no
difficulty in deciding at once whether any given noun is an a-stem,
ô-stem, i-stem, u-stem, or n-stem; but these final letters had, for the
most part, either been dropped, or fused with the case-endings, long
before the period of historic Old English. It is only, therefore, by a
rigid comparison of the Germanic languages with one another, and with
the other Aryan languages, that scholars are able to reconstruct a
single Germanic language, in which the original stem-characteristics may
be seen far better than in any one historic branch of the Germanic group
(§ 5, Note).

This hypothetical language, which bears the same ancestral relation to
the historic Germanic dialects that Latin bears to the Romance tongues,
is known simply as _Germanic_ (Gmc.), or as _Primitive Germanic_.
Ability to reconstruct Germanic forms is not expected of the students of
this book, but the following table should be examined as illustrating
the basis of distinction among the several Old English declensions (O.E.
= Old English, Mn.E. = Modern English):

                     {            {Gmc. _staina-z_,
                     {(1) a-stems {O.E. #stân#,
                     {            {Mn.E. _stone_.
                     {
                     {            {Gmc. _hallô_,
                     {(2) ô-stems {O.E. #heall#,
  I. Strong or Vowel {            {Mn.E. _hall_.
     Declensions     {
                     {            {Gmc. _bôni-z_,
                     {(3) i-stems {O.E. #bên#,
                     {            {Mn.E. _boon_.
                     {
                     {            {Gmc. _sunu-z_,
                     {(4) u-stems {O.E. #sunu#,
                     {            {Mn.E. _son_.

                     {(1) n-stems            {Gmc. _tungôn-iz_,
                     {    (Weak              {O.E. #tung-an#,
                     {    Declension)        {Mn.E. _tongue-s_.
                     {
                     {                {      {Gmc. _fôt-iz_,
                     {                {(_a_) {O.E. #fêt#,
  II. Consonant      {(2) Remnants    {      {Mn.E. _feet_.
      Declensions    {    of other    {
                     {    Consonant   {      {Gmc. _frijônd-iz_,
                     {    Declensions {(_b_) {O.E. #frîend#,
                     {                {      {Mn.E. _friend-s_.
                     {                {
                     {                {      {Gmc. _brôðr-iz_,
                     {                {(_c_) {O.E. #brôðor#,
                     {                {      {Mn.E. _brother-s_.


  NOTE.--"It will be seen that if Old English #êage#, _eye_, is said
  to be an n-stem, what is meant is this, that at some former period
  the kernel of the word ended in -n, while, as far as the Old
  English language proper is concerned, all that is implied is that
  the word is inflected in a certain manner." (Jespersen, _Progress
  in Language_, § 109).

  This is true of all Old English stems, whether Vowel or Consonant.
  The division, therefore, into a-stems, ô-stems, etc., is made in
  the interests of grammar as well as of philology.


#Conjugations.#

17. There are, likewise, two systems of conjugation in Old English: the
Strong or Old Conjugation, and the Weak or New Conjugation.

The verbs of the Strong Conjugation (the so-called Irregular Verbs of
Modern English) number about three hundred, of which not one hundred
remain in Modern English (§ 101, Note). They form their preterit and
frequently their past participle by changing the radical vowel of the
present stem. This vowel change or modification is called _ablaut_
(pronounced _áhp-lowt_): Modern English _sing, sang, sung_; _rise, rose,
risen_. As the radical vowel of the preterit plural is often different
from that of the preterit singular, there are four _principal parts_ or
_tense stems_ in an Old English strong verb, instead of the three of
Modern English. The four principal parts in the conjugation of a strong
verb are (1) the present indicative, (2) the preterit indicative
singular, (3) the preterit indicative plural, and (4) the past
participle.

Strong verbs fall into seven groups, illustrated in the following table:

  PRESENT.
    PRET. SING.
      PRET. PLUR.
        PAST PARTICIPLE.

  I. Bîtan, _to bite_:

  Ic bît-e, _I bite_ or _shall bite_.[3]
    Ic bât, _I bit_.
      Wê bit-on, _we bit_.
        Ic hæbbe ge[4]-biten, _I have bitten_.

  II. Bêodan, _to bid_:

  Ic bêod-e, _I bid_ or _shall bid_.
    Ic bêad, _I bade_.
      Wê bud-on, _we bade_.
        Ic hæbbe ge-boden, _I have bidden_.

  III. Bindan, _to bind_:

  Ic bind-e, _I bind_ or _shall bind_.
    Ic bond, _I bound_.
      Wê bund-on, _we bound_.
        Ic hæbbe ge-bund-en, _I have bound_.

  IV. Beran, _to bear_:

  Ic ber-e, _I bear_ or _shall bear_.
    Ic bær, _I bore_.
      Wê bæ:r-on, _we bore_.
        Ic hæbbe ge-bor-en, _I have borne_.

  V. Metan, _to measure_:

  Ic met-e, _I measure_ or _shall measure_.
    Ic mæt, _I measured_.
      Wê mæ:t-on, _we measured_.
        Ic hæbbe ge-met-en, _I have measured_.

  VI. Faran, _to go_:

  Ic far-e, _I go_ or _shall go_.
    Ic fôr, _I went_.
      Wê fôr-on, _we went_.
        Ic eom[5] ge-far-en, _I have (am) gone_.

  VII. Feallan, _to fall_:

  Ic feall-e, _I fall_ or _shall fall_.
    Ic fêoll, _I fell_.
      Wê fêoll-on, _we fell_.
        Ic eom[5] ge-feall-en, _I have (am) fallen_.

    [Footnote 3: Early West Saxon had no distinctive form for the
    future. The present was used both as present proper and as
    future. _Cf._ Modern English "I go home tomorrow," or "I am
    going home tomorrow" for "I shall go home tomorrow."]

    [Footnote 4: The prefix ge- (Middle English _y-_), cognate with
    Latin _co_ (_con_) and implying completeness of action, was not
    always used. It never occurs in the past participles of compound
    verbs: #oþ-feallan#, _to fall off_, past participle #oþ-feallen#
    (not #oþ-gefeallen#). Milton errs in prefixing it to a present
    participle:

      "What needs my Shakespeare, for his honour'd bones,
      The labour of an age in piled stones?
      Or that his hallow'd reliques should be hid
      Under a star-_ypointing_ pyramid."
        --_Epitaph on William Shakespeare_.

    And Shakespeare misuses it in "Y-ravished," a preterit
    (_Pericles_ III, _Prologue_ l. 35).

    It survives in the archaic _y-clept_ (Old English #ge-clypod#,
    called). It appears as _a_ in _aware_ (Old English #ge-wær#),
    as _e_ in _enough_ (Old English #ge-nôh#), and as _i_ in
    _handiwork_ (Old English #hand-ge-weorc#).]

    [Footnote 5: With intransitive verbs denoting _change of
    condition_, the Old English auxiliary is usually some form of
    _to be_ rather than _to have_. See § 139.]


18. The verbs of the Weak Conjugation (the so-called Regular Verbs of
Modern English) form their preterit and past participle by adding to the
present stem a suffix[6] with _d_ or _t_: Modern English _love_,
_loved_; _sleep_, _slept_.

The stem of the preterit plural is never different from the stem of the
preterit singular; hence these verbs have only three distinctive
tense-stems, or principal parts: _viz._, (1) the present indicative,
(2) the preterit indicative, and (3) the past participle.

Weak verbs fall into three groups, illustrated in the following table:

  PRESENT.
    PRETERIT.
      PAST PARTICIPLE.

  I. Fremman, _to perform_:

  Ic fremm-e, _I perform_ or _shall perform_.
    Ic frem-ede, _I performed_.
      Ic hæbbe ge-frem-ed, _I have performed_.

  II. Bodian, _to proclaim_:

  Ic bodi-e, _I proclaim_ or _shall proclaim_.
    Ic bod-ode, _I proclaimed_.
      Ic hæbbe ge-bod-od, _I have proclaimed_.

  III. Habban, _to have_:

  Ic hæbbe, _I have_ or _shall have_.
    Ic hæf-de, _I had_.
      Ic hæbbe ge-hæf-d, _I have had_.

    [Footnote 6: The theory that _loved_, for example, is a fused
    form of _love-did_ has been generally given up. The dental
    ending was doubtless an Indo-Germanic suffix, which became
    completely specialized only in the Teutonic languages.]


19. There remain a few verbs (chiefly the Auxiliary Verbs of Modern
English) that do not belong entirely to either of the two conjugations
mentioned. The most important of them are, #Ic mæg# _I may_, #Ic mihte#
_I might_; #Ic con# _I can_, #Ic cûðe# _I could_; #Ic môt# _I must_, #Ic
môste# _I must_; #Ic sceal# _I shall_, #Ic sceolde# _I should_; #Ic eom#
_I am_, #Ic wæs# _I was_; #Ic wille# _I will_, #Ic wolde# _I would_; #Ic
dô# _I do_, #Ic dyde# _I did_; #Ic gâ# _I go_, #Ic êode# _I went_.

All but the last four of these are known as Preterit-Present Verbs. The
present tense of each of them is _in origin_ a preterit, _in function_ a
present. _Cf._ Modern English _ought_ (= _owed_).




CHAPTER IV.

ORDER OF WORDS.


20. The order of words in Old English is more like that of Modern German
than of Modern English. Yet it is only the Transposed order that the
student will feel to be at all un-English; and the Transposed order,
even before the period of the Norman Conquest, was fast yielding place
to the Normal order.

The three divisions of order are (1) Normal, (2) Inverted, and
(3) Transposed.

(1) Normal order = subject + predicate. In Old English, the Normal order
is found chiefly in independent clauses. The predicate is followed by
its modifiers: #Sê hwæl bið micle læ:ssa þonne ôðre hwalas#, _That whale
is much smaller than other whales_; #Ond hê geseah twâ scipu#, _And he
saw two ships_.

(2) Inverted order = predicate + subject. This order occurs also in
independent clauses, and is employed (_a_) when some modifier of the
predicate precedes the predicate, the subject being thrown behind. The
words most frequently causing Inversion in Old English prose are #þâ#
_then_, #þonne# _then_, and #þæ:r# _there_: #Ðâ fôr hê#, _Then went he_;
#Ðonne ærnað hy: ealle tôweard þæ:m fêo#, _Then gallop they all toward
the property_; #ac þæ:r bið medo genôh#, _but there is mead enough_.

Inversion is employed (_b_) in interrogative sentences: #Lufast ðû mê?#
_Lovest thou me?_ and (_c_) in imperative sentences: #Cume ðîn rîce#,
_Thy kingdom come_.

(3) Transposed order = subject ... predicate. That is, the predicate
comes last in the sentence, being preceded by its modifiers. This is the
order observed in dependent clauses:[1] #Ðonne cymeð sê man sê þæt
swiftoste hors hafað#, _Then comes the man that has the swiftest horse_
(literally, _that the swiftest horse has_); #Ne mêtte hê æ:r nân gebûn
land, siþþan hê from his âgnum hâm fôr#, _Nor did he before find any
cultivated land, after he went from his own home_ (literally, _after he
from his own home went_).

    [Footnote 1: But in the _Voyages of Ohthere and Wulfstan_, in
    which the style is apparently more that of oral than of written
    discourse, the Normal is more frequent than the Transposed order
    in dependent clauses. In his other writings Alfred manifests a
    partiality for the Transposed order in dependent clauses, except
    in the case of substantival clauses introduced by #þæt#. Such
    clauses show a marked tendency to revert to their Normal _oratio
    recta_ order. The norm thus set by the indirect affirmative
    clause seems to have proved an important factor in the ultimate
    disappearance of Transposition from dependent clauses. The
    influence of Norman French helped only to consummate forces that
    were already busily at work.]


21. Two other peculiarities in the order of words require a brief
notice.

(1) Pronominal datives and accusatives usually precede the predicate:
#Hê hine oferwann#, _He overcame him_ (literally, _He him overcame_);
#Dryhten him andwyrde#, _The Lord answered him_. But substantival
datives and accusatives, as in Modern English, follow the predicate. The
following sentence illustrates both orders: #Hy: genâmon Ioseph, ond
hine gesealdon cîpemonnum, ond hy: hine gesealdon in Êgypta lond#, _They
took Joseph, and sold him to merchants, and they sold him into Egypt_
(literally, _They took Joseph, and him sold to merchants, and they him
sold into Egyptians' land_).

  NOTE.--The same order prevails in the case of pronominal
  nominatives used as predicate nouns: #Ic hit eom#, _It is I_
  (literally, _I it am_); #Ðû hit eart#, _It is thou_ (literally,
  _Thou it art_).

(2) The attributive genitive, whatever relationship it expresses,
usually precedes the noun which it qualifies: #Breoton is gârsecges
îgland#, _Britain is an island of the ocean_ (literally, _ocean's
island_); #Swilce hit is êac berende on wecga ôrum#, _Likewise it is
also rich in ores of metals_ (literally, _metals' ores_); #Cyninga
cyning#, _King of kings_ (literally, _Kings' king_); #Gê witon Godes
rîces gery:ne#, _Ye know the mystery of the kingdom of God_ (literally,
_Ye know God's kingdom's mystery_).

A preposition governing the word modified by the genitive, precedes the
genitive:[2] #On ealdra manna sægenum#, _In old men's sayings_; #Æt
ðæ:ra stræ:ta endum#, _At the ends of the streets_ (literally, _At the
streets' ends_); #For ealra ðînra hâlgena lufan#, _For all thy saints'
love_. See, also, § 94, (5).

    [Footnote 2: The positions of the genitive are various. It
    frequently follows its noun: #þâ bearn þâra Aðeniensa#, _The
    children of the Athenians_. It may separate an adjective and a
    noun: #Ân ly:tel sæ:s earm#, _A little arm of (the) sea_. The
    genitive may here be construed as an adjective, or part of a
    compound = _A little sea-arm_; #Mid monegum Godes gifum#, _With
    many God-gifts_ = _many divine gifts_.]




CHAPTER V.

PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS.


22. In the study of Old English, the student must remember that he is
dealing not with a foreign or isolated language but with the earlier
forms of his own mother tongue. The study will prove profitable and
stimulating in proportion as close and constant comparison is made of
the old with the new. The guiding principles in such a comparison are
reducible chiefly to two. These are (1) the regular operation of
phonetic laws, resulting especially in certain Vowel Shiftings, and
(2) the alterations in form and syntax that are produced by Analogy.

(1) "The former of these is of physiological or _natural_ origin, and is
perfectly and inflexibly regular throughout the same period of the same
language; and even though different languages show different phonetic
habits and predilections, there is a strong general resemblance between
the changes induced in one language and in another; many of the
particular laws are true for many languages.

(2) "The other principle is psychical, or mental, or _artificial_,
introducing various more or less capricious changes that are supposed to
be emendations; and its operation is, to some extent, uncertain and
fitful."[1]

    [Footnote 1: Skeat, _Principles of English Etymology_, Second
    Series, § 342. But Jespersen, with Collitz and others, stoutly
    contests "the theory of sound laws and analogy sufficing between
    them to explain everything in linguistic development."]


(1) #Vowel-Shiftings.#

23. It will prove an aid to the student in acquiring the inflections and
vocabulary of Old English to note carefully the following shiftings that
have taken place in the gradual growth of the Old English vowel system
into that of Modern English.

(1) As stated in § 3, the Old English inflectional vowels, which were
all short and unaccented, weakened in early Middle English to _e_. This
_e_ in Modern English is frequently dropped:

  OLD ENGLISH.      MIDDLE ENGLISH.     MODERN ENGLISH.
    stân-as           ston-es             stones
    sun-u             sun-e               son
    sun-a             sun-e               sons
    ox-an             ox-en               oxen
    swift-ra          swift-er            swifter
    swift-ost         swift-est           swiftest
    lôc-ode           lok-ede             looked

(2) The Old English long vowels have shifted their phonetic values with
such uniform regularity that it is possible in almost every case to
infer the Modern English sound; but our spelling is so chaotic that
while the student may infer the modern sound, he cannot always infer the
modern symbol representing the sound.

  OLD         MODERN ENGLISH.
  ENGLISH.

  â       _o_[2]           { nâ = _no_; stân = _stone_; bân = _bone_;
           (as in _no_)    {   râd = _road_; âc = _oak_; hâl = _whole_;
                           {   hâm = _home_; sâwan = _to sow_; gâst =
                           {   _ghost_.

  ê       _e_             { hê = _he_; wê = _we_; ðê = _thee_; mê =
           (as in _he_)   {   _me_; gê = _ye_; hêl = _heel_; wêrig =
                          {   _weary_; gelêfan = _to believe_; gês =
                          {   _geese_.

  î (y:)   _i_ (_y_)       { mîn = _mine_; ðîn = _thine_; wîr = _wire_;
           (as in _mine_) {   my:s = _mice_; rîm = _rime_ (wrongly spelt
                          {   _rhyme_); ly:s = _lice_; bî = _by_;
                          {   scînan = _to shine_; stig-râp = _sty-rope_
                          {   (shortened to _stirrup_, stîgan meaning
                          {   _to mount_).

  ô       _o_             { dô = _I do_; tô = _too, to_; gôs = _goose_;
            (as in _do_)  {   tôð = _tooth_; môna = _moon_; ðôm =
                          {   _doom_; môd = _mood_; wôgian = _to woo_;
                          {   slôh = _I slew_.

  û       _ou_ (_ow_)     { ðû = _thou_; fûl = _foul_; hûs = _house_;
           (as in _thou_) {   nû = _now_; hû = _how_; tûn = _town_;
                          {   ûre = our; ût = _out_; hlûd = _loud_;
                          {   ðûsend = _thousand_.


  æ:,      _ea_            { æ:: sæ: = _sea_; mæ:l = _meal_; dæ:lan =
   êa,     (as in _sea_)  {   _to deal_; clæ:ne = _clean_; græ:dig =
   êo                     {   _greedy_.
                          {
                          { êa: êare = _ear_; êast = _east_; drêam =
                          {   _dream_; gêar = _year_; bêatan =
                          {   _to beat_.
                          {
                          { êo: ðrêo = _three_; drêorig = _dreary_;
                          {   sêo = _she_, hrêod = _reed_; dêop =
                          {   _deep_.

    [Footnote 2: But Old English â preceded by w sometimes gives
    Modern English _o_ as in _two_: #twâ# = _two_; #hwâ# = _who_;
    #hwâm# = _whom_.]


(2) #Analogy.#

24. But more important than vowel shifting is the great law of Analogy,
for Analogy shapes not only words but constructions. It belongs,
therefore, to Etymology and to Syntax, since it influences both form and
function. By this law, minorities tend to pass over to the side of the
majorities. "The greater mass of cases exerts an assimilative influence
upon the smaller."[3] The effect of Analogy is to simplify and to
regularize. "The main factor in getting rid of irregularities is
group-influence, or Analogy--the influence exercised by the members of
an association-group on one another.... Irregularity consists in partial
isolation from an association-group through some formal difference."[4]

Under the influence of Analogy, entire declensions and conjugations have
been swept away, leaving in Modern English not a trace of their former
existence. There are in Old English, for example, five plural endings
for nouns, -as, -a, -e, -u, and -an. No one could well have predicted[5]
that -as (Middle English _-es_) would soon take the lead, and become the
norm to which the other endings would eventually conform, for there were
more an-plurals than as-plurals; but the as-plurals were doubtless more
often employed in everyday speech. _Oxen_ (Old English #oxan#) is the
sole pure survival of the hundreds of Old English an-plurals. No group
of feminine nouns in Old English had -es as the genitive singular
ending; but by the close of the Middle English period all feminines
formed their genitive singular in _-es_ (or _-s_, Modern English _'s_)
after the analogy of the Old English masculine and neuter nouns with
es-genitives. The weak preterits in -ode have all been leveled under the
ed-forms, and of the three hundred strong verbs in Old English more than
two hundred have become weak.

These are not cases of derivation (as are the shifted vowels): Modern
English _-s_ in _sons_, for example, could not possibly be derived from
Old English -a in #suna#, or Middle English _-e_ in _sune_ (§ 23, (1)).
They are cases of replacement by Analogy.

A few minor examples will quicken the student's appreciation of the
nature of the influence exercised by Analogy:

(_a_) The intrusive _l_ in _could_ (Chaucer always wrote _coud_ or
_coude_) is due to association with _would_ and _should_, in each of
which _l_ belongs by etymological right.

(_b_) _He need not_ (for _He needs not_) is due to the assimilative
influence of the auxiliaries _may_, _can_, etc., which have never added
_-s_ for their third person singular (§ 137).

(_c_) _I am friends with him_, in which _friends_ is a crystalized form
for _on good terms_, may be traced to the influence of such expressions
as _He and I are friends_, _They are friends_, etc.

(_d_) Such errors as are seen in _runned_, _seed_, _gooses_, _badder_,
_hisself_, _says I_ (usually coupled with _says he_) are all analogical
formations. Though not sanctioned by good usage, it is hardly right to
call these forms the products of "false analogy." The grammar involved
is false, because unsupported by literary usages and traditions; but the
analogy on which these forms are built is no more false than the law of
gravitation is false when it makes a dress sit unconventionally.

    [Footnote 3: Whitney, _Life and Growth of Language_, Chap. IV.]

    [Footnote 4: Sweet, _A New English Grammar_, Part I., § 535.]

    [Footnote 5: As Skeat says (§ 22, (2)), Analogy is "fitful." It
    enables us to explain many linguistic phenomena, but not to
    anticipate them. The multiplication of books tends to check its
    influence by perpetuating the forms already in use. Thus Chaucer
    employed nine _en-_plurals, and his influence served for a time
    to check the further encroachment of the _es-_plurals. As soon
    as there is an acknowledged standard in any language, the
    operation of Analogy is fettered.]




PART II.

ETYMOLOGY AND SYNTAX.




THE STRONG OR VOWEL DECLENSIONS OF NOUNS.

THE a-DECLENSION.

CHAPTER VI.


(_a_) #Masculine _a_-Stems.#

[O.E., M.E., and Mn.E. will henceforth be used for Old English, Middle
English, and Modern English. Other abbreviations employed are
self-explaining.]

25. The a-Declension, corresponding to the Second or _o_-Declension of
Latin and Greek, contains only (_a_) masculine and (_b_) neuter nouns.
To this declension belong most of the O.E. masculine and neuter nouns of
the Strong Declension. At a very early period, many of the nouns
belonging properly to the i- and u-Declensions began to pass over to the
a-Declension. This declension may therefore be considered the _normal
declension_ for all masculine and neuter nouns belonging to the Strong
Declension.


26. Paradigms of #sê mûð#, _mouth_; #sê fiscere#, _fisherman_; #sê
hwæl#, _whale_; #sê mearh#, _horse_; #sê finger#, _finger_:

  _Sing. N.A._  mûð     fiscer-e   hwæl     mearh    finger
          _G._  mûð-es  fiscer-es  hwæl-es  mêar-es  fingr-es
        _D.I._  mûð-e   fiscer-e   hwæl-e   mêar-e   fingr-e

  _Plur. N.A._  mûð-as  fiscer-as  hwal-as  mêar-as  fingr-as
          _G._  mûð-a   fiscer-a   hwal-a   mêar-a   fingr-a
        _D.I._  mûð-um  fiscer-um  hwal-um  mêar-um  fingr-um

  NOTE.--For meanings of the cases, see § 12. The dative and
  instrumental are alike in all nouns.


27. The student will observe (1) that nouns whose nominative ends in -e
(#fiscere#) drop this letter before adding the case endings; (2) that æ
before a consonant (#hwæl#) changes to a in the plural;[1] (3) that h,
preceded by r (#mearh#) or l (#seolh#, _seal_), is dropped before an
inflectional vowel, the stem diphthong being then lengthened by way of
compensation; (4) that dissyllables (#finger#) having the first syllable
long, usually syncopate the vowel of the second syllable before adding
the case endings.[2]

    [Footnote 1: Adjectives usually retain æ in closed syllables,
    changing it to a in open syllables: #hwæt# (_active_), #glæd#
    (_glad_), #wær# (_wary_) have G. #hwates#, #glades#, #wares#; D.
    #hwatum#, #gladum#, #warum#; but A. #hwætne#, #glædne#, #wærne#.
    Nouns, however, change to a only in open syllables followed by a
    guttural vowel, a or u. The æ in the open syllables of the
    singular is doubtless due to the analogy of the N.A. singular,
    both being closed syllables.]

    [Footnote 2: _Cf._ Mn.E. _drizz'ling_, _rememb'ring_, _abysmal_
    (_abysm_ = _abiz^{u}m_), _sick'ning_, in which the principle of
    syncopation is precisely the same.]


28. Paradigm of the Definite Article[3] #sê#, #sêo#, #ðæt# = _the_:

               _Masculine._  _Feminine._  _Neuter._

  _Sing. N._     sê (se)       sêo          ðæt
        _G._     ðæs           ðæ:re         ðæs
        _D._     ðæ:m (ðâm)     ðæ:re         ðæ:m (ðâm)
        _A._     ðone          ðâ           ðæt
        _I._     ðy:, ðon       ----         ðy:, ðon

                             _All Genders._

  _Plur. N.A._                 ðâ
        _G._                   ðâra
        _D._                   ðæ:m (ðâm)

    [Footnote 3: This may mean four things: (1) _The_, (2) _That_
    (demonstrative), (3) _He_, _she_, _it_, (4) _Who_, _which_,
    _that_ (relative pronoun). Mn.E. demonstrative _that_ is, of
    course, the survival of O.E. neuter #ðæt# in its demonstrative
    sense. Professor Victor Henry (_Comparative Grammar of English
    and German_, § 160, 3) sees a survival of dative plural
    demonstrative #ðæ:m# in such an expression as _in them days_. It
    seems more probable, however, that _them_ so used has followed
    the lead of _this_ and _these_, _that_ and _those_, in their
    double function of pronoun and adjective. There was doubtless
    some such evolution as, _I saw them. Them what? Them boys._

    An unquestioned survival of the dative singular feminine of the
    article is seen in the _-ter_ of _Atterbury_ (= #æt ðæ:re byrig#,
    _at the town_); and #ðæ:m# survives in the _-ten_ of
    _Attenborough_, the word _borough_ having become an uninflected
    neuter. Skeat, _Principles_, First Series, § 185.]


29. VOCABULARY.[4]

  sê bôcere, _scribe_ [bôc].
  sê cyning, _king_.
  sê dæg, _day_.
  sê ende, _end_.
  sê engel, _angel_ [angelus].
  sê frêodôm, _freedom_.
  sê fugol (G. sometimes #fugles#), _bird_ [fowl].
  sê gâr, _spear_ [gore, gar-fish].
  sê heofon, _heaven_.
  sê hierde, _herdsman_ [shep-herd].
  ond (and), _and_.
  sê secg, _man, warrior_.
  sê seolh, _seal_.
  sê stân, _stone_.
  sê wealh, _foreigner, Welshman_ [wal-nut].
  sê weall, _wall_.
  sê wîsdôm, _wisdom_.
  sê wulf, _wolf_.

    [Footnote 4: The brackets contain etymological hints that may
    help the student to discern relationships otherwise overlooked.
    The genitive is given only when not perfectly regular.]


30. EXERCISES.

I. 1. Ðâra wulfa mûðas. 2. Ðæs fisceres fingras. 3. Ðâra Wêala cyninge.
4. Ðæ:m englum ond ðæ:m hierdum. 5. Ðâra daga ende. 6. Ðæ:m bôcerum ond
ðæ:m secgum ðæs cyninges. 7. Ðæ:m sêole ond ðæ:m fuglum. 8. Ðâ stânas
ond ðâ gâras. 9. Hwala ond mêara. 10. Ðâra engla wîsdôm. 11. Ðæs
cyninges bôceres frêodôm. 12. Ðâra hierda fuglum. 13. Ðy: stâne.
14. Ðæ:m wealle.

II. 1. For the horses and the seals. 2. For the Welshmen's freedom.
3. Of the king's birds. 4. By the wisdom of men and angels. 5. With the
spear and the stone. 6. The herdsman's seal and the warriors' spears.
7. To the king of heaven. 8. By means of the scribe's wisdom. 9. The
whale's mouth and the foreigner's spear. 10. For the bird belonging to
(= of) the king's scribe. 11. Of that finger.




CHAPTER VII.

(_b_) #Neuter _a-_Stems.#


31. The neuter nouns of the a-Declension differ from the masculines only
in the N.A. plural.


32. Paradigms of #ðæt hof#, _court, dwelling_; #ðaet bearn#, _child_;
#ðæt bân#, _bone_; #ðæt rîce#, _kingdom_; #ðæt spere#, _spear_; #ðæt
werod#, _band of men_; #ðæt tungol#, _star_:

  _Sing. N.A._    hof       bearn       bân       rîc-e
          _G._    hof-es    bearn-es    bân-es    rîc-es
        _D.I._    hof-e     bearn-e     bân-e     rîc-e

  _Plur. N.A._    hof-u     bearn       bân       rîc-u
          _G._    hof-a     bearn-a     bân-a     rîc-a
        _D.I._    hof-um    bearn-um    bân-um    rîc-um

  _Sing. N.A._    sper-e     werod       tungol
          _G._    sper-es    werod-es    tungl-es
        _D.I._    sper-e     werod-e     tungl-e

  _Plur. N.A._    sper-u     werod       tungl-u
          _G._    sper-a     werod-a     tungl-a
        _D.I._    sper-um    werod-um    tungl-um


33. The paradigms show (1) that monosyllables with short stems (#hof#)
take -u in the N.A. plural; (2) that monosyllables with long stems
(#bearn#, #bân#) do not distinguish the N.A. plural from the N.A.
singular;[1] (3) that dissyllables in -e, whether the stem be long or
short (#rîce#, #spere#), have -u in the N.A. plural; (4) that
dissyllables ending in a consonant and having the first syllable
short[2] (#werod#) do not usually distinguish the N.A. plural from the
N.A. singular; (5) that dissyllables ending in a consonant and having
the first syllable long (#tungol#) more frequently take -u in the N.A.
plural.

  NOTE.--Syncopation occurs as in the masculine a-stems. See
  § 27, (4).

    [Footnote 1: Note the many nouns in Mn.E. that are unchanged in
    the plural. These are either survivals of O.E. long stems,
    _swine_, _sheep_, _deer_, _folk_, or analogical forms, _fish_,
    _trout_, _mackerel_, _salmon_, etc.]

    [Footnote 2: Dissyllables whose first syllable is a prefix are,
    of course, excluded. They follow the declension of their last
    member: #gebed#, _prayer_, #gebedu#, _prayers_; #gefeoht#,
    _battle_, #gefeoht#, _battles_.]


34. Present and Preterit Indicative of #habban#, _to have_:

          PRESENT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic hæbbe, _I have_, or _shall have_.[3]
          2. ðû hæfst (hafast), _thou hast_, or _wilt have_.
          3. hê, hêo, hit hæfð (hafað),
               _he, she, it has_, or _will have_.

  _Plur._ 1. wê habbað, _we have_, or _shall have_.
          2. gê habbað, _ye have_, or _will have_.
          3. hîe habbað, _they have_, or _will have_.

          PRETERIT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic hæfde _I had_.
          2. ðû hæfdest, _thou hadst_.
          3. hê, hêo, hit hæfde, _he, she, it had_.

  _Plur._ 1. wê hæfdon, _we had_.
          2. gê hæfdon, _ye had_.
          3. hîe hæfdon, _they had_.

  NOTE.--The negative #ne#, _not_, which always precedes its verb,
  contracts with all the forms of #habban#. The negative loses its
  e, #habban# its h. #Ne# + #habban# = #nabban#; #Ic ne hæbbe = Ic
  næbbe#; #Ic ne hæfde = Ic næfde#, etc. The negative forms may be
  got, therefore, by simply substituting in each case n for h.

    [Footnote 3: See § 17, Note 1. Note that (as in #hwæl#, § 27,
    (2)) æ changes to a when the following syllable contains a:
    #hæbbe#, but #hafast#.]


35. VOCABULARY.

  ðæt dæl, _dale_.
  ðæt dêor, _animal_ [deer[4]].
  ðæt dor, _door_.
  ðæt fæt, _vessel_ [vat].
  ðæt fy:r, _fire_.
  ðæt gêar, _year_.
  ðæt geoc, _yoke_.
  ðæt geset, _habitation_ [settlement].
  ðæt hêafod, _head_.
  ðæt hûs, _house_.
  ðæt lîc, _body_ [lich-gate].
  ðæt lim, _limb_.
  on (with dat.) _in_.
  ðæt spor, _track_.
  ðæt wæ:pen, _weapon_.
  ðæt wîf, _wife, woman_.
  ðæt wîte, _punishment_.
  ðæt word, _word_.

    [Footnote 4: The old meaning survives in Shakespeare's "Rats and
    mice and such small deer," _King Lear_, III, iv, 144.]


36. EXERCISES.

I. 1. Hê hafað ðæs cyninges bearn. 2. Ðâ Wêalas habbað ðâ speru. 3. Ðâ
wîf habbað ðâra secga wæ:pnu. 4. Ðû hæfst ðone fugol ond ðæt hûs ðæs
hierdes. 5. Hæfð[5] hêo ðâ fatu[6]? 6. Hæfde hê ðæs wîfes lîc on ðæ:m
hofe? 7. Hê næfde ðæs wîfes lîc; hê hæfde ðæs dêores hêafod. 8. Hæfð sê
cyning gesetu on ðæ:m dæle? 9. Sê bôcere hæfð ðâ sêolas on ðæ:m hûse.
10. Gê habbað frêodôm.

II. 1. They have yokes and spears. 2. We have not the vessels in the
house. 3. He had fire in the vessel. 4. Did the woman have (= Had the
woman) the children? 5. The animal has the body of the woman's child.
6. I shall have the heads of the wolves. 7. He and she have the king's
houses. 8. Have not (= #Nabbað#) the children the warrior's weapons?

    [Footnote 5: See § 20, (2), (b).]

    [Footnote 6: See § 27, (2).]




CHAPTER VIII.

THE ô-DECLENSION.


37. The ô-Declension, corresponding to the First or _â-_Declension of
Latin and Greek, contains only feminine nouns. Many feminine i-stems and
u-stems soon passed over to this Declension. The ô-Declension may,
therefore, be considered the _normal declension_ for all strong feminine
nouns.


38. Paradigms of #sêo giefu#, _gift_; #sêo wund#, _wound_; #sêo rôd#,
_cross_; #sêo leornung#, _learning_; #sêo sâwol#, _soul_:

    _Sing. N._  gief-u   wund     rôd     leornung        sâwol
          _G._  gief-e   wund-e   rôd-e   leornung-a (e)  sâwl-e
        _D.I._  gief-e   wund-e   rôd-e   leornung-a (e)  sâwl-e
          _A._  gief-e   wund-e   rôd-e   leornung-a (e)  sâwl-e

  _Plur. N.A._  gief-a   wund-a   rôd-a   leornung-a      sâwl-a
          _G._  gief-a   wund-a   rôd-a   leornung-a      sâwl-a
        _D.I._  gief-um  wund-um  rôd-um  leornung-um     sâwl-um


39. Note (1) that monosyllables with short stems (#giefu#) take u in the
nominative singular; (2) that monosyllables with long stems (#wund#,
#rôd#) present the unchanged stem in the nominative singular; (3) that
dissyllables are declined as monosyllables, except that abstract nouns
in -ung prefer a to e in the singular.

  NOTE.--Syncopation occurs as in masculine and neuter a-stems. See
  § 27, (4).


40. Present and Preterit Indicative of #bêon# (#wesan#) _to be_:

          PRESENT (first form).    PRESENT         PRETERIT.
                                   (second form).

  _Sing._ 1. Ic eom                1. Ic bêom      1. Ic wæs
          2. ðû eart               2. ðû bist      2. ðû wæ:re
          3. hê is                 3. hê bið       3. hê wæs

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }                 1. wê  }        1. wê  }
          2. gê  } sind(on), sint  2. gê  } bêoð   2. gê  } wæ:ron
          3. hîe }                 3. hîe }        3. hîe }

  NOTE 1.--The forms #bêom#, #bist#, etc. are used chiefly as future
  tenses in O.E. They survive to-day only in dialects and in poetry.
  Farmer Dobson, for example, in Tennyson's _Promise of May_, uses
  _be_ for all persons of the present indicative, both singular and
  plural; and _there be_ is frequent in Shakespeare for _there are_.
  The Northern dialect employed #aron# as well as #sindon# and
  #sind# for the present plural; hence Mn.E. _are_.

  NOTE 2.--Fusion with #ne# gives #neom#, #neart#, #nis# for the
  present; #næs#, #næ:re#, #næ:ron# for the preterit.

  NOTE 3.--The verb _to be_ is followed by the nominative case, as
  in Mn.E.; but when the predicate noun is plural, and the subject a
  neuter pronoun in the singular, the verb agrees in number with the
  predicate noun. The neuter singular #ðæt# is frequently employed
  in this construction: #Ðaet wæ:ron eall Finnas#, _They were all
  Fins_; #Ðæt sind englas#, _They are angels_; #Ðæ:t wæ:ron engla
  gâstas#, _They were angels' spirits_.

  Notice, too, that O.E. writers do not say _It is I_, _It is thou_,
  but _I it am_, _Thou it art_: #Ic hit eom#, #ðû hit eart#. See
  § 21, (1), Note 1.


41. VOCABULARY.

  sêo brycg, _bridge_.
  sêo costnung, _temptation_.
  sêo cwalu, _death_ [quail, quell].
  sêo fôr, _journey_ [faran].
  sêo frôfor, _consolation, comfort_.
  sêo geoguð, _youth_.
  sêo glôf, _glove_.
  sêo hâlignes[1], _holiness_.
  sêo heall, _hall_.
  hêr, _here_.
  hwâ, _who_?
  hwæ:r, _where_?
  sêo lufu, _love_.
  sêo mearc, _boundary_ [mark, marches[2]].
  sêo mêd, _meed, reward_.
  sêo mildheortnes, _mild-heartedness, mercy_.
  sêo stôw, _place_ [stow away].
  ðæ:r, _there_.
  sêo ðearf, _need_.
  sêo wylf, _she wolf_.

    [Footnote 1: All words ending in -nes double the -s before
    adding the case endings.]

    [Footnote 2: As in _warden of the marches_.]


42. EXERCISES.

I. 1. Hwæ:r is ðæ:re brycge ende? 2. Hêr sind ðâra rîca mearca. 3. Hwâ
hæfð þâ glôfa? 4. Ðæ:r bið ðæ:m cyninge frôfre ðearf. 5. Sêo wund is on
ðæ:re wylfe hêafde. 6. Wê habbað costnunga. 7. Hîe næ:ron on ðæ:re
healle. 8. Ic hit neom. 9. Ðæt wæ:ron Wêalas. 10. Ðæt sind ðæs wîfes
bearn.

II. 1. We shall have the women's gloves. 2. Where is the place? 3. He
will be in the hall. 4. Those (#Ðæt#) were not the boundaries of the
kingdom. 5. It was not I. 6. Ye are not the king's scribes. 7. The
shepherd's words are full (#full# + gen.) of wisdom and comfort.
8. Where are the bodies of the children? 9. The gifts are not here.
10. Who has the seals and the birds?




CHAPTER IX.

THE i-DECLENSION AND THE u-DECLENSION.


#The _i-_Declension.# (See § 58.)

43. The i-Declension, corresponding to the group of _i-_stems in the
classical Third Declension, contains chiefly (_a_) masculine and (_b_)
feminine nouns. The N.A. plural of these nouns ended originally in -e
(from older i).


(_a_) #Masculine _i-_Stems.#

44. These stems have almost completely gone over to the a-Declension, so
that -as is more common than -e as the N.A. plural ending, whether the
stem is long or short. The short stems all have -e in the N.A. singular.


45. Paradigms of #sê wyrm#, _worm_; #sê wine#, _friend_.

  _Sing. N.A._  wyrm        win-e
          _G._  wyrm-es     win-es
        _D.I._  wyrm-e      win-e

  _Plur. N.A._  wyrm-as     win-as (e)
          _G._  wyrm-a      win-a
        _D.I._  wyrm-um     win-um


#Names of Peoples.#

46. The only i-stems that regularly retain -e of the N.A. plural are
certain names of tribes or peoples used only in the plural.


47. Paradigms of #ðâ Engle#, _Angles_; #ðâ Norðymbre#, _Northumbrians_;
#ðâ lêode#, _people_:

  _Plur. N.A._  Engle     Norðymbre     lêode
          _G._  Engla     Norðymbra     lêoda
        _D.I._  Englum    Norðymbrum    lêodum


(_b_) #Feminine _i-_Stems.#

48. The short stems (#frem-u#) conform entirely to the declension of
short ô-stems; long stems (#cwên#, #wyrt#) differ from long ô-stems in
having no ending for the A. singular. They show, also, a preference for
-e rather than -a in the N.A. plural.


49. Paradigms of #sêo frem-u#, _benefit_; #sêo cwên#, _woman, queen_
[quean]; #sêo wyrt#, _root_ [wort]:

    _Sing. N._ frem-u     cwên          wyrt
          _G._ frem-e     cwên-e        wyrt-e
        _D.I._ frem-e     cwên-e        wyrt-e
          _A._ frem-e     cwên          wyrt

  _Plur. N.A._ frem-a     cwên-e (a)    wyrt-e (a)
          _G._ frem-a     cwên-a        wyrt-a
        _D.I._ frem-um    cwên-um       wyrt-um


#The _u-_Declension.#

50. The u-Declension, corresponding to the group of u-stems in the
classical Third Declension, contains no neuters, and but few (_a_)
masculines and (_b_) feminines. The short-stemmed nouns of both genders
(#sun-u#, #dur-u#) retain the final u of the N.A. singular, while the
long stems (#feld#, #hond#) drop it. The influence of the masculine
a-stems is most clearly seen in the long-stemmed masculines of the
u-Declension (#feld#, #feld-es#, etc.).

  NOTE.--Note the general aversion of all O.E. long stems to final
  -u: _cf._ N.A. plural #hof-u#, but #bearn#, #bân#; N. singular
  #gief-u#, but #wund#, #rôd#; N. singular #frem-u#, but #cwên#,
  #wyrt#; N.A. singular #sun-u#, #dur-u#, but #feld#, #hond#.


(_a_) #Masculine _u-_Stems.#

51. Paradigms of #sê sun-u#, _son_; #sê feld#, _field_:

  _Sing. N.A._  sun-u     feld
          _G._  sun-a     feld-a (es)
        _D.I._  sun-a     feld-a (e)

  _Plur. N.A._  sun-a     feld-a (as)
          _G._  sun-a     feld-a
        _D.I._  sun-um    feld-um


(b) #Feminine _u-_Stems.#

52. Paradigms of #sêo dur-u#, _door_; #sêo hond#, _hand_:

  _Sing. N.A._  dur-u     hond
          _G._  dur-a     hond-a
        _D.I._  dur-a     hond-a

  _Plur. N.A._  dur-a     hond-a
          _G._  dur-a     hond-a
        _D.I._  dur-um    hond-um


53. Paradigm of the Third Personal Pronoun, #hê#, #hêo#, #hit# = _he_,
_she_, _it_:

            _Masculine._  _Feminine._  _Neuter._
  _Sing. N._  hê            hêo          hit
        _G._  his           hiere        his
        _D._  him           hiere        him
        _A._  hine, hiene   hîe          hit

                      _All Genders._
  _Plur. N.A._              hîe
          _G._              hiera
          _D._              him


54. VOCABULARY.

  (i-STEMS.)

  sê cierr, _turn, time_ [char, chare, chore].
  sêo dæ:d, _deed_.
  sê dæ:l, _part_ [a great deal].
  ðâ Dene, _Danes_.
  sê frêondscipe, _friendship_.
  sêo hy:d, _skin, hide_.
  ðâ londlêode, _natives_.
  ðâ Mierce, _Mercians_.
  ðâ Rômware, _Romans_.
  ðâ Seaxe, _Saxons_.
  sê stede, _place_ [in-stead of].

  (u-STEMS.)

  sêo flôr, _floor_.
  sêo nosu, _nose_.
  sê sumor (_G._ sumeres, _D._ sumera), _summer_.
  sê winter (_G._ wintres, _D._ wintra), _winter_.
  sê wudu, _wood, forest_.

  NOTE.--The numerous masculine nouns ending in -hâd,--#cildhâd#
  (_childhood_), #wîfhâd# (_womanhood_),--belong to the u-stems
  historically; but they have all passed over to the a-Declension.


55. EXERCISES.

I. 1. Ðâ Seaxe habbað ðæs dêores hy:d on ðæ:m wuda. 2. Hwâ hæfð ðâ
giefa? 3. Ðâ Mierce hîe[1] habbað. 4. Hwæ:r is ðæs Wêales fugol? 5. Ðâ
Dene hiene habbað. 6. Hwæ:r sindon hiera winas? 7. Hîe sindon on ðæs
cyninges wuda. 8. Ðâ Rômware ond ðâ Seaxe hæfdon ðâ gâras ond ðâ geocu.
9. Hêo is on ðæ:m hûse on wintra, ond on ðæ:m feldum on sumera.
10. Hwæ:r is ðæs hofes duru?  11. Hêo[2] (= sêo duru) nis hêr.

II. 1. His friends have the bones of the seals and the bodies of the
Danes. 2. Art thou the king's son? 3. Has she her[3] gifts in her[3]
hands? 4. Here are the fields of the natives. 5. Who had the bird?
6. I had it.[2] 7. The child had the worm in his[3] fingers. 8. The
Mercians were here during (the) summer (#on# + dat.).

    [Footnote 1: See § 21, (1).]

    [Footnote 2: Pronouns agree in gender with the nouns for which
    they stand. #Hit#, however, sometimes stands for inanimate
    things of both masculine and feminine genders. See Wülfing
    (_l.c._) I, § 238.]

    [Footnote 3: See § 76 (last sentence).]




CHAPTER X.

PRESENT INDICATIVE ENDINGS OF STRONG VERBS.


56. The unchanged stem of the present indicative may always be found by
dropping -an of the infinitive: #feall-an#, _to fall_; #cêos-an#, _to
choose_; #bîd-an#, _to abide_.


57. The personal endings are:

  _Sing._ 1. -e    _Plur._ 1. }
          2. -est          2. } -að
          3. -eð           3. }


#_i-_Umlaut.#

58. The 2d and 3d singular endings were originally not -est and -eð, but
-is and -ið; and the i of these older endings has left its traces upon
almost every page of Early West Saxon literature. This i, though
unaccented and soon displaced, exerted a powerful back influence upon
the vowel of the preceding accented syllable. This influence, a form of
regressive assimilation, is known as i-umlaut (pronounced _oóm-lowt_).
The vowel i or j (= _y_), being itself a palatal, succeeded in
palatalizing every guttural vowel that preceded it, and in imposing
still more of the i-quality upon diphthongs that were already
palatal.[1] The changes produced were these:

  a became e (æ): menn (< *mann-iz), _men_.
  â    "   æ:      æ:nig (< *ân-ig), _any_.
  u    "   y      wyllen (< *wull-in), _woollen_.
  û    "   y:      my:s (< *mûs-iz), _mice_.
  o    "   e      dehter (< *dohtr-i), _to_ or _for the daughter_.
  ô    "   ê      fêt (< *fôt-iz), _feet_.
  ea   "   ie     wiexð (< *weax-ið), _he grows_ (weaxan = _to grow_).
  êa   "   îe     hîewð (< *hêaw-ið), _he hews_ (hêawan = to _hew_).
  eo   "   ie     wiercan (< *weorc-jan), _to work_.
  êo   "   îe     lîehtan (< *lêoht-jan), _to light_.

    [Footnote 1: The _palatal_ vowels and diphthongs were long or
    short æ, e, i, (ie), y, ea, eo; the _guttural_ vowels were long
    or short a, o, u.]


#The Unchanged Present Indicative.#

59. In the Northumbrian and Mercian dialects, as well as in the dialect
of Late West Saxon, the 2d and 3d singular endings were usually joined
to the present stem without modification either of the stem itself or of
the personal endings. The complete absence of umlauted forms in the
present indicative of Mn.E. is thus accounted for.

In Early West Saxon, however, such forms as the following are
comparatively rare in the 2d and 3d singular:

  _Sing._ 1. Ic feall-e      cêos-e          bîd-e
               (_I fall_)      (_I choose_)    (_I abide_)
          2. ðû feall-est    cêos-est        bîd-est
          3. hê feall-eð     cêos-eð         bîd-eð

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } feall-að  cêos-að         bîd-að
          3. hîe }


#The Present Indicative with i-Umlaut and Contraction.#

60. The 2d and 3d persons singular are distinguished from the other
forms of the present indicative in Early West Saxon by (1) i-umlaut of
the vowel of the stem, (2) syncope of the vowel of the ending, giving
-st and -ð for -est and -eð, and (3) contraction of -st and -ð with the
final consonant or consonants of the stem.


#Contraction.#

61. The changes produced by i-umlaut have been already discussed. By
these changes, therefore, the stems of the 2d and 3d singular indicative
of such verbs as (1) #stondan# (= #standan#), _to stand_, (2) #cuman#,
_to come_, (3) #grôwan#, _to grow_, (4) #brûcan#, _to enjoy_,
(5) #blâwan#, _to blow_, (6) #feallan#, _to fall_, (7) #hêawan#, _to
hew_, (8) #weorpan#, _to throw_, and (9) #cêosan#, _to choose_, become
respectively (1) #stend-#,[2] (2) #cym-#, (3) #grêw-#, (4) #bry:c-#,
(5) #blæ:w-#, (6) #fiell-#, (7) #hîew-#, (8) #wierp-#, and (9) #cîes-#.

If the unchanged stem contains the vowel e, this is changed in the 2d
and 3d singular to i (ie): #cweðan# _to say_, stem #cwið-#; #beran# _to
bear_, stem #bier-#. But this mutation[3] had taken place long before
the period of O.E., and belongs to the Germanic languages in general. It
is best, however, to class the change of e to i or ie with the changes
due to umlaut, since it occurs consistently in the 2d and 3d singular
stems of Early West Saxon, and outlasted almost all of the umlaut forms
proper.

If, now, the syncopated endings -st and -ð are added directly to the
umlauted stem, there will frequently result such a massing of consonants
as almost to defy pronunciation: #cwið-st#, _thou sayest_; #stend-st#,
_thou standest_, etc. Some sort of contraction, therefore, is demanded
for the sake of euphony. The ear and eye will, by a little practice,
become a sure guide in these contractions. The following rules, however,
must be observed. They apply only to the 2d and 3d singular of the
present indicative:

(1) If the stem ends in a double consonant, one of the consonants is
dropped:

  1. feall-e (_I fall_)  1. winn-e (_I fight_)  1. swimm-e (_I swim_)
  2. fiel-st             2. win-st              2. swim-st
  3. fiel-ð              3. win-ð               3. swim-ð

(2) If the stem ends in -ð, this is dropped:

  1. cweð-e (_I say_)  1. weorð-e (_I become_)
  2. cwi-st            2. wier-st
  3. cwi-ð             3. wier-ð

(3) If the stem ends in -d, this is changed to -t. The -ð of the ending
is then also changed to -t, and usually absorbed. Thus the stem of the
2d singular serves as stem and ending for the 3d singular:

  1. stond-e (= stand-e) (_I stand_)  1. bind-e (_I bind_)
  2. stent-st                         2. bint-st
  3. stent                            3. bint

  1. bîd-e (_I abide_)                1. rîd-e (_I ride_)
  2. bît-st                           2. rît-st
  3. bît (-t)                         3. rît (-t)

(4) If the stem ends already in -t, the endings are added as in (3), -ð
being again changed to -t and absorbed:

  1. brêot-e (_I break_)  1. feoht-e (_I fight_)  1. bît-e (_I bite_)
  2. brîet-st             2. fieht-st             2. bît-st
  3. brîet (-t)           3. fieht                3. bît (-t)

(5) If the stem ends in -s, this is dropped before -st (to avoid -sst),
but is retained before -ð, the latter being changed to -t. Thus the 2d
and 3d singulars are identical:[4]

  1. cêos-e (_I choose_)  1. rîs-e (_I rise_)
  2. cîe-st               2. rî-st
  3. cîes-t               3. rîs-t

    [Footnote 2: The more common form for stems with a is æ rather
    than e: #faran#, _to go_, 2d and 3d singular stem #fær-#;
    #sacan#, _to contend_, stem #sæc-#. Indeed, a changes to e _via_
    æ (Cosijn, _Altwestsächsische Grammatik_, I, § 32).]

    [Footnote 3: Umlaut is frequently called Mutation. Metaphony is
    still another name for the same phenomenon. The term Metaphony
    has the advantage of easy adjectival formation (metaphonic). It
    was proposed by Professor Victor Henry (_Comparative Grammar of
    English and German_, Paris, 1894), but has not been
    naturalized.]

    [Footnote 4: This happens also when the infinitive stem ends
    in #st#:

      1. berst-e (_I burst_)
      2. bier-st
      3. bierst.]


62. EXERCISES.

I. 1. Sê cyning fielð. 2. Ðâ wîf cêosað ðâ giefa. 3. Ðû stentst on ðæ:m
hûse. 4. Hê wierpð ðæt wæ:pen. 5. Sê secg hîewð ðâ lîc. 6. Ðæt sæ:d
grêwð ond wiexð (_Mark_ iv. 27). 7. Ic stonde hêr, ond ðû stentst ðæ:r.
8. "Ic hit eom," cwið hê. 9. Hîe berað ðæs wulfes bân. 10. Hê hîe bint,
ond ic hine binde. 11. Ne rîtst ðû?

II. 1. We shall bind him. 2. Who chooses the child's gifts? 3. "He was
not here," says she. 4. Wilt thou remain in the hall? 5. The wolves are
biting (= bite) the fishermen. 6. He enjoys[5] the love of his children.
7. Do you enjoy (= Enjoyest thou) the consolation and friendship of the
scribe? 8. Will he come? 9. I shall throw the spear, and thou wilt bear
the weapons. 10. The king's son will become king. 11. The army (#werod#)
is breaking the doors and walls of the house.

    [Footnote 5: #Brûcan#, _to enjoy_, usually takes the genitive
    case, not the accusative. It means "to have joy of any thing."]




CHAPTER XI.

THE CONSONANT DECLENSIONS OF NOUNS.


#The Weak or _n-_Declension.#

63. The n-Declension contains almost all of the O.E. nouns belonging to
the Consonant Declensions. The stem characteristic n has been preserved
in the oblique cases, so that there is no difficulty in distinguishing
n-stems from the preceding vowel stems.

The n-Declension includes (_a_) masculines, (_b_) feminines, and (_c_)
neuters. The masculines far outnumber the feminines, and the neuters
contain only #êage#, _eye_ and #êare#, _ear_. The masculines end in -a,
the feminines and neuters in -e.


64. Paradigms of (_a_) #sê hunta#, _hunter_; (_b_) #sêo tunge#,
_tongue_; (_c_) #ðæt êage#, _eye_:

    _Sing. N._  hunt-a      tung-e      êag-e
      _G.D.I._  hunt-an     tung-an     êag-an
          _A._  hunt-an     tung-an     êag-e

  _Plur. N.A._  hunt-an     tung-an     êag-an
          _G._  hunt-ena    tung-ena    êag-ena
        _D.I._  hunt-um     tung-um     êag-um


65. VOCABULARY.

  sê adesa, _hatchet, adze_.
  sê æ:metta, _leisure_ [empt-iness].
  sê bona (bana), _murderer_ [bane].
  sêo cirice, _church_ [Scotch kirk].
  sê cnapa (later, #cnafa#), _boy_ [knave].
  sê cuma, _stranger_ [comer].
  ðæt êare, _ear_.
  sêo eorðe, _earth_.
  sê gefêra, _companion_ [co-farer].
  sê guma, _man_ [bride-groom[1]].
  sêo heorte, _heart_.
  sê môna, _moon_.
  sêo næ:dre, _adder_ [a nadder > an adder[2]].
  sê oxa, _ox_.
  sê scêowyrhta, _shoe-maker_ [shoe-wright].
  sêo sunne, _sun_.
  sê têona, _injury_ [teen].
  biddan (with dat. of person and gen. of thing[3]), _to request, ask
for_.
  cwelan, _to die_ [quail].
  gescieppan, _to create_ [shape, land-scape, friend-ship].
  giefan (with dat. of indirect object), _to give_.
  healdan, _to hold_.
  helpan (with dat.), _to help_.
  sceððan[4] (with dat.), _to injure_ [scathe].
  wiðstondan (-standan) (with dat.), _to withstand_.
  wrîtan, _to write_.

    [Footnote 1: The _r_ is intrusive in _-groom_, as it is in
    _cart-r-idge_, _part-r-idge_, _vag-r-ant_, and _hoa-r-se_.]

    [Footnote 2: The _n_ has been appropriated by the article. Cf.
    _an apron_ (< _a napron_), _an auger_ (< _a nauger_), _an
    orange_ (< _a norange_), _an umpire_ (< _a numpire_).]

    [Footnote 3: In Mn.E. we say "I request a favor of you"; but in
    O.E. it was "I request you (dative) of a favor" (genitive). Cf.
    _Cymbeline_, III, vi, 92: "We'll mannerly demand thee of thy
    story." See Franz's _Shakespeare-Grammatik_, § 361 (1900).]

    [Footnote 4: #Sceððan# is conjugated through the present
    indicative like #fremman#. See § 129.]


66. EXERCISES.

I. 1. Sê scêowyrhta bry:cð his æ:mettan. 2. Ðâ guman biddað ðæ:m cnapan
ðæs adesan. 3. Hwâ is sê cuma? 4. Hielpst ðû ðæ:m bonan? 5. Ic him ne
helpe. 6. Ðâ bearn sceððað ðæs bonan êagum ond êarum. 7. Sê cuma cwielð
on ðæ:re cirican. 8. Sê hunta wiðstent ðæ:m wulfum. 9. Ðâ oxan berað ðæs
cnapan gefêran. 10. Sê môna ond ðâ tunglu sind on ðæ:m heofonum. 11. Ðâ
huntan healdað ðæ:re næ:dran tungan. 12. Hê hiere giefð ðâ giefa. 13. Ðâ
werod sceððað ðæs cyninges feldum.

II. 1. Who will bind the mouths of the oxen? 2. Who gives him the
gifts? 3. Thou art helping him, and I am injuring him. 4. The boy's
companion is dying. 5. His nephew does not enjoy his leisure. 6. The
adder's tongue injures the king's companion. 7. The sun is the day's
eye. 8. She asks the strangers for the spears. 9. The men's bodies are
not here. 10. Is he not (#Nis hê#) the child's murderer? 11. Who creates
the bodies and the souls of men? 12. Thou withstandest her. 13. He is
not writing.




CHAPTER XII.


#Remnants of Other Consonant Declensions.#

67. The nouns belonging here are chiefly masculines and feminines. Their
stem ended in a consonant other than n. The most important of them may
be divided as follows: (1) The _foot_ Declension, (2) r-Stems, and
(3) nd-Stems. These declensions are all characterized by the prevalence,
wherever possible, of i-umlaut in certain cases, the case ending being
then dropped.


68. (1) The nouns belonging to the _foot_ Declension exhibit umlaut most
consistently in the N.A. plural.

  _Sing. N.A._  sê fôt     sê mon    sê tôð      sêo cû
  _Sing. N.A._   (_foot_)   (_man_)   (_tooth_)    (_cow_)
  _Plur. N.A._  fêt        men       têð         cy:

  NOTE.--The dative singular usually has the same form as the N.A.
  plural. Here belong also #sêo bôc# (_book_), #sêo burg#
  (_borough_), #sêo gôs# (_goose_), #sêo lûs# (_louse_), and #sêo
  mûs# (_mouse_), all with umlauted plurals. Mn.E. preserves only
  six of the _foot_ Declension plurals: _feet_, _men_, _teeth_,
  _geese_, _lice_, and _mice_. The _c_ in the last two is an
  artificial spelling, intended to preserve the sound of voiceless
  _s_. Mn.E. _kine_ (= _cy-en_) is a double plural formed after the
  analogy of weak stems; Burns in _The Twa Dogs_ uses _kye_.

  No umlaut is possible in #sêo niht# (_night_) and #sê mônað#
  (_month_), plural #niht# and #mônað# (preserved in Mn.E.
  _twelvemonth_ and _fortnight_).

(2) The r-Stems contain nouns expressing kinship, and exhibit umlaut of
the dative singular.

  _Sing. N.A._  sê fæder     sê brôðor    sêo môdor
                 (_father_)   (_brother_)   (_mother_)
          _D._     fæder        brêðer        mêder

  _Sing. N.A._  sêo dohtor (_daughter_)  sêo swuster (_sister_)
          _D._      dehter                   swyster

  NOTE.--The N.A. plural is usually the same as the N.A. singular.
  These umlaut datives are all due to the presence of a former i.
  Cf. Lat. dative singular _patri_, _frâtri_, _mâtri_, _sorori_
  (< _*sosori_), and Greek +thugatri+.

(3) The nd-Stems show umlaut both in the N.A. plural and in the dative
singular:

  _Sing. N.A._  sê frêond (_friend_)  sê fêond (_enemy_)
          _D._     frîend                fîend

  _Plur. N.A._     frîend             fîend

  NOTE.--Mn.E. _friend_ and _fiend_ are interesting analogical
  spellings. When s had been added by analogy to the O.E. plurals
  #frîend# and #fîend#, thus giving the double plurals _friends_ and
  _fiends_, a second singular was formed by dropping the s. Thus
  _friend_ and _fiend_ displaced the old singulars _frend_ and
  _fend_, both of which occur in the M.E. _Ormulum_, written about
  the year 1200.


#Summary of O.E. Declensions.#

69. A brief, working summary of the O.E. system of declensions may now
be made on the basis of gender.

All O.E. nouns are (1) masculine, (2) feminine, or (3) neuter.

(1) The masculines follow the declension of #mûð# (§ 26), except those
ending in -a, which are declined like #hunta# (§ 64):

  _Sing. N.A._  mûð        _N._  hunta
          _G._  mûðes  _G.D.A._  huntan
        _D.I._  mûðe       _I._  huntan

  _Plur. N.A._  mûðas          huntan
          _G._  mûða           huntena
        _D.I._  mûðum          huntum

(2) The short-stemmed neuters follow the declension of #hof# (§ 32); the
long-stemmed, that of #bearn# (§ 32):

  _Sing. N.A._  hof      bearn
          _G._  hofes    bearnes
        _D.I._  hofe     bearne

  _Plur. N.A._  hofu     bearn
          _G._  hofa     bearna
        _D.I._  hofum    bearnum

(3) The feminines follow the declensions of #giefu# and #wund# (§ 38)
(the only difference being in the N. singular), except those ending in
-e, which follow the declension of #tunge# (§ 64):

    _Sing. N._  giefu     wund      tunge
          _G._  giefe     wunde     tungan
        _D.I._  giefe     wunde     tungan
          _A._  giefe     wunde     tungan

  _Plur. N.A._  giefa     wunda     tungan
          _G._  giefa     wunda     tungena
        _D.I._  giefum    wundum    tungum


70. VOCABULARY.

  ac, _but_.
  bûtan (with dat.), _except, but, without_.
  sê Crîst, _Christ_.
  sê eorl, _earl, alderman, warrior_.
  ðæt Englalond, _England_ [Angles' land].
  faran, _to go_ [fare].
  findan, _to find_.
  sê God, _God_.
  hâtan, _to call, name_.
  sê hlâford, _lord_ [#hlâf-weard#].
  mid (with dat.), _with_.
  on (with acc.), _on, against, into_.
  tô (with dat.), _to_.
  uton (with infin.), _let us_.

  NOTE.--O.E. #mon# (#man#) is frequently used in an indefinite sense
  for _one_, _people_, _they_. It thus takes the place of a passive
  construction proper: #And man nam þâ gebrotu þe þâr belifon, twelf
  cy:pan fulle#, _And there were taken up of fragments that remained
  there twelve baskets full_; but more literally, _And one_ (or
  _they_) _took the fragments_, etc.; #Ond Hæstenes wîf ond hîs suna
  twêgen mon brôhte tô ðæ:m cyninge#, _And Hæsten's wife and his two
  sons were brought to the king_.


71. EXERCISES.

I. 1. Môn hine hæ:t Ælfred. 2. Uton faran on ðæt scip. 3. God is cyninga
cyning ond hlâforda hlâford. 4. Sê eorl ne giefð giefa his fîend. 5. Ic
næs mid his frîend. 6. Sêo môdor færð mid hiere dehter on ðâ burg.
7. Fintst ðû ðæs bôceres bêc? 8. Hê bint ealle (all) ðâ dêor bûtan ðæ:m
wulfum. 9. Ðû eart Crîst, Godes sunu. 10. "Uton bindan ðæs bonan fêt,"
cwið hê.

II. 1. Christ is the son of God. 2. Let us call him Cædmon. 3. He throws
his spear against the door. 4. Thou art not the earl's brother. 5. He
will go with his father to England, but I shall remain (abide) here.
6. Gifts are not given to murderers. 7. Who will find the tracks of the
animals? 8. They ask their lord for his weapons (§ 65, Note 3).




CHAPTER XIII.

PRONOUNS.


(1) #Personal Pronouns.#

72. Paradigms of #ic#, _I_; #ðû#, _thou_. For #hê#, #hêo#, #hit#, see
§ 53.

  _Sing. N._  ic                          ðû
        _G._  mîn                         ðîn
        _D._  mê                          ðê
        _A._  mê (mec)                    ðê (ðec)

   _Dual N._  wit (_we two_)              git (_ye two_)
        _G._  uncer (_of us two_)         incer (_of you two_)
        _D._  unc (_to_ or _for us two_)  inc (_to_ or _for you two_)
        _A._  unc (_us two_)              inc (_you two_)

  _Plur. N._  wê                          gê
        _G._  ûser (ûre)                  êower
        _D._  ûs                          êow
        _A._  ûs (ûsic)                   êow (êowic)

  NOTE 1.--The dual number was soon absorbed by the plural. No relic
  of it now remains. But when two and only two are referred to, the
  dual is consistently used in O.E. An example occurs in the case of
  the two blind men (_Matthew_ ix. 27-31): #Gemiltsa unc, Davîdes
  sunu!# _Pity us, (thou) Son of David!_ #Sîe inc æfter incrum
  gelêafan#, _Be it unto you according to your faith._

  NOTE 2.--Mn.E. _ye_ (< gê), the nominative proper, is fast being
  displaced by _you_ (< #êow#), the old objective. The distinction
  is preserved in the King James's version of the Bible: _Ye in me,
  and I in you_ (_John_ xiv. 20); but not in Shakespeare and later
  writers.


(2) #Demonstrative Pronouns.#

73. Paradigm of #ðês#, #ðêos#, #ðis#, _this_. For the Definite Article
as a demonstrative, meaning _that_, see § 28, Note 3.

               _Masculine._  _Feminine._  _Neuter._
    _Sing. N._  ðês           ðêos         ðis
          _G._  ðisses        ðisse        ðisses
          _D._  ðissum        ðisse        ðissum
          _A._  ðisne         ðâs          ðis
          _I._  ðy:s           ----         ðy:s

                             _All Genders._
  _Plur. N.A._                ðâs
          _G._                ðissa
          _D._                ðissum


(3) #The Interrogative Pronoun.#

74. Paradigm of #hwâ#, #hwæt#, _who_, _what?_

             _Masculine._  _Neuter._
  _Sing. N._  hwâ           hwæt
        _G._  hwæs          hwæs
        _D._  hwæ:m          hwæ:m
        _A._  hwone         hwæt
        _I._  ----          hwy:

  NOTE 1.--The derivative interrogatives, #hwæðer# (< #*hwâ-ðer#),
  _which of two?_ and #hwilc# (< #*hwâ-lîc#), _which?_ are declined
  as strong adjectives (§§ 79-82).

  NOTE 2.--The instrumental case of #hwâ# survives in Mn.E. _why_ =
  _on what account_; the instrumental of the definite article is
  seen in the adverbial _the: The sooner, the better = by how much
  sooner, by so much better._

  NOTE 3.--How were the Mn.E. relative pronouns, _who_ and _which_,
  evolved from the O.E. interrogatives? The change began in early
  West Saxon with #hwæt# used in indirect questions (Wülfing, _l.c._
  § 310, [beta]): #Nû ic wât eall hwæt ðû woldest#, _Now I know all
  that thou desiredst_. The direct question was, #Hwæt woldest ðû?# But
  the presence of #eall# shows that in Alfred's mind #hwæt# was, in
  the indirect form, more relative than interrogative.


(4) #Relative Pronouns.#

75. O.E. had no relative pronoun proper. It used instead (1) the
Indeclinable Particle #ðe#, _who_, _whom_, _which_, _that_, (2) the
Definite Article (§ 28), (3) the Definite Article with the Indeclinable
Particle, (4) the Indeclinable Particle with a Personal Pronoun.

The Definite Article agrees in gender and number with the antecedent.
The case depends upon the construction. _The bird which I have_ may,
therefore, be:--

  (1) #Sê fugol ðe ic hæbbe#;
  (2) #Sê fugol ðone ic hæbbe#;
  (3) #Sê fugol ðone ðe# (= _the which_) #ic hæbbe#;
  (4) #Sê fugol ðe hine ic hæbbe#.

  NOTE.--O.E. #ðe# agrees closely in construction with Mn.E.
  relative _that_: (1) Both are indeclinable. (2) Both refer to
  animate or inanimate objects. (3) Both may be used with phrasal
  value: #ðy: ylcan dæge ðe hî hine tô ðæ:m âde beran wyllað#, _On the
  same day that_ (= _on which_) _they intend to bear him to the
  funeral pile_. (4) Neither can be preceded by a preposition.


(5) #Possessive Pronouns.#

76. The Possessive Pronouns are #mîn#, _mine_; #ðîn#, _thine_; #ûre#,
_our_; #êower#, _your_; [#sîn#, _his_, _her_, _its_]; #uncer#,
_belonging to us two_; #incer#, _belonging to you two_. They are
declined as strong adjectives. The genitives of the Third Personal
Pronoun, #his#, _his_, #hiere#, _her_, #hiera#, _their_, are
indeclinable.


(6) #Indefinite Pronouns.#

77. These are #æ:lc#, _each_, _every_; #ân#, _a_, _an_, _one_; #æ:nig#
(< #ân-ig#), _any_; #næ:nig# (< #ne-æ:nig#), _none_; #ôðer#, _other_;
#sum#, _one_, _a certain one_; #swilc#, _such_. They are declined as
strong adjectives.

  NOTE.--O.E. had three established methods of converting an
  interrogative pronoun into an indefinite: (1) By prefixing #ge#,
  (2) by prefixing #æ:g#, (3) by interposing the interrogative
  between #swâ ... swâ#: (1) #gehwâ#, _each_; #gehwæðer#, _either_;
  #gehwilc#, _each_; (2) #æ:ghwâ#, _each_; #æ:ghwæðer#, _each_;
  #æ:ghwilc#, _each_; (3) #swâ hwâ swâ#, _whosoever_; #swâ hwæðer
  swâ#, _whichsoever of two_; #swâ hwilc swâ#, _whosoever_.




CHAPTER XIV.

ADJECTIVES, STRONG AND WEAK.


78. The declension of adjectives conforms in general to the declension
of nouns, though a few pronominal inflections have influenced certain
cases. Adjectives belong either to (1) the Strong Declension or to
(2) the Weak Declension. The Weak Declension is employed when the
adjective is preceded by #sê# or #ðês#, _the_, _that_, or _this_;
otherwise, the Strong Declension is employed: #ðâ gôdan cyningas#, _the
good kings_; #ðês gôda cyning#, _this good king_; but #gôde cyningas#,
_good kings_.

  NOTE.--The Weak Declension is also frequently used when the
  adjective is employed in direct address, or preceded by a
  possessive pronoun: #Dryhten, ælmihtiga God ... ic bidde ðê for
  ðînre miclan mildheortnesse#, _Lord, almighty God, I pray thee,
  for thy great mercy_.


(1) #Strong Declension of Adjectives.#

(a) _Monosyllables._

79. The strong adjectives are chiefly monosyllabic with long stems:
#gôd#, _good_; #eald#, _old_; #long#, _long_; #swift#, _swift_. They are
declined as follows.


80. Paradigm of #gôd#, _good_:

               _Masculine._  _Feminine._  _Neuter._

    _Sing. N._  gôd           gôd          gôd
          _G._  gôdes         gôdre        gôdes
          _D._  gôdum         gôdre        gôdum
          _A._  gôdne         gôde         gôd
          _I._  gôde          ----         gôde

  _Plur. N.A._  gôde          gôda         gôd
          _G._  gôdra         gôdra        gôdra
        _D.I._  gôdum         gôdum        gôdum


81. If the stem is short, -u is retained as in #giefu# (§ 39, (1)) and
#hofu# (§ 33, (1)). Thus #glæd# (§ 27, Note 1), _glad_, and #til#,
_useful_, are inflected:

                _Masculine._  _Feminine._  _Neuter._
    _Sing. N._ { glæd          gladu        glæd
               { til           tilu         til

  _Plur. N.A._ { glade         glada        gladu
               { tile          tila         tilu


(b) _Polysyllables._

82. Polysyllables follow the declension of short monosyllables. The most
common terminations are #-en#, _-en_; #-fæst#, _-fast_; #-full#, _-ful_;
#-lêas#, _-less_; #-lîc#, _-ly_; #-ig#, _-y_: #hæ:ð-en# (#hæ:ð# =
_heath_), _heathen_; #stede-fæst# (#stede# = _place_), _steadfast_;
#sorg-full# (#sorg# = _sorrow_), _sorrowful_; #cyst-lêas# (#cyst# =
_worth_), _worthless_; #eorð-lîc# (#eorðe# = _earth_), _earthly_;
#blôd-ig# (#blôd# = _blood_), _bloody_. The present and past
participles, when inflected and not as weak adjectives, may be classed
with the polysyllabic adjectives, their inflection being the same.

Syncopation occurs as in a-stems (§ 27, (4)). Thus #hâlig#, _holy_,
#blîðe#, _blithe_, #berende#, _bearing_, #geboren#, _born_, are thus
inflected:

                _Masculine._  _Feminine._  _Neuter._
    _Sing. N._ { hâlig         hâlgu        hâlig
               { blîðe         blîðu        blîðe
               { berende       berendu      berende
               { geboren       geborenu     geboren

  _Plur. N.A._ { hâlge         hâlga        hâlgu
               { blîðe         blîða        blîðu
               { berende       berenda      berendu
               { geborene      geborena     geborenu


(2) #Weak Declension of Adjectives.#

83. The Weak Declension of adjectives, whether monosyllabic or
polysyllabic, does not differ from the Weak Declension of nouns, except
that -ena of the genitive plural is usually replaced by -ra of the
strong adjectives.


                _Masculine._  _Feminine._  _Neuter._
84.  _Sing. N._  gôda          gôde         gôde
           _G._  gôdan         gôdan        gôdan
         _D.I._  gôdan         gôdan        gôdan
           _A._  gôdan         gôdan        gôde

                          _All Genders._
                 _Plur. N.A._  gôdan
                         _G._  gôdra (gôdena)
                       _D.I._  gôdum


85. RULE OF SYNTAX.

_Adjectives agree with their nouns in gender, number, and case; but
participles, when used predicatively, may remain uninflected_ (§ 139,
§ 140).


86. VOCABULARY.

  dêad, _dead_.
  eall, _all_.
  hâl,[1] _whole, hale_.
  heard, _hard_.
  ðæt hors, _horse_.
  lêof, _dear_ [as lief].
  ly:tel, _little_.
  micel, _great, large_.
  monig, _many_.
  niman, _to take_ [nimble, numb].
  nîwe, _new_.
  rîce, _rich, powerful_.
  sôð, _true_ [sooth-sayer].
  stælwierðe,[2] _serviceable_ [stalwart].
  swîðe, _very_.
  sê tûn, _town, village_.
  sê ðegn, _servant, thane, warrior_.
  ðæt ðing, _thing_.
  sê weg, _way_.
  wîs, _wise_.
  wið (with acc.), _against_, in a hostile sense [with-stand].
  sê ilca, _the same_ [of that ilk].

    [Footnote 1: #Hâlig#, _holy_, contains, of course, the same
    root. "I find," says Carlyle, "that you could not get any better
    definition of what 'holy' really is than 'healthy--completely
    healthy.'"]

    [Footnote 2: This word has been much discussed. The older
    etymologists explained it as meaning _worth stealing_. A more
    improbable conjecture is that it means _worth a stall_ or
    _place_. It is used of ships in the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_. As
    applied to men, Skeat thinks it meant _good_ or _worthy at
    stealing_; but the etymology is still unsettled.]


87. EXERCISES.

I. 1. Ðâs scipu ne sind swîðe swift, ac hîe sind swîðe stælwierðu.
2. Sêo gôde cwên giefð æ:lcum ðegne moniga giefa. 3. Ðês wîsa cyning
hæfð monige micele tûnas on his rîce. 4. Næ:nig mon is wîs on eallum
ðingum. 5. Ðy: ilcan dæge (§ 98, (2)) mon fond (found) ðone ðegn ðe
mînes wines bêc hæfde. 6. Ealle ðâ secgas ðâ ðe swift hors habbað rîdað
wið ðone bonan. 7. Ðîne fîend sind mîne frîend. 8. Sê micela stân ðone
ðe ic on mînum hondum hæbbe is swîðe heard. 9. Hîe sceððað ðæ:m ealdum
horsum. 10. Uton niman ðâs tilan giefa ond hîe beran tô ûrum lêofum
bearnum.

II. 1. These holy men are wise and good. 2. Are the little children very
dear to the servants (dat. without #tô#)? 3. Gifts are not given (§ 70,
Note 1) to rich men. 4. All the horses that are in the king's fields are
swift. 5. These stones are very large and hard. 6. He takes the dead
man's spear and fights against the large army. 7. This new house has
many doors. 8. My ways are not your ways. 9. Whosoever chooses me, him I
also (#êac#) choose. 10. Every man has many friends that are not wise.




CHAPTER XV.

NUMERALS.


88. Numerals are either (_a_) Cardinal, expressing pure number, _one_,
_two_, _three_; or (_b_) Ordinal, expressing rank or succession,
_first_, _second_, _third_.


(_a_) #Cardinals.#

89. The Cardinals fall into the three following syntactic groups:

  GROUP I.

  1. ân
  2. twêgen [twain]
  3. ðrîe

These numerals are inflected adjectives. #Ân#, _one_, _an_, _a_, being a
long stemmed monosyllable, is declined like #gôd# (§ 80). The weak form,
#âna#, means _alone_.

#Twêgen# and #ðrîe#, which have no singular, are thus declined:

                _Masc._  _Fem._  _Neut._     _Masc._  _Fem._  _Neut._
  _Plur. N.A._   twêgen   twâ     twâ (tû)    ðrîe    ðrêo    ðrêo
          _G._   twêgra   twêgra  twêgra      ðrêora  ðrêora  ðrêora
          _D._ { twæ:m     twæ:m    twæ:m        ðrîm    ðrîm    ðrîm
               { (twâm)   (twâm)  (twâm)


90. GROUP II.

   4. fêower
   5. fîf
   6. siex
   7. seofon
   8. eahta
   9. nigon
  10. tîen
  11. endlefan
  12. twelf
  13. ðrêotîene
  14. fêowertîene
  15. fîftîene
  16. siextîene
  17. seofontîene
  18. eahtatîene
  19. nigontîene

These words are used chiefly as uninflected adjectives: #on gewitscipe
ðrêora oþþe fêower bisceopa#, _on testimony of three or four bishops_;
#on siex dagum#, _in six days_; #ân næ:dre ðe hæfde nigon hêafdu#, _a
serpent which had nine heads_; #æðeling eahtatîene wintra#, _a prince of
eighteen winters_.


91. GROUP III.

    20. twêntig
    21. ân ond twêntig
    30. ðrîtig
    40. fêowertig
    50. fîftig
    60. siextig
    70. hundseofontig
    80. hundeahtatig
    90. hundnigontig
   100. hund
   200. twâ hund
  1000. ðûsend
  2000. twâ ðûsend

All these numbers are employed as neuter singular nouns, and are
followed by the genitive plural: #Næfde hê þêah mâ ðonne twêntig
hry:ðera, and twêntig scêapa, and twêntig swy:na#, _He did not have,
however, more than twenty (of) cattle, and twenty (of) sheep, and twenty
(of) swine_; #Hîe hæfdon hundeahtatig scipa#, _They had eighty ships_;
#twâ hund mîla brâd#, _two hundred miles broad_; #ðæ:r wæ:ron seofon
hund gûðfanena genumen#, _there were seven hundred standards captured_;
#ân ðûsend monna#, _a thousand men_; #Hannibales folces wæs twâ ðûsend
ofslagen#, _Of Hannibal's men there were two thousand slain_; #Hîe
âcuron endlefan ðûsend monna#, _They chose eleven thousand men_.

  NOTE 1.--Group III is rarely inflected. Almost the only
  inflectional endings that are added are (1) -es, a genitive
  singular termination for the numerals in #-tig#, and (2) -e, a
  dative singular for #hund#. (1) The first is confined to
  adjectives expressing extent of space or time, as, #eald#, _old_;
  #brâd#, _broad_; #hêah#, _high_; and #long#, _long_: #ðæt is
  ðrîtiges mîla long#, _that is thirty miles long_; #Hê wæs ðrîtiges
  gêara eald#, _He was thirty years old_. (2) The second is employed
  after #mid#: #mid twæ:m hunde scipa#, _with two hundred ships_;
  #mid ðrîm hunde monna#, _with three hundred men_; #Ðæ:r wearð ...
  Regulus gefangen mid V hunde monna#, _There was Regulus captured
  with five hundred men_.

  The statement made in nearly all the grammars that #hunde# occurs
  as a nominative and accusative plural is without foundation.

  NOTE 2.--Many numerals, otherwise indeclinable, are used in the
  genitive plural with the indefinite pronoun #sum#, which then
  means _one of_ a certain number. In this peculiar construction,
  the numeral always precedes #sum#: #fêowera sum#, _one of four_ (=
  _with three others_); #Hê sæ:de þæt hê syxa sum ofslôge syxtig#,
  _He said that he, with five others, slew sixty_ (_whales_); #Hê
  wæs fêowertigra sum#, _He was one of forty_.

  NOTE 3.--These are the most common constructions with the
  Cardinals. The forms in #-tig# have only recently been
  investigated. A study of Wülfing's citations shows that Alfred
  occasionally uses the forms in #-tig# (1) as adjectives with
  plural inflections: #mid XXXgum cyningum#, _with thirty kings_;
  and (2) as nouns with plural inflections: #æfter siextigum daga#,
  _after sixty days_. But both constructions are rare.


(b) #Ordinals.#

92. The Ordinals, except the first two, are formed from the Cardinals.
They are:

   1. forma, æ:resta, fyrsta
   2. ôðer, æfterra
   3. ðridda
   4. fêorða
   5. fîfta
   6. siexta
   7. seofoða
   8. eahtoða
   9. nigoða
  10. têoða
  11. endlefta
  12. twelfta
  13. ðrêotêoða
  14. fêowertêoða
  15. fîftêoða
        etc.
  20. twêntigoða
  21. ân ond twêntigoða
  30. ðrîtigoða
        etc.

  NOTE.--There are no Ordinals corresponding to #hund# and #ðûsend#.

With the exception of #ôðer# (§ 77), all the Ordinals are declined as
Weak Adjectives; the article, however, as in Mn.E., is frequently
omitted: #Brûtus wæs sê forma consul#, _Brutus was the first consul_;
#Hêr endað sêo æ:reste bôc, ond onginneð sêo ôðer#, _Here the first book
ends, and the second begins_; #ðy: fîftan dæge#, _on the fifth day_; #on
ðæ:m têoðan gêare hiera gewinnes#, _in the tenth year of their strife_;
#Hêo wæs twelfte#, _She was twelfth_; #Sê wæs fêorða from Agusto#, _He
was fourth from Augustus_.




CHAPTER XVI.

ADVERBS, PREPOSITIONS, AND CONJUNCTIONS.


#Adverbs.#

93. (1) Adverbs are formed by adding -e or #-lîce# to the corresponding
adjectives: #sôð#, _true_; #sôðe# or #sôðlîce#, _truly_; #earmlîc#,
_wretched_; #earmlîce#, _wretchedly_; #wîd#, _wide_; #wîde#, _widely_;
#micel#, _great_; #micle# (#micele#), _greatly, much_.

(2) The terminations -e and #-lîce# are replaced in some adverbs
by #-(l)unga# or #-(l)inga#: #eallunga#, _entirely_; #fæ:ringa#,
_suddenly_; #grundlunga#, _from the ground, completely_.

  NOTE 1.--In Mn.E. _headlong_, _darkling_, and _groveling_,
  originally adverbs, we have survivals of these endings.

(3) The genitive case is frequently used adverbially: #sûðeweardes#,
_southwards_; #ealles#, _altogether, entirely_; #dæges#, _by day_;
#nihtes#, _by night_; #ðæs#, _from that time, afterwards_. _Cf._ #hys#
(= #his#) #weges# in #Ðonne rîdeð æ:lc hys weges#, _Then rides each his
way_.

  NOTE 2.--The adverbial genitive is abundantly preserved in Mn.E.
  _Always_, _crossways_, _sideways_, _needs_ (= _necessarily_),
  _sometimes_, etc., are not plurals, but old genitive singulars.
  The same construction is seen in _of course_, _of a truth_, _of an
  evening_, _of old_, _of late_, and similar phrases.

(4) Dative and instrumental plurals may be used as adverbs: #hwîlum#,
_at times, sometimes_ [whilom]; #stundum# (#stund# = _period_), _from
time to time_; #miclum#, _greatly_. Especially common is the suffix
#-mæ:lum# (#mæ:l# = _time_, #measure# [meal]), preserved adverbially in
Mn.E. _piecemeal_: #dropmæ:lum#, _drop by drop_; #styccemæ:lum#
(#stycce# = _piece_), _piecemeal, here and there_.

(5) The suffix -an usually denotes motion from:

  hêr, _here_.      hider, _hither_.      heonan, _hence_.
  ðæ:r, _there_.     ðider, _thither_.     ðonan, _thence_.
  hwæ:r, _where?_    hwider, _whither?_    hwonan, _whence?_
                                          norðan, _from the north_.
                                          êastan, _from the east_.
                                          hindan, _from behind_.
                                          feorran, _from far_.
                                          ûtan, _from without_.

(6) The adverb #rihte# (#riht# = _right, straight_) denotes _motion
toward_ in #norðrihte#, _northward, due north_; #êastrihte#, _due east_;
#sûðrihte#, _due south_; #westrihte#, _due west_.


#Prepositions.#

94. The nominative is the only case in O.E. that is never governed by a
preposition. Of the other cases, the dative and accusative occur most
frequently with prepositions.

(1) The prepositions that are most frequently found with the dative are:

  æfter, _after_.
  æ:t, _at_.
  be (bî), _by, near, about_.
  betwêonan (betuh), _between_.
  bûtan (bûton), _except_.
  for, _for_.
  from (fram), _from, by_.
  mid, _with_.
  of, _of, from_.
  tô, _to_.
  tôforan, _before_.
  tôweard, _toward_.

(2) The following prepositions require the accusative:

  geond, _throughout_ [be-yond].
  ofer, _over, upon_.
  oð, _until, up to_.
  ðurh, _through_.
  ymbe, _about, around_ [um-while, ember-days].

(3) The preposition #on# (rarely #in#), meaning _into_, is usually
followed by the accusative; but meaning _in_, _on_, or _during_, it
takes the dative or instrumental. The preposition #wið#, meaning
_toward_, may be followed by the genitive, dative, or accusative; but
meaning _against_, and implying _motion_ or _hostility_, the accusative
is more common.

(4) The following phrases are used prepositionally with the dative:

  be norðan, _north of_.
  be êastan, _east of_.
  be sûðan, _south of._
  be westan, _west of_.
  tô êacan, _in addition to_.
  on emnlange (efn-lang = _evenly long_), _along_.
  tô emnes, _along_.

(5) Prepositions regularly precede the noun or pronoun that they
introduce; but by their adverbial nature they are sometimes drawn in
front of the verb: #And him wæs mycel menegu tô gegaderod#, _And there
was gathered unto him a great multitude_. In relative clauses introduced
by #ðe#, the preceding position is very common: #sêo scîr ... ðe hê on
bûde#, _the district, ... which he dwelt in_ (= _which he in-habited_);
#Hê wæs swy:ðe spêdig man on ðæ:m æ:htum ðe hiera spêda on bêoð#, _He
was a very rich man in those possessions which their riches consist in_;
#ny:hst ðæ:m tûne ðe sê dêada man on lîð#, _nearest the town that the
dead man lies in_.


#Conjunctions.#

95. (1) The most frequently occurring conjunctions are:

  #ac, _but_.
  æ:r, _before, ere_.
  bûtan (bûton), _except that, unless_.
  êac, _also_ [eke].
  for ðæ:m,    }
  for ðæ:m ðe, }  _because_.
  for ðon,    }
  for ðon ðe, }
  for ðy:, _therefore_.
  gif, _if_.
  hwæðer, _whether_.
  ond (and), _and_.
  oððe, _or_.
  ðæt, _that, so that_.
  ðêah, _though, however_.

(2) The correlative conjunctions are:

  æ:gðer ge ... ge,      _both ...... and_.
  æ:gðer ...... ôðer }   _either .... or_.
  oððe ....... oððe }
  nê ......... nê,      _neither ... nor_.
  sam ........ sam,     _whether ... or_.
  swâ ........ swâ    { _the ....... the_.
                      { _as ........ as_.
  ðâ ......... ðâ    }  _when ...... then_.
  ðonne ...... ðonne }




CHAPTER XVII.

COMPARISON OF ADJECTIVES AND ADVERBS.


#Adjectives#.

96. (1) Adjectives are regularly compared by adding -ra for the
comparative, and -ost (rarely -est) for the superlative:

  _Positive._       _Comparative._     _Superlative._
  earm, _poor_      earmra             earmost
  rîce, _rich_      rîcra              rîcost
  smæl, _narrow_    smælra             smalost
  brâd, _broad_     brâdra (bræ:dra)    brâdost
  swift, _swift_    swiftra            swiftost

(2) Forms with i-umlaut usually have superlative in -est:

  _Positive._         _Comparative._  _Superlative._
  eald, _old_         ieldra          ieldest
  long, _long_        lengra          lengest
  strong, _strong_    strengra        strengest
  geong, _young_      giengra         giengest
  hêah, _high_        hîerra          hîehst

(3) The following adjectives are compared irregularly:

  _Positive._               _Comparative._  _Superlative._
  gôd, _good_               betra           betst
  ly:tel, _little, small_    læ:ssa           læ:st
  micel, _great, much_      mâra            mæ:st
  yfel, _bad_               wiersa          wierst

(4) The positive is sometimes supplied by an adverb:

  _Positive._     _Comparative._    _Superlative._
  feor, _far_     fierra            fierrest
  nêah, _near_    nêarra            nîehst
  æ:r, _before_    æ:rra, _former_    æ:rest, _first_

(5) The comparatives all follow the Weak Declension. The superlatives,
when preceded by the definite article, are weak; but when used
predicatively they are frequently strong: #sê læ:sta dæ:l#, _the least
part_; #Ðonne cymeð sê man sê ðæt swiftoste hors hafað tô ðæ:m æ:restan
dæ:le and tô ðæ:m mæ:stan#, _Then comes the man that has the swiftest
horse to the first part and to the largest_. But, #ðæt by:ne land is
êasteweard brâdost# (not #brâdoste#), _the cultivated land is broadest
eastward_; #and# (#hit#) #bið ealra wyrta mæ:st#, _and it is largest of
all herbs_; #Ac hyra# (= #hiera#) #âr is mæ:st on ðæ:m gafole ðe ðâ
Finnas him gyldað#, _But their income is greatest in the tribute that
the Fins pay them_.

(6) The comparative is usually followed by #ðonne# and the nominative
case: #Sê hwæl bið micle læ:ssa ðonne ôðre hwalas#, _That whale is much
smaller than other whales_; #Ðâ wunda ðæs môdes bêoð dîgelran ðonne ðâ
wunda ðæs lîchaman#. _The wounds of the mind are more secret than the
wounds of the body_.

But when #ðonne# is omitted, the comparative is followed by the dative:
#Ûre Âlîesend, ðe mâra is ond mæ:rra eallum gesceaftum#, _Our Redeemer,
who is greater and more glorious than all created things_; #nê ongeat hê
nô hiene selfne betran ôðrum gôdum monnum#, _nor did he consider himself
better than other good men_.


#Adverbs.#

97. (1) Adverbs are regularly compared by adding -or for the comparative
and -ost (rarely -est) for the superlative:

  _Positive._          _Comparative._    _Superlative._
  georne, _willingly_  geornor           geornost
  swîðe, _very,        swîðor, _more_    swîðost, _most, chiefly_
      severely_
  æ:r, _before_         æ:ror, _formerly_  æ:rest, _first_
  norð, _northwards_   norðor            norðmest[1]

(2) The comparatives of a few adverbs may be found by dropping -ra of
the corresponding adjective form:

  _Positive._      _Comparative._  _Superlative._
  longe, _long_    leng            lengest
  micle, _much_    mâ              mæ:st
  wel, _well_      bet             betst

    [Footnote 1: This is really a double superlative, m being itself
    an old superlative suffix. _Cf._ Latin _opti-m-us_. In Mn.E.
    _northmost_ and _hindmost_, _-m-est_ has been confused with
    _-most_, with which etymologically it has nothing to do.]


#Expressions of Time.#

98. (1) Duration of time and extent of space are usually expressed by
the accusative case: #Ealle ðâ hwîle ðe ðæt lîc bið inne#, _All the time
that the body is within_; #twêgen dagas#, _for two days_; #ealne weg#,
_all the way, always_.

(2) Time when is more often expressed by the instrumental case when no
preposition is used: #ðy: ilcan dæge#, _the same day_; #æ:lce gêare#,
_each year_; #ðy: gêare#, _that year_; #æ:lce dæge#, _each day_.

(3) Time or space within which is expressed by #on# and the dative: #on
sumera#, _in summer_; #on wintra#, _in winter_; #on fîf dagum#, _in five
days_; #on fîf mîlum#, _in five miles_; #on ðissum gêare#, _in this
year_; #on ðæ:m tîman#, _in those times_. Sometimes by the genitive
without a preceding preposition: #ðæ:s gêares#, _in that year_.


99. VOCABULARY.

  ðæt gefylce [folc], _troop, division_.
  ðæt lond (land), _land_.
  sêo mîl, _mile_.
  ôðer ... ôðer, _the one ... the other_; _the former ... the latter_.
  sê sige, _victory_.
  sige[2] habban, _to win (the) victory_.
  sprecan, _to speak_.
  ðæt swîn (swy:n), _swine, hog_.
  wêste, _waste_.

    [Footnote 2: #Sige# usually, but not invariably, precedes
    #habban#.]


100. EXERCISES.

I. 1. Hê hæfð ðrêo swîðe swift hors. 2. Ic hæbbe nigontîene scêap ond mâ
ðonne twêntig swîna. 3. Sêo gôde cwên cîest twâ hund monna. 4. Uton
feohtan wið ðâ Dene mid ðrîm hunde scipa. 5. Ond hîe wæ:ron on twæ:m
gefylcum: on ôðrum wæs[3] Bâchsecg ond Halfdene ðâ hæ:ðnan cyningas, ond
on ôðrum wæ:ron ðâ eorlas. 6. Ðû spricst sôðlîce. 7. Ðonne rît æ:lc mon
his weges. 8. Æfter monigum dagum, hæfde Ælfred cyning[4] sige. 9. Ðis
lond is wêste styccemæ:lum. 10. Ðês feld is fîftiges mîla brâd.
11. Ælfred cyning hæfde monige frîend, for ðæ:m ðe hê wæs æ:gðer ge wîs
ge gôd. 12. Ðâ hwalas, ðe ðû ymbe spricst, sind micle læ:ssan ôðrum
hwalum. 13. Hêo is ieldre ðonne hiere swuster, ac mîn brôðor is ieldra
ðonne hêo. 14. Wê cumað tô ðæ:m tûne æ:lce gêare. 15. Ðâ men ðe ðâ
swiftostan hors hæ:fdon wæ:ron mid ðæ:m Denum fêower dagas.

II. 1. Our army (#werod#) was in two divisions: one was large, the other
was small. 2. The richest men in the kingdom have more (#mâ#) than
thirty ships. 3. He was much wiser than his brother. 4. He fights
against the Northumbrians with two ships. 5. After three years King
Alfred gained the victory. 6. Whosoever chooses these gifts, chooses
well. 7. This man's son is both wiser and better than his father.
8. When the king rides, then ride his thanes also. 9. The richest men
are not always (â) the wisest men.

    [Footnote 3: See p. 100, note on #gefeaht#.]  [[Linenote 100.8]]

    [Footnote 4: The proper noun comes first in appositive
    expressions: #Ælfred cyning#, #Sidroc eorl#, #Hêahmund
    bisceop#.]




CHAPTER XVIII.

STRONG VERBS: CLASS I. (See § 17.)


#Syntax of Moods.#

101. Of the three hundred simple verbs belonging to the O.E. Strong
Conjugation, it is estimated[1] that seventy-eight have preserved their
strong inflections in Mn.E., that eighty-eight have become weak, and
that the remaining one hundred and thirty-four have entirely
disappeared, their places being taken in most cases by verbs of Latin
origin introduced through the Norman-French.

  NOTE.--Only the simple or primitive verbs, not the compound forms,
  are here taken into consideration. The proportionate loss,
  therefore, is really much greater. O.E. abounded in formative
  prefixes. "Thus from the Anglo-Saxon #flôwan#, _to flow_, ten new
  compounds were formed by the addition of various prefixes, of
  which ten, only one, #oferflôwan#, _to overflow_, survives with
  us. In a similar manner, from the verb #sittan#, _to sit_,
  thirteen new verbs were formed, of which not a single one is to be
  found to-day." Lounsbury, _ib._ Part I, p. 107.

    [Footnote 1: Lounsbury, _English Language_, Part II, § 241.]


102. #Class I: The "Drive" Conjugation.#

  Vowel Succession: î, â, i, i.

  INFINITIVE.  PRETERIT SING.  PRETERIT PLUR.  PAST PART.

  Drîf-an      drâf            drif-on         gedrif-en, _to drive_.

         #Indicative.#                     #Subjunctive.#

          PRESENT.                          PRESENT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic drîf-e              _Sing._ 1. Ic  }
          2. ðû drîf-st (drîf-est)          2. ðû  } drîf-e
          3. hê drîf-ð (drîf-eð)            3. hê  }

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }                  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } (drîf-að)                2. gê  } drîf-en
          3. hîe }                          3. hîe }

          PRETERIT.                         PRETERIT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic drâf                _Sing._ 1. Ic  }
          2. ðû drif-e                      2. ðû  } drif-e
          3. hê drâf                        3. hê  }

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }                  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } drif-on                  2. gê  } drif-en
          3. hîe }                          3. hîe }

          #Imperative.#    #Infinitive.#  #Present Participle.#

  _Sing._ 2. drîf          drîf-an        drîf-ende
  _Plur._ 1. drîf-an
          2. drîf-að

                    #Gerund.#             #Past Participle.#

                    tô drîf-anne (-enne)  gedrif-en


#Tense Formation of Strong Verbs.#

103. (1) It will be seen from the conjugation of #drîfan# that the
_present stem_ in all strong verbs is used throughout the present
indicative, the present subjunctive, the imperative, the infinitive, the
gerund, and the present participle. More than half of the endings,
therefore, of the Strong Conjugation are added directly to the present
stem.

(2) That the _preterit singular stem_ is used in only two forms of the
verb, the 1st and 3d persons singular of the preterit indicative: #Ic
drâf#, #hê drâf#.

(3) That the _preterit plural stem_ is used in the preterit plural
indicative, in the second person of the preterit singular indicative,
and in the singular and plural of the preterit subjunctive.

(4) That the _stem of the past participle_ (#gedrif-#) is used for no
other form.


#Syntax of the Verb.#

104. The Indicative Mood[2] represents the predicate _as a reality_. It
is used both in independent and in dependent clauses, its function in
O.E. corresponding with its function in Mn.E.

    [Footnote 2: Usage sanctions _mood_, but the better spelling
    would be _mode_. It is from the Lat. _modus_, whereas _mood_ (=
    _temper_) is O.E. _môd_.]


105. The Subjunctive Mood represents the predicate _as an idea_.[3] It
is of far more frequent occurrence in O.E. than in Mn.E.

1. When used in independent clauses it denotes desire, command, or
entreaty, and usually precedes its subject: #Sîe ðîn nama gehâlgod#,
_Hallowed be Thy name_; #Ne swerigen gê#, _Do not swear_.

2. In dependent clauses it denotes uncertainty, possibility, or mere
futurity.[4] (_a_) Concessive clauses (introduced by #ðêah#, _though_)
and (_b_) temporal clauses (introduced by #æ:r#, #æ:r ðæ:m ðe#,
_before_) are rarely found with any other mood than the subjunctive. The
subjunctive is also regularly used in Alfredian prose (_c_) after verbs
of saying, even when no suggestion of doubt or discredit attaches to the
narration.[5] "Whether the statement refer to a fact or not, whether the
subject-matter be vouched for by the reporter, as regards its objective
reality and truth, the subjunctive does not tell. It simply represents a
statement as reported"[6]: #ðêah man âsette twêgen fæ:tels full ealað
oððe wæteres#, _though one set two vessels full of ale or water_; #æ:r
ðæ:m ðe hit eall forhergod wæ:re#, _before it was all ravaged_; #Hê
sæ:de ðæt Norðmanna land wæ:re swy:ðe lang and swy:ðe smæl#, _He said
that the Norwegians' land was very long and very narrow_.

    [Footnote 3: Gildersleeve's _Latin Grammar_, § 255.]

    [Footnote 4: Thus when Alfred writes that an event took place
    _before_ the founding of Rome, he uses the subjunctive: #æ:r ðæ:m
    ðe Rômeburh getimbrod wæ:re# = _before Rome were founded_; but,
    #æfter ðæ:m ðe Rômeburh getimbrod wæs# = _after Rome was
    founded_.]

    [Footnote 5: "By the time of Ælfric, however, the levelling
    influence of the indicative [after verbs of saying] has made
    considerable progress."--Gorrell, _Indirect Discourse in
    Anglo-Saxon_ (Dissertation, 1895), p. 101.]

    [Footnote 6: Hotz, _On the Use of the Subjunctive Mood in
    Anglo-Saxon_ (Zürich, 1882).]


106. The Imperative is the mood of command or intercession: #Iôhannes,
cum tô mê#, _John, come to me_; #And forgyf ûs ûre gyltas#, _And forgive
us our trespasses_; #Ne drîf ûs fram ðê#, _Do not drive us from thee_.


107. (1) The Infinitive and Participles are used chiefly in verb-phrases
(§§ 138-141); but apart from this function, the Infinitive, being a
neuter noun, may serve as the subject or direct object of a verb.
#Hâtan# (_to command, bid_), #læ:tan# (_to let, permit_), and onginnan
(_to begin_) are regularly followed by the Infinitive: #Hine rîdan
lyste#, _To ride pleased him_; #Hêt ðâ bæ:re settan#, _He bade set down
the bier_;[7] #Læ:tað ðâ ly:tlingas tô mê cuman#, _Let the little ones
come to me_; #ðâ ongann hê sprecan#, _then began he to speak_.

(2) The Participles may be used independently in the dative absolute
construction (an imitation of the Latin ablative absolute), usually for
the expression of time:[8] #Him ðâ gy:t sprecendum#, _While he was yet
speaking_; #gefylledum dagum#, _the days having been fulfilled_.

    [Footnote 7: Not, _He commanded the bier to be set down._ The
    Mn.E. passive in such sentences is a loss both in force and
    directness.]

    [Footnote 8: Callaway, _The Absolute Participle in Anglo-Saxon_
    (Dissertation, 1889), p. 19.]


108. The Gerund, or Gerundial Infinitive, is used:

(1) To express purpose: #Ût êode sê sâwere his sæ:d tô sâwenne#, _Out
went the sower his seed to sow_.

(2) To expand or determine the meaning of a noun or adjective: #Sy:môn,
ic hæbbe ðê tô secgenne sum ðing#, _Simon, I have something to say to
thee_; #Hit is scondlîc ymb swelc tô sprecanne#, _It is shameful to
speak about such things_.

(3) After #bêon# (#wesan#) to denote duty or necessity: #Hwæt is nû mâ
ymbe ðis tô sprecanne#, _What more is there now to say about this_?
#ðonne is tô geðencenne hwaet Crîst self cwæð#, _then it behooves to
bethink what Christ himself said_.

  NOTE.--The Gerund is simply the dative case of the Infinitive
  after #tô#. It began very early to supplant the simple Infinitive;
  hence the use of _to_ with the Infinitive in Mn.E. As late as the
  Elizabethan age the Gerund sometimes replaced the Infinitive even
  after the auxiliary verbs:

          "Some pagan shore,
  Where these two Christian armies _might combine_
  The blood of malice in a vein of league,
  And not _to spend_ it so unneighbourly."
                                _--King John_, V, ii, 39.

  When _to_ lost the meaning of purpose and came to be considered as
  a merely formal prefix, _for_ was used to supplement the purpose
  element: _What went ye out for to see_?[9]

    [Footnote 9: This is not the place to discuss the Gerund in
    Mn.E., the so-called "infinitive in _-ing_." The whole subject
    has been befogged for the lack of an accepted nomenclature, one
    that shall do violence neither to grammar nor to history.]




CHAPTER XIX.

STRONG VERBS: CLASSES II AND III.


109. #Class II: The "Choose" Conjugation.#

  Vowel Succession: êo, êa, u, o.

  INFINITIVE.[1]  PRET. SING.  PRET. PLUR.[2]  PAST PART.[2]

  cêos-an,        cêas,        cur-on          gecor-en, _to choose_.

         #Indicative.#           #Subjunctive#.

          PRESENT.                        PRESENT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic cêos-e            _Sing._ 1. Ic  }
          2. ðû cîest (cêos-est)          2. ðû  } cêos-e
          3. hê cîest (cêos-eð)           3. hê  }

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }                _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } cêos-að                2. gê  } cêos-en
          3. hîe }                        3. hîe }

          PRETERIT.                       PRETERIT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic cêas              _Sing._ 1. Ic  }
          2. ðû cur-e                     2. ðû  } cur-e
          3. hê cêas                      3. hê  }

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }                _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } cur-on                 2. gê  } cur-en
          3. hîe }                        3. hîe }

          #Imperative.#    #Infinitive.#  #Present Participle.#

  _Sing._ 2. cêos          cêos-an        cêos-ende
  _Plur._ 1. cêos-an
          2. cêos-að

                    #Gerund.#             #Past Participle.#

                    tô cêos-anne (-enne)  gecor-en

    [Footnote 1: A few verbs of Class II have û instead of êo in the
    infinitive:

      brûcan, brêac, brucon, gebrocen, _to enjoy_ [brook].
      bûgan, bêag, bugon, gebogen, _to bend, bow_.]

    [Footnote 2: By a law known as Grammatical Change, final ð, s,
    and h of strong verbs generally become d, r, and g,
    respectively, in the preterit plural and past participle.]


110. #Class III: The "Bind" Conjugation.#

  Vowel Succession: {i,e}, a, u, {u,o}.

The present stem ends in m, n, l, r, or h, + one or more consonants:

  m: belimp-an, { belomp }, belump-on, belump-en, _to belong_.
                { belamp }

  n:  bind-an,  { bond },   bund-on,   gebund-en, _to bind_.
                { band }

  l:  help-an,    healp,    hulp-on,   geholp-en, _to help_.

  r:  weorð-an,   wearð,    wurd-on,   geword-en, _to become_.

  h:  gefeoht-an, gefeaht,  gefuht-on, gefoht-en, _to fight_.

  NOTE 1.--If the present stem ends in a nasal (m, n) + a consonant,
  the past participle retains the u of the pret. plur.; but if the
  present stem ends in a liquid (l, r) or h, + a consonant, the past
  participle has o instead of u.

  NOTE 2.--Why do we not find #*halp#, #*warð#, and #*faht# in the
  pret. sing.? Because a before l, r, or h, + a consonant, underwent
  "breaking" to ea. Breaking also changes every e followed by r or
  h, + a consonant, to eo: #weorðan# (< #*werðan#), feohtan
  (< #*fehtan#).


111.     #Indicative.#            #Subjunctive.#

          PRESENT.                         PRESENT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic bind-e             _Sing._ 1. Ic  }
          2. ðû bintst (bind-est)          2. ðû  } bind-e
          3. hê bint (bind-eð)             3. hê  }

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }                 _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  }  bind-að                2. gê  } bind-en
          3. hîe }                         3. hîe }

          PRETERIT.                        PRETERIT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic bond               _Sing._ 1. Ic  }
          2. ðû bund-e                     2. ðû  } bund-e
          3. hê bond                       3. hê  }

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }                 _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } bund-on                 2. gê  } bund-en
          3. hîe }                         3. hîe }

          #Imperative.#    #Infinitive.#  #Present Participle.#

  _Sing._ 2. bind          bind-an        bind-ende
  _Plur._ 1. bind-an
          2. bind-að

                    #Gerund.#             #Past Participle.#

                    tô bind-anne (-enne)  gebund-en


112. VOCABULARY.

  ðæt gefeoht, _fight, battle_.
  sêo gerecednes, _narration_ [#reccan#].
  ðæt gesceap, _creation_ [#scieppan#].
  sêo hergung (§ 39, (3)), _harrying, plundering_ [#hergian#].
  sê medu (medo) (§ 51), _mead_.
  sêo meolc, _milk_.
  sê middangeard, _world_ [middle-yard].
  sê munuc, _monk_ [monachus].
  sêo my:re, mare [#mearh#].
  hê sæ:de, _he said_.
  hîe sæ:don, _they said_.
  sêo spêd, _riches_ [speed].
  spêdig, _rich, prosperous_ [speedy].
  sêo tîd, _time_ [tide].
  unspêdig, _poor_.
  sê westanwind, _west-wind_.
  ðæt wîn, _wine_.

  ârîsan,         ârâs,    ârison,    ârisen,     _to arise_.
  bîdan,          bâd,     bidon,     gebiden,    _to remain, expect_
                                                    (with gen.)
  drêogan,[3]     drêag,   drugon,    gedrogen,   _to endure, suffer_.
  drincan,        dronc,   druncon,   gedruncen,  _to drink_.
  findan,         fond,    fundon,    gefunden,   _to find_.
  geswîcan        geswâc,  geswicon,  geswicen,   _to cease, cease from_
                                                    (with gen.)
  iernan (yrnan), orn,     urnon,     geurnen,    _to run_.
  onginnan,       ongonn,  ongunnon,  ongunnen,   _to begin_.
  rîdan,          râd,     ridon,     geriden,    _to ride_.
  singan,         song,    sungon,    gesungen,   _to sing_.
  wrîtan,         wrât,    writon,    gewriten,   _to write_.

    [Footnote 3: _Cf._ the Scotch "to _dree_ one's weird" = _to
    endure one's fate_.]


113. EXERCISES.

I. 1. Æfter ðissum wordum, sê munuc wrât ealle ðâ gerecednesse on ânre
bêc. 2. Ðâ eorlas ridon ûp æ:r ðæ:m ðe ðâ Dene ðæs gefeohtes geswicen.
3. Cædmon song æ:rest be middangeardes gesceape. 4. Sê cyning ond ðâ
rîcostan men drincað my:ran meolc, ond ðâ unspêdigan drincað medu.
5. Ond hê ârâs ond sê wind geswâc. 6. Hîe sæ:don ðæt hîe ðæ:r westwindes
biden. 7. Hwæt is nû mâ ymbe ðâs ðing tô sprecanne? 8. Ðâ secgas
ongunnon geswîcan ðæ:re hergunga. 9. Ðâ bêag ðæt lond ðæ:r êastryhte,
oððe sêo sæ: in on ðæt lond. 10. Ðâs lond belimpað tô, ðæ:m Englum.
11. Ðêah ðâ Dene ealne dæg gefuhten, gîet hæfde Ælfred cyning sige.
12. Ond ðæs (afterwards) ymbe ânne mônað gefeaht Ælfred cyning wið ealne
ðone here æt Wiltûne.

II. 1. The most prosperous men drank mare's milk and wine, but the poor
men drank mead. 2. I suffered many things before you began to help me
(dat.). 3. About two days afterwards (#Ðæs ymbe twêgen dagas#), the
plundering ceased. 4. The king said that he fought against all the army
(#here#). 5. Although the Danes remained one month (§ 98, (1)), they did
not begin to fight. 6. These gifts belonged to my brother. 7. The earls
were glad because their lord was (indicative) with them. 8. What did you
find? 9. Then wrote he about (#be#) the wise man's deeds. 10. What more
is there to endure?




CHAPTER XX.

STRONG VERBS: CLASSES IV, V, VI, AND VII.

CONTRACT VERBS.

[The student can now complete the conjugation for himself (§ 103). Only
the principal parts will be given.]


114. #Class IV: The "Bear" Conjugation.#

  Vowel Succession: e, æ, æ:, o.

The present stem ends in l, r, or m, no consonant following:

  l:   hel-an, hæl,       hæ:l-on,          gehol-en, _to conceal_.
  r:   ber-an, bær,       bæ:r-on,          gebor-en, _to bear_.

The two following verbs are slightly irregular:

  m: { nim-an, nôm (nam), nôm-on (nâm-on), genum-en, _to take_.
     { cum-an, c(w)ôm,    c(w)ôm-on,       gecum-en, _to come_.


115. #Class V: The "Give" Conjugation.#

  Succession of Vowels: e (ie), æ, æ:, e.

The present stem ends in a single consonant, never a liquid or nasal:

  met-an,  mæt,  mæ:ton,   gemet-en,  _to measure, mete_.
  gief-an, geaf, gêaf-on, gegief-en, _to give_.

  NOTE 1.--The palatal consonants, g, c, and sc, convert a following
  e into ie, æ into ea, and æ: into êa. Hence #giefan# (< #*gefan#),
  #geaf# (< #*gæf#), #gêafon# (< #*gæ:fon#), #gegiefen# (< #*gegefen#).
  This change is known as Palatalization. See § 8.

  NOTE 2.--The infinitives of the following important verbs are only
  apparently exceptional:

  biddan,  bæd,  bæ:d-on,  gebed-en, _to ask for_ [bid].
  licgan,  læg,  læ:g-on,  geleg-en, _to lie, extend_.
  sittan,  sæt,  sæ:t-on,  geset-en, _to sit_.

The original e reappears in the participial stems. It was changed to i
in the present stems on account of a former -jan in the infinitive
(#bid-jan#, etc.). See § 61. To the same cause is due the doubling of
consonants in the infinitive. All simple consonants in O.E., with the
exception of r, were doubled after a short vowel, when an original j
followed.


116. #Class VI: The "Shake" Conjugation.#

  Succession of Vowels: a, ô, ô, a.

  scac-an,  scôc,  scôc-on,  gescac-en,  _to shake_.
  far-an,   fôr,   fôr-on,   gefar-en,   _to go_ [fare].


117. #Class VII: The "Fall" Conjugation.#

  Vowel Succession: {â,æ:}, ê, ê, {â,æ:};
  or {ea,êa,ô}, êo, êo, {ea,êa,ô}.


  (1)  hât-an,    hêt,    hêt-on,    gehât-en,    _to call, name,
                                                    command_.
       læ:t-an,    lêt,    lêt-on,    gelæ:t-en,    _to let_.

  (2)  feall-an,  fêoll,  fêoll-on,  gefeall-en,  _to fall_.
       heald-an,  hêold,  hêold-on,  geheald-en,  _to hold_.
       hêaw-an,   hêow,   hêow-on,   gehêaw-en,   _to hew_.
       grôw-an,   grêow,  grêow-on,  gegrôw-en,   _to grow_.

  NOTE 1.--This class consists of the Reduplicating Verbs; that is,
  those verbs that originally formed their preterits not by internal
  vowel change (ablaut), but by prefixing to the present stem the
  initial consonant + e (_cf._ Gk. #le-loipa# and Lat. _d[)e]-di_).
  Contraction then took place between the syllabic prefix and the
  root, the fusion resulting in ê or êo: #*he-hat# > #heht# > #hêt#.

  NOTE 2.--A peculiar interest attaches to #hâtan#: the forms
  #hâtte# and #hâtton# are the sole remains in O.E. of the original
  Germanic passive. They are used both as presents and as preterits:
  #hâtte# = _I am_ or _was called_, _he is_ or _was called_. No
  other verb in O.E. could have a passive sense without calling in
  the aid of the verb _to be_ (§ 141).


#Contract Verbs.#

118. The few Contract Verbs found in O.E. do not constitute a new class;
they fall under Classes I, II, V, VI, and VII, already treated. The
present stem ended originally in h. This was lost before -an of the
infinitive, contraction and compensatory lengthening being the result.
The following are the most important of these verbs:

  Classes.

    I. ðêon  (< *ðîhan),  ðâh,  ðig-on, { geðig-en  }, _to thrive_.
                                        { geðung-en }
   II. têon  (< *têohan), têah, tug-on,   getog-en,    _to draw, go_
                                                         [tug].
    V. sêon  (< *sehwan), seah, sâw-on,   gesew-en,    _to see_.
   VI. slêan (< *slahan), slôh, slôg-on,  geslæg-en,   _to slay_.
  VII. fôn   (< *fôhan),  fêng, fêng-on,  gefong-en,   _to seize_
                                                         [fang].


119. The Present Indicative of these verbs runs as follows (see rules of
i-umlaut, § 58):

  _Sing._ 1. Ic ðêo      têo     sêo     slêa     fô
          2. ðû ðîhst    tîehst  siehst  sliehst  fêhst
          3. hê ðîhð     tîehð   siehð   sliehð   fêhð

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } ðêoð  têoð    sêoð    slêað    fôð
          3. hîe }

The other tenses and moods are regularly formed from the given stems.


120. VOCABULARY.

  sêo æ:ht, _property, possession_ [#âgan#].
  aweg, _away_ [#on weg#].
  sêo fierd, _English army_ [#faran#].
  sê here, _Danish army_ [#hergian#].
  on gehwæðre hond, _on both sides_.
  sige niman (= sige habban), _to win (the) victory_.
  sêo spræ:c, _speech, language_.
  tô rîce fôn, _to come to the throne_.[1]
  ðæt wæl [Val-halla] } _slaughter, carnage_.
  sê wælsliht,        }
  sê weall, _wall, rampart_.
  ðæt wildor, _wild beast, reindeer_.
  sê wîngeard, _vineyard_.

  âbrecan,[2] âbræc,   âbræ:con,   âbrocen,   _to break down_.
  cweðan,     cwæð,    cwæ:don,    gecweden,  _to say_ [quoth].
  gesêon,     geseah,  gesâwon,   gesewen,   _to see_.
  grôwan,     grêow,   grêowon,   gegrôwen,  _to grow_.
  ofslêan,    ofslôh,  ofslôgon,  ofslægen,  _to slay_.
  sprecan,    spræc,   spræ:con,   gesprecen, _to speak_.
  stelan,     stæl,    stæ:lon,    gestolen,  _to steal_.
  stondan,    stôd,    stôdon,    gestonden, _to stand_.
  weaxan,     wêox,    wêoxon,    geweaxen,  _to grow, increase_ [wax].

    [Footnote 1: Literally, _to take to (the) kingdom_. _Cf._
    "Have you anything to take to?" (_Two Gentlemen of Verona_,
    IV, i, 42).]

    [Footnote 2: #Brecan# belongs properly in Class V, but it has
    been drawn into Class IV possibly through the influence of the r
    in the root.]


121. EXERCISES.

I. 1. Æfter ðæ:m sôðlîce (indeed) ealle men spræ:con âne (one) spræ:ce.
2. Ond hê cwæð: "Ðis is ân folc, ond ealle hîe sprecað âne spræ:ce."
3. On sumum stôwum wîngeardas grôwað. 4. Hê hêt ðâ næ:dran ofslêan.
5. Ðâ Engle âbræ:con ðone longan weall, ond sige nômon. 6. Ond ðæt sæ:d
grêow ond wêox. 7. Ic ne geseah ðone mon sê ðe ðæs cnapan adesan stæl.
8. Hê wæs swy:ðe spêdig man on ðæ:m æ:htum ðe hiera spêda on[3] bêoð,
ðæt is, on wildrum. 9. Ond ðæ:r wearð (was) micel wælsliht on gehwæðre
hond. 10. Ond æfter ðissum gefeohte côm Ælfred cyning mid his fierde,
ond gefeaht wið ealne ðone here, ond sige nôm. 11. Ðêos burg hâtte[4]
Æscesdûn (Ashdown). 12. Ðæ:re cwêne lîc læg on ðæ:m hûse. 13. Ond sê
dæ:l ðe ðæ:r aweg côm wæs swy:ðe ly:tel. 14. Ond ðæs ðrêotîene dagas
Æðered tô rîce fêng.

II. 1. The men stood in the ships and fought against the Danes.
2. Before the thanes came, the king rode away. 3. They said (#sæ:don#)
that all the men spoke one language. 4. They bore the queen's body to
Wilton. 5. Alfred gave many gifts to his army (dat. without #tô#) before
he went away. 6. These men are called earls. 7. God sees all things.
8. The boy held the reindeer with (#mid#) his hands. 9. About six months
afterwards, Alfred gained the victory, and came to the throne. 10. He
said that there was very great slaughter on both sides.

    [Footnote 3: See § 94, (5).]

    [Footnote 4: See § 117, Note 2.]




CHAPTER XXI.

WEAK VERBS (§ 18).


122. The verbs belonging to the Weak Conjugation are generally of more
recent origin than the strong verbs, being frequently formed from the
roots of strong verbs. The Weak Conjugation was the growing conjugation
in O.E. as it is in Mn.E. We instinctively put our newly coined or
borrowed words into this conjugation (_telegraphed_, _boycotted_); and
children, by the analogy of weak verbs, say _runned_ for _ran_, _seed_
for _saw_, _teared_ for _tore_, _drawed_ for _drew_, and _growed_ for
_grew_. So, for example, when Latin _dictâre_ and _breviâre_ came into
O.E., they came as weak verbs, #dihtian# and #brêfian#.


#The Three Classes of Weak Verbs.#

123. There is no difficulty in telling, from the infinitive alone, to
which of the three classes a weak verb belongs. Class III has been so
invaded by Class II that but three important verbs remain to it:
#habban#, _to have_; #libban#, _to live_; and #secgan#, _to say_.
Distinction is to be made, therefore, only between Classes II and I.
Class II contains the verbs with infinitive in -ian not preceded
by r. Class I contains the remaining weak verbs; that is, those with
infinitive in #-r-ian# and those with infinitive in -an (not -ian).


#Class I.#

124. The preterit singular and past participle of Class I end in -ede
and -ed, or -de and -ed respectively.

  NOTE.--The infinitives of this class ended originally in -jan (=
  -ian). This accounts for the prevalence of i-umlaut in these
  verbs, and also for the large number of short-voweled stems ending
  in a double consonant (§ 115, Note 2). The weak verb is frequently
  the causative of the corresponding strong verb. In such cases, the
  root of the weak verb corresponds in form to the preterit singular
  of the strong verb: Mn.E. _drench_ (= _to make drink_), _lay_ (=
  _to make lie_), _rear_ (= _to make rise_), and _set_ (= _to make
  sit_), are the umlauted forms of #dronc# (preterit singular of
  #drincan#), #læg# (preterit singular of #licgan#), #râs# (preterit
  singular of #rîsan#), and #sæt# (preterit singular of #sittan#).


#Preterit and Past Participle in _-ede_ and _-ed_.#

125. Verbs with infinitive in -an preceded by ri- or the double
consonants mm, nn, ss, bb, cg (= gg), add -ede for the preterit, and -ed
for the past participle, the double consonant being always made single:

  ri:  neri-an,   ner-ede,   gener-ed,   _to save_.
  mm:  fremm-an,  frem-ede,  gefrem-ed,  _to perform_ [frame].
  nn:  ðenn-an,   ðen-ede,   geðen-ed,   _to extend_.
  ss:  cnyss-an,  cnys-ede,  gecnys-ed,  _to beat_.
  bb:  swebb-an,  swef-ede,  geswef-ed,  _to put to sleep_.
  cg:  wecg-an,   weg-ede,   geweg-ed,   _to agitate_.

  NOTE.--#Lecgan#, _to lay_, is the only one of these verbs that
  syncopates the e: #lecgan#, #legde# (#lêde#), #gelegd# (#gelêd#),
  instead of #legede#, #geleged#.


#Preterit and Past Participle in _-de_ and _-ed_.#

126. All the other verbs belonging to Class I. add -de for the preterit
and -ed for the past participle. This division includes, therefore, all
stems long by nature (§ 10, (3), (_a_)):

  dæ:l-an,   dæ:l-de,   gedæ:l-ed,   _to deal out, divide_ [dæ:l].
  dêm-an,   dêm-de,   gedêm-ed,   _to judge_ [dôm].
  grêt-an,  grêt-te,  gegrêt-ed,  _to greet_.
  hîer-an,  hîer-de,  gehîer-ed,  _to hear_.
  læ:d-an,   læ:d-de,   gelæ:d-ed,   _to lead_.

  NOTE 1.--A preceding voiceless consonant (§ 9, Note) changes -de
  into -te: #*grêt-de# > #grêt-te#; #*mêt-de# > #mêt-te#; #*îec-de#
  > #îec-te#. Syncope and contraction are also frequent in the
  participles: #gegrêt-ed# > #*gegrêt-d# > #gegrêt(t)#; #gelæ:d-ed# >
  #gelæ:d(d)#.

  NOTE 2.--#Bûan#, _to dwell, cultivate_, has an admixture of
  strong forms in the past participle: #bûan#, #bûde#, #gebûd#
  (#by:n#, #gebûn#). The present participle survives in Mn.E.
  _husband_ = _house-dweller_.


127. It includes, also, all stems long by position (§ 10, (3), (_b_))
except those in mm, nn, ss, bb, and cg (§ 125):

  send-an,   send-e,   gesend-ed,   _to send_.
  sett-an,   set-te,   geset-ed,    _to set_ [sittan].
  sigl-an,   sigl-de,  gesigl-ed,   _to sail_.
  spend-an,  spend-e,  gespend-ed,  _to spend_.
  tredd-an,  tred-de,  getred-ed,   _to tread_.

  NOTE.--The participles frequently undergo syncope and contraction:
  #gesended# > #gesend#; #geseted# > #geset(t)#; #gespended# >
  #gespend#; #getreded# > #getred(d)#.


#Irregular Verbs of Class I.#

128. There are about twenty verbs belonging to Class I that are
irregular in having no umlaut in the preterit and past participle. The
preterit ends in -de, the past participle in -d; but, through the
influence of a preceding voiceless consonant (§ 9, Note), -ed is
generally unvoiced to -te, and -d to -t. The most important of these
verbs are as follows:

  bring-an,  brôh-te,  gebrôh-t,  _to bring_.
  byc-gan,   boh-te,   geboh-t,   _to buy_.
  sêc-an,    sôh-te,   gesôh-t,   _to seek_.
  sell-an,   seal-de,  geseal-d,  _to give, sell_ [hand-sel].
  tæ:c-an,    tæ:h-te,   getæ:h-t,   _to teach_.
  tell-an,   teal-de,  geteal-d,  _to count_ [tell].
  ðenc-an,   ðôh-te,   geðôh-t,   _to think_.
  ðync-an,   ðûh-te,   geðûh-t,   _to seem_ [methinks].
  wyrc-an,   worh-te,  geworh-t,  _to work_.

  NOTE.--Such of these verbs as have stems in c or g are frequently
  written with an inserted e: #bycgean#, #sêcean#, #tæ:cean#, etc.
  This e indicates that c and g have palatal value; that is, are to
  be followed with a vanishing y-sound. In such cases, O.E. c
  usually passes into Mn.E. _ch_: #tæ:c(e)an# > _to teach_;
  #ræ:c(e)an# > _to reach_; #strecc(e)an# > _to stretch_. #Sêc(e)an#
  gives _beseech_ as well as _seek_. See § 8.


#Conjugation of Class I.#

129. Paradigms of #nerian#, _to save_; #fremman#, _to perform_;
#dæ:lan#, _to divide_:

        #Indicative.#

          PRESENT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic nerie       fremme     dæ:le
          2. ðû nerest      fremest    dæ:lst
          3. hê nereð       fremeð     dæ:lð

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } neriað   fremmað    dæ:lað
          3. hîe }

          PRETERIT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic nerede      fremede    dæ:lde
          2. ðû neredest    fremedest  dæ:ldest
          3. hê nerede      fremede    dæ:lde

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } neredon  fremedon   dæ:ldon
          3. hîe }

         #Subjunctive.#

          PRESENT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic  }
          2. ðû  } nerie    fremme     dæ:le
          3. hê  }

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  }  nerien  fremmen    dæ:len
          3. hîe }

          PRETERIT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic  }
          2. ðû  } nerede   fremede    dæ:lde
          3. hê  }

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } nereden  fremeden   dæ:lden
          3. hîe }

         #Imperative.#

  _Sing._ 2. nere           freme      dæ:l

  _Plur._ 1. nerian         fremman    dæ:lan
          2. neriað         fremmað    dæ:lað

         #Infinitive.#

             nerian         fremman    dæ:lan

  #Gerund.#

  tô nerianne (-enne)    tô fremmanne (-enne)    tô dæ:lanne (-enne)

  #Present Participle.#

             neriende       fremmende   dæ:lende

  #Past Participle.#

             genered        gefremed    gedæ:led

  NOTE.--The endings of the preterit present no difficulties; in the
  2d and 3d singular present, however, the student will observe
  (_a_) that double consonants in the stem are made single:
  #fremest#, #fremeð# (not #*freemmest#, #*freemmeð#); #ðenest#,
  #ðeneð#; #setest# (#setst#), #seeteð# (#sett#); #fylst#, #fylð#,
  from #fyllan#, _to fill_; (_b_) that syncope is the rule in stems
  long by nature: #dæ:lst# (< #dæ:lest#), #dæ:lð# (< #dæ:leð#); #dêmst#
  (< #dêmest#), #dêmð# (< #dêmeð#); #hîerst# (< #hîerest#), #hîerð#
  (< #hîereð#). Double consonants are also made single in the
  imperative 2d singular and in the past participle. Stems long by
  nature take no final -e in the imperative: #dæ:l#, #hîer#, #dêm#.


#Class II.#

130. The infinitive of verbs belonging to this class ends in -ian (not
#-r-ian#), the preterit singular in -ode, the past participle in -od.
The preterit plural usually has #-edon#, however, instead of #-odon#:

  eard-ian,   eard-ode,   geeard-od,   _to dwell_ [eorðe].
  luf-ian,    luf-ode,    geluf-od,    _to love_ [lufu].
  rîcs-ian,   rîcs-ode,   gerîcs-od,   _to rule_ [rîce].
  sealf-ian,  sealf-ode,  gesealf-od,  _to anoint_ [salve].
  segl-ian,   segl-ode,   gesegl-od,   _to sail_ [segel].

  NOTE.--These verbs have no trace of original umlaut, since their
  -ian was once #-ôjan#. Hence, the vowel of the stem was shielded
  from the influence of the j (= i) by the interposition of ô.


#Conjugation of Class II.#

131. Paradigm of #lufian#, _to love_:

          #Indicative.#                     #Subjunctive.#

          PRESENT.                          PRESENT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic lufie               _Sing._ 1. Ic     }
          2. ðu lufast                      2. ðû  } lufie
          3. hê lufað                       3. hê  }

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }                  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } lufiað                   2. gê  } lufien
          3. hîe }                          3. hîe }

          PRETERIT.                         PRETERIT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic lufode              _Sing._ 1. Ic  }
          2. ðû lufodest                    2. ðû  } lufode
          3. hê lufode                      3. hê  }

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }                  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } lufedon (-odon)          2. gê  } lufeden (-oden)
          3. hîe }                          3. hîe }

          #Imperative.#    #Infinitive.#  #Present Participle.#

  _Sing._ 2. lufa          lufian         lufiende
  _Plur._ 1. lufian
          2. lufiað

                   #Gerund.#              #Past Participle.#

                   tô lufianne (-enne)    gelufod

  NOTE 1.--The -ie (-ien) occurring in the present must be
  pronounced as a dissyllable. The y-sound thus interposed between
  the i and e is frequently indicated by the letter g: #lufie#, or
  #lufige#; #lufien#, or #lufigen#. So also for ia: #lufiað#, or
  #lufigað#; #lufian#, or #lufig(e)an#.

  NOTE 2.--In the preterit singular, -ade, -ude, and -ede are not
  infrequent for -ode.


#Class III.#

132. The few verbs belonging here show a blending of Classes I and II.
Like certain verbs of Class I (§ 128), the preterit and past participle
are formed by adding -de and -d; like Class II, the 2d and 3d present
indicative singular end in -ast and -að, the imperative 2d singular in
-a:

  habb-an,  hæf-de,          gehæf-d,          _to have_.
  libb-an,  lif-de,          gelif-d,          _to live_.
  secg-an,  sæ:d-e (sæg-de),  gesæ:d (gesæg-d),  _to say_.


#Conjugation of Class III.#

133. Paradigms of #habban#, _to have_; #libban#, _to live_; #secgan#,
_to say_.

        #Indicative.#

          PRESENT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic hæbbe           libbe      secge
          2. ðû hæfst (hafast)  lifast     sægst (sagast)
          3. hê hæfð (hafað)    lifað      sægð (sagað)

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } habbað       libbað     secgað
          3. hîe }

          PRETERIT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic hæfde           lifde      sæ:de
          2. ðû hæfdest         lifdest    sæ:dest
          3. hê hæfde           lifde      sæ:de

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } hæfdon       lifdon     sæ:don
          3. hîe }

         #Subjunctive.#

          PRESENT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic  }
          2. ðû  } hæbbe        libbe      secge
          3. hê  }

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } hæbben       libben     secgen
          3. hîe }

          PRETERIT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic  }
          2. ðû  } hæfde        lifde      sæ:de
          3. hê  }

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } hæfden       lifden     sæ:den
          3. hîe }

         #Imperative.#

  _Sing._ 2. hafa               lifa       saga
  _Plur._ 1. habban             libban     secgan
          2. habbað             libbað     secgað

  #Infinitive.#

             habban             libban     secgan

  #Gerund.#

  tô habbanne (-enne)    tô libbanne (-enne)    tô secganne (-enne)

  #Present Participle.#

             hæbbende           libbende   secgende

  #Past Participle.#

             gehæfd             gelifd     gesæ:d




CHAPTER XXII.

REMAINING VERBS; VERB-PHRASES WITH #habban#, #bêon#, AND #weorðan#.


#Anomalous Verbs.# (See § 19.)

134. These are:

  bêon (wesan),  wæs,    wæ:ron,   ----,   _to be_.
  willan,        wolde,  woldon,  ----,   _to will, intend_.
  dôn,           dyde,   dydon,   gedôn,  _to do, cause_.
  gân,           êode,   êodon,   gegân,  _to go_.

  NOTE.--In the original Indo-Germanic language, the first person
  of the present indicative singular ended in (1) ô or (2) mi.
  _Cf._ Gk. +lu-ô+, +ei-mi+, Lat. _am-ô_, _su-m_. The Strong and Weak
  Conjugations of O.E. are survivals of the ô-class. The four
  Anomalous Verbs mentioned above are the sole remains in O.E. of
  the mi-class. Note the surviving m in #eom# _I am_, and #dôm# _I
  do_ (Northumbrian form). These mi-verbs are sometimes called
  non-Thematic to distinguish them from the Thematic or ô-verbs.


#Conjugation of Anomalous Verbs.#

135. Only the present indicative and subjunctive are at all irregular:

         #Indicative.#

          PRESENT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic eom (bêom)     wille     dô      gâ
          2. ðû eart (bist)    wilt      dêst    gæ:st
          3. hê is (bið)       wille     dêð     gæ:ð

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } sind(on)    willað    dôð     gâð
          3. hîe }

         #Subjunctive.#

          PRESENT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic  }
          2. ðû  } sîe         wille     dô      gâ
          3. hê  }

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } sîen        willen    dôn     gân
          3. hîe }

  NOTE.--The preterit subjunctive of #bêon# is formed, of course,
  not from #wæs#, but from #wæ:ron#. See § 103, (3).


#Preterit-Present Verbs.# (See § 19.)

136. These verbs are called Preterit-Present because the present tense
(indicative and subjunctive) of each of them is, in form, a strong
preterit, the old present having been displaced by the new. They all
have weak preterits. Most of the Mn.E. Auxiliary Verbs belong to this
class.

  witan,  { wiste, }  wiston,     gewiten,       _to know_
          { wisse, }                               [to wit, wot].
  âgan,     âhte,     âhton,      âgen (adj.),   _to possess_ [owe].
  cunnan,   cûðe,     cûðon,    { gecunnen,   }  _to know_, _can_
                                { cûð (adj.), }    [uncouth, cunning].
  durran,   dorste,   dorston,    ----           _to dare_.
  sculan,   sceolde,  sceoldon,   ----           _shall_.
  magan,  { meahte,   meahton, }  ----           _to be able_, _may_.
          { mihte,    mihton,  }
  môtan,    môste,    môston,     ----           _may_, _must_.

  NOTE.--The change in meaning from preterit to present, with
  retention of the preterit form, is not uncommon in other
  languages. Several examples are found in Latin and Greek
  (cf. _nôvi_ and +oida+, _I know_). Mn.E. has gone further still:
  #âhte# and #môste#, which had already suffered the loss of their
  old preterits (#âh#, #môt#), have been forced back again into the
  present (_ought_, _must_). Having exhausted, therefore, the only
  means of preterit formation known to Germanic, the strong and the
  weak, it is not likely that either _ought_ or _must_ will ever
  develop distinct preterit forms.


#Conjugation of Preterit-Present Verbs.#

137. The irregularities occur in the present indicative and subjunctive:

         #Indicative.#

          PRESENT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic wât       âh    con (can)
          2. ðû wâst      âhst  const (canst)
          3. hê wât       âh    con (can)

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } witon  âgon  cunnon
          3. hîe }

  _Sing._ 1. Ic dear    sceal   mæg    môt
          2. ðû dearst  scealt  meaht  môst
          3. hê dear    sceal   mæg    môt

  _Plur._ 1. wê
          2. gê durron  sculon  magon  môton
          3. hîe

         #Subjunctive.#

          PRESENT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic  }
          2. ðû  } wite   âge   cunne
          3. hê  }

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } witen  âgen  cunnen
          3. hîe }

  _Sing._ 1. Ic  }
          2. ðû  } durre   scule (scyle)    mæge   môte
          3. hê  }

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } durren  sculen (scylen)  mægen  môten
          3. hîe }

  NOTE 1.--#Willan# and #sculan# do not often connote simple
  futurity in Early West Saxon, yet they were fast drifting that
  way. The Mn.E. use of _shall_ only with the 1st person and _will_
  only with the 2d and 3d, to express simple futurity, was wholly
  unknown even in Shakespeare's day. The elaborate distinctions
  drawn between these words by modern grammarians are not only
  cumbersome and foreign to the genius of English, but equally
  lacking in psychological basis.

  NOTE 2.--#Sculan# originally implied the idea of (1) _duty_, or
  _compulsion_ (= _ought to_, or _must_), and this conception lurks
  with more or less prominence in almost every function of #sculan#
  in O.E.: #Dryhten bebêad Moyse hû hê sceolde beran ðâ earce#, _The
  Lord instructed Moses how he ought to bear the ark_; #Æ:lc mann
  sceal be his andgietes mæ:ðe ... sprecan ðæt he spricð, and dôn ðæt
  ðæt hê dêð#, _Every man must, according to the measure of his
  intelligence, speak what he speaks, and do what he does_. Its next
  most frequent use is to express (2) _custom_, the transition from
  the obligatory to the customary being an easy one: #Sê byrdesta
  sceall gyldan fîfty:ne mearðes fell#, _The man of highest rank pays
  fifteen marten skins_.

  NOTE 3.--#Willan# expressed originally (1) _pure volition_, and
  this is its most frequent use in O.E. It may occur without the
  infinitive: #Nylle ic ðæs synfullan dêað, ac ic wille ðæt hê
  gecyrre and lybbe#, _I do not desire the sinner's death, but I
  desire that he return and live_. The wish being father to the
  intention, #willan# soon came to express (2) _purpose_: #Hê sæ:de
  ðæt hê at sumum cirre wolde fandian hû longe ðæt land norðryhte
  læ:ge#, _He said that he intended, at some time, to investigate how
  far that land extended northward_.


#Verb-Phrases with _habban_, _bêon_ (_wesan_), and _weorðan_.#

_Verb-Phrases in the Active Voice._

138. The present and preterit of #habban#, combined with a past
participle, are used in O.E., as in Mn.E., to form the present perfect
and past perfect tenses:

          PRESENT PERFECT.                  PAST PERFECT.

  _Sing._ 1. Ic hæbbe gedrifen      _Sing._ 1. Ic hæfde gedrifen
          2. ðû hæfst gedrifen              2. ðû hæfdest gedrifen
          3. hê hæfð gedrifen               3. hê hæfde gedrifen

          PRESENT PERFECT.                  PAST PERFECT.

  _Plur._ 1. wê  }                  _Plur._ 1. wê  }
          2. gê  } habbað gedrifen          2. gê  } hæfdon gedrifen
          3. hîe }                          3. hîe }

The past participle is not usually inflected to agree with the direct
object: #Norðymbre ond Êastengle hæfdon Ælfrede cyninge âðas geseald#
(not #gesealde#, § 82), _The Northumbrians and East Anglians had given
king Alfred oaths_; #ond hæfdon miclne dæ:l ðâra horsa freten# (not
#fretenne#), _and (they) had devoured a large part of the horses_.

  NOTE.--Many sentences might be quoted in which the participle does
  agree with the direct object, but there seems to be no clear line
  of demarcation between them and the sentences just cited.
  Originally, the participle expressed a _resultant state_, and
  belonged in sense more to the object than to #habban#; but in
  Early West Saxon #habban# had already, in the majority of cases,
  become a pure auxiliary when used with the past participle. This
  is conclusively proved by the use of #habban# with intransitive
  verbs. In such a clause, therefore, as #oð ðæt hîe hine ofslægenne
  hæfdon#, there is no occasion to translate _until they had him
  slain_ (= _resultant state_); the agreement here is more probably
  due to the proximity of #ofslægenne# to #hine#. So also #ac hî
  hæfdon þâ hiera stemn gesetenne#, _but they had already served
  out_ (_sat out_) _their military term_.


139. If the verb is intransitive, and denotes _a change of condition_,
_a departure or arrival_, #bêon# (#wesan#) usually replaces #habban#.
The past participle, in such cases, partakes of the nature of an
adjective, and generally agrees with the subject: #Mîne welan þe ic îo
hæfde syndon ealle gewitene ond gedrorene#, _My possessions which I once
had are all departed and fallen away_; #wæ:ron þâ men uppe on londe of
âgâne#, _the men had gone up ashore_; #ond þâ ôþre wæ:ron hungre
âcwolen#, _and the others had perished of hunger_; #ond êac sê micla
here wæs þâ þæ:r tô cumen#, _and also the large army had then arrived
there_.


140. A progressive present and preterit (not always, however, with
distinctively progressive meanings) are formed by combining a present
participle with the present and preterit of #bêon# (#wesan#). The
participle remains uninflected: #ond hîe alle on ðone cyning wæ:run
feohtende#, _and they all were fighting against the king_; #Symle hê bið
lôciende, nê slæ:pð hê næ:fre#, _He is always looking, nor does He ever
sleep_.

  NOTE.--In most sentences of this sort, the subject is masculine
  (singular or plural); hence no inference can be made as to
  agreement, since -e is the participial ending for both numbers of
  the nominative masculine (§ 82). By analogy, therefore, the other
  genders usually conform in inflection to the masculine: #wæ:ron þâ
  ealle þâ dêoflu clypigende ânre stefne#, _then were all the devils
  crying with one voice_.


_Verb-Phrases in the Passive Voice._

141. Passive constructions are formed by combining #bêon# (#wesan#) or
#weorðan# with a past participle. The participle agrees regularly with
the subject: #hîe wæ:ron benumene æ:gðer ge þæs cêapes ge þæs cornes#,
_they were deprived both of the cattle and the corn_; #hî bêoð âblende
mid ðæ:m þîostrum heora scylda#, _they are blinded with the darkness of
their sins_; #and sê wælhrêowa Domiciânus on ðâm ylcan gêare wearð
âcweald#, _and the murderous Domitian was killed in the same year_; #ond
Æþelwulf aldormon wearð ofslægen#, _and Æthelwulf, alderman, was slain_.

  NOTE 1.--To express agency, Mn.E. employs _by_, rarely _of_; M.E.
  _of_, rarely _by_; O.E. #from# (#fram#), rarely #of#: #Sê ðe Godes
  bebodu ne gecnæ:wð, ne bið hê oncnâwen from Gode#, _He who does not
  recognise God's commands, will not be recognized by God_; #Betwux
  þæ:m wearð ofslagen Êadwine ... fram Brytta cyninge#, _Meanwhile,
  Edwin was slain by the king of the Britons_.

  NOTE 2.--O.E. had no progressive forms for the passive, and could
  not, therefore, distinguish between _He is being wounded_ and _He
  is wounded_. It was not until more than a hundred years after
  Shakespeare's death that _being_ assumed this function. #Weorðan#,
  which originally denoted _a passage from one state to another_,
  was ultimately driven out by #bêon# (#wesan#), and survives now
  only in _Woe worth_ (= _be to_).


142. VOCABULARY.

  ðâ Beormas, _Permians_.
  ðâ Deeniscan, _the Danish (men), Danes_.
  ðâ Finnas, _Fins_.
  ðæt gewald, _control_ [#wealdan#].
  sêo sæ:, _sea_.
  sêo scîr, _shire, district_.
  sêo wælstôw, _battle-field_.
  âgan wælstôwe gewald, _to maintain possession of the battle-field_.
  sê wealdend, _ruler, wielder_.

  geflîeman,    geflîemde,    geflîemed,   _to put to flight_.
  gestaðelian,  gestaðelode,  gestaðelod,  _to establish, restore_.
  gewissian,    gewissode,    gewissod,    _to guide, direct_.
  wîcian,       wîcode,       gewîcod,     _to dwell_ [wîc = village].


143. EXERCISES.

I. 1. Ond ðær wæs micel wæl geslægen on gehwæþre hond, ond Æþelwulf
ealdormon wearþ ofslægen; ond þâ Deniscan âhton wælstôwe gewald. 2. Ond
þæs ymb ânne mônaþ gefeaht Ælfred cyning wiþ ealne þone here ond hine
geflîemde. 3. Hê sæ:de þêah þæt þæt land sîe swîþe lang norþ þonan.
4. Þâ Beormas hæfdon swîþe wel gebûd (§ 126, Note 2) hiera land.
5. Ohthere sæ:de þæt sêo scîr hâtte (§ 117, Note 2) Hâlgoland, þe hê on
(§ 94, (5)) bûde. 6. Þâ Finnas wîcedon be þæ:re sæ:. 7. Dryhten,
ælmihtiga (§ 78, Note) God, Wyrhta and Wealdend ealra gesceafta, ic
bidde ðê for ðînre miclan mildheortnesse ðæt ðû mê gewissie tô ðînum
willan; and gestaðela mîn môd tô ðînum willan and tô mînre sâwle ðearfe.
8. Þâ sceolde hê ðæ:r bîdan ryhtnorþanwindes, for ðæ:m þæt land bêag
þæ:r sûðryhte, oþþe sêo sæ: in on ðæt land, hê nysse hwæðer. 9. For ðy:,
mê ðyncð betre, gif êow swâ ðyncð, ðæt wê êac ðâs bêc on ðæt geðêode
wenden ðe wê ealle gecnâwan mægen.

II. 1. When the king heard that, he went (= then went he) westward with
his army to Ashdown. 2. Lovest thou me more than these? 3. The men said
that the shire which they lived in was called Halgoland. 4. All things
were made (#wyrcan#) by God. 5. They were fighting for two days with
(= against) the Danes. 6. King Alfred fought with the Danes, and gained
the victory; but the Danes retained possession of the battle-field.
7. These men dwelt in England before they came hither. 8. I have not
seen the book of (#ymbe#) which you speak (#sprecan#).




PART III.


SELECTIONS FOR READING.




PROSE.

INTRODUCTORY.


I. #The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle.#

This famous work, a series of progressive annals by unknown hands,
embraces a period extending from Cæsar's invasion of England to 1154. It
is not known when or where these annals began to be recorded in
English.

"The annals from the year 866--that of Ethelred's ascent of the
throne--to the year 887 seem to be the work of one mind. Not a single
year is passed over, and to several is granted considerable space,
especially to the years 871, 878, and 885. The whole has gained a
certain roundness and fulness, because the events--nearly all of them
episodes in the ever-recurring conflict with the Danes--are taken in
their connection, and the thread dropped in one year is resumed in the
next. Not only is the style in itself concise; it has a sort of nervous
severity and pithy rigor. The construction is often antiquated, and
suggests at times the freedom of poetry; though this purely historical
prose is far removed from poetry in profusion of language." (Ten Brink,
_Early Eng. Lit._, I.)


II. #The Translations of Alfred.#

Alfred's reign (871-901) may be divided into four periods. The _first_,
the period of Danish invasion, extends from 871 to 881; the _second_,
the period of comparative quiet, from 881 to 893; the _third_, the
period of renewed strife (beginning with the incursions of Hasting),
from 893 to 897; the _fourth_, the period of peace, from 897 to 901. His
literary work probably falls in the second period.[A]

The works translated by Alfred from Latin into the vernacular were
(1) _Consolation of Philosophy_ (_De Consolatione Philosophiae_) by
Boëthius (475-525), (2) _Compendious History of the World_ (_Historiarum
Libri VII_) by Orosius (c. 418), (3) _Ecclesiastical History of the
English_ (_Historia Ecclesiastica Gentis Anglorum_) by Bede (672-735),
and (4) _Pastoral Care_ (_De Cura Pastorali_) by Pope Gregory the Great
(540-604).

  The chronological sequence of these works is wholly unknown. That
  given is supported by Turner, Arend, Morley, Grein, and Pauli.
  Wülker argues for an exact reversal of this order. According to
  Ten Brink, the order was more probably (1) _Orosius_, (2) _Bede_,
  (3) _Boëthius_, and (4) _Pastoral Care_. The most recent
  contribution to the subject is from Wülfing, who contends for
  (1) _Bede_, (2) _Orosius_, (3) _Pastoral Care_, and (4) _Boëthius_.

    [Footnote A: There is something inexpressibly touching in this
    clause from the great king's pen: gif wê ðâ stilnesse habbað. He
    is speaking of how much he hopes to do, by his translations, for
    the enlightenment of his people.]


I. THE BATTLE OF ASHDOWN.

  [From the _Chronicle_, Parker MS. The event and date are
  significant. The Danes had for the first time invaded Wessex.
  Alfred's older brother, Ethelred, was king; but to Alfred belongs
  the glory of the victory at Ashdown (Berkshire). Asser (_Life of
  Alfred_) tells us that for a long time Ethelred remained praying
  in his tent, while Alfred and his followers went forth "like a
  wild boar against the hounds."]

[[page 99]]

   1   871. Hêr cuôm[1] sê here tô Rêadingum on Westseaxe,
   2 ond þæs ymb iii niht ridon ii eorlas ûp. Þa gemêtte hîe

[[page 100]]

   1 Æþelwulf aldorman[2] on Englafelda, ond him þæ:r wiþ gefeaht,
   2 ond sige nam. Þæs ymb iiii niht Æþered cyning
   3 ond Ælfred his brôþur[3] þæ:r micle fierd tô Rêadingum
   4 gelæ:ddon, ond wiþ þone here gefuhton; ond þæ:r wæs
   5 micel wæl geslægen on gehwæþre hond, ond Æþelwulf
   6 aldormon wearþ ofslægen; ond þa Deniscan âhton wælstôwe
   7 gewald.

   8   Ond þæs ymb iiii niht gefeaht Æþered cyning ond
   9 Ælfred his brôþur wiþ alne[4] þone here on Æscesdûne.
  10 Ond hîe wæ:run[5] on twæ:m gefylcum: on ôþrum wæs
  11 Bâchsecg ond Halfdene þâ hæ:þnan cyningas, ond on
  12 ôþrum wæ:ron þâ eorlas. Ond þâ gefeaht sê cyning
  13 Æþered wiþ þâra cyninga getruman, ond þæ:r wearþ sê
  14 cyning Bâgsecg ofslægen; ond Ælfred his brôþur wiþ
  15 þâra eorla getruman, ond þæ:r wearþ Sidroc eorl ofslægen
  16 sê alda,[6] ond Sidroc eorl sê gioncga,[7] ond Ôsbearn eorl,
  17 ond Fræ:na eorl, ond Hareld eorl; ond þâ hergas[8] bêgen
  18 geflîemde, ond fela þûsenda ofslægenra, ond onfeohtende
  19 wæ:ron oþ niht.

  20   Ond þæs ymb xiiii niht gefeaht Æþered cyning ond
  21 Ælfred his brôður wiþ þone here æt Basengum, ond þæ:r
  22 þa Deniscan sige nâmon.

  23   Ond þæs ymb ii mônaþ gefeaht Æþered cyning ond
  24 Ælfred his brôþur wiþ þone here æt Meretûne, ond hîe
  25 wæ:run on tuæ:m[9] gefylcium, ond hîe bûtû geflîemdon, ond
  26 longe on dæg sige âhton; ond þæ:r wearþ micel wælsliht
  27 on gehwæþere hond; ond þâ Deniscan âhton wælstôwe

[[page 101]]

   1 gewald; ond þær wearþ Hêahmund bisceop ofslægen,
   2 ond fela gôdra monna. Ond æfter þissum gefeohte cuôm[1]
   3 micel sumorlida.

   4   Ond þæs ofer Êastron gefôr Æþered cyning; ond hê
   5 rîcsode v gêar; ond his lîc lîþ æt Wînburnan.

   6   Þâ fêng Ælfred Æþelwulfing his brôþur tô Wesseaxna
   7 rîce. Ond þæs ymb ânne mônaþ gefeaht Ælfred cyning
   8 wiþ alne[4] þone here ly:tle werede[10] æt Wiltûne, ond hine
   9 longe on dæg geflîemde, ond þâ Deniscan âhton wælstôwe
  10 gewald.

  11   Ond þæs gêares wurdon viiii folcgefeoht gefohten wiþ
  12 þone here on þy: cynerîce be sûþan Temese, bûtan þâm þe
  13 him Ælfred þæs cyninges brôþur ond ânlîpig aldormon[2] ond
  14 cyninges þegnas oft râde onridon þe mon nâ ne rîmde;
  15 ond þæs gêares wæ:run[5] ofslægene viiii eorlas ond ân cyning.
  16 Ond þy: gêare nâmon Westseaxe friþ wiþ þone here.

CONSULT GLOSSARY AND PARADIGMS UNDER FORMS GIVEN BELOW.

No note is made of such variants as y (y:) or i (î) for ie (îe). See
Glossary under ie (îe); occurrences, also, of #and# for #ond#, #land#
for #lond#, are found on almost every page of Early West Saxon. Such
words should be sought for under the more common forms, #ond#, #lond#.

    [1] = cwôm.
    [2] = ealdormon.
    [3] = brôþor.
    [4] = ealne.
    [5] = wæ:ron.
    [6] = ealda.
    [7] = geonga.
    [8] = heras.
    [9] = twæ:m.
    [10] = werode.

    [Linenotes:

    100.8. #gefeaht#. Notice that the singular is used. This is the
    more common construction in O.E. when a compound subject,
    composed of singular members, follows its predicate. Cf. _For
    thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory_. See also
    p. 107, note on #wæs#.]  [[Linenote 107.14-15]]

    100.18. #ond fela þûsenda ofslægenra#, _and there were many
    thousands of slain_ (§ 91).

    101.12: #bûtan þâm þe#, etc., _besides which, Alfred ... made
    raids against them_ (#him#), _which were not counted_. See § 70,
    Note.]


II. A PRAYER OF KING ALFRED.

  [With this characteristic prayer, Alfred concludes his translation
  of Boëthius's _Consolation of Philosophy_. Unfortunately, the only
  extant MS. (Bodleian 180) is Late West Saxon. I follow, therefore,
  Prof. A. S. Cook's normalization on an Early West Saxon basis. See
  Cook's _First Book in Old English_, p. 163.]

[[page 102]]

   1   Dryhten, ælmihtiga God, Wyrhta and Wealdend ealra
   2 gesceafta, ic bidde ðê for ðînre miclan mildheortnesse,
   3 and for ðæ:re hâlgan rôde tâcne, and for Sanctæ Marian
   4 mægðhâde, and for Sancti Michaeles gehîersumnesse, and
   5 for ealra ðînra hâlgena lufan and hîera earnungum, ðæt
   6 ðû mê gewissie bet ðonne ic âworhte tô ðê; and gewissa
   7 mê tô ðînum willan, and tô mînre sâwle ðearfe, bet ðonne
   8 ic self cunne; and gestaðela mîn môd tô ðinum willan and
   9 tô mînre sâwle ðearfe; and gestranga mê wið ðæs dêofles
  10 costnungum; and âfierr fram mê ðâ fûlan gâlnesse and
  11 æ:lce unrihtwîsnesse; and gescield mê wið mînum wiðerwinnum,
  12 gesewenlîcum and ungesewenlîcum; and tæ:c mê
  13 ðînne willan tô wyrceanne; ðæt ic mæge ðê inweardlîce
  14 lufian tôforan eallum ðingum, mid clæ:num geðance and
  15 mid clæ:num lîchaman. For ðon ðe ðû eart mîn Scieppend,
  16 and mîn Alîesend, mîn Fultum, mîn Frôfor, mîn Trêownes,
  17 and mîn Tôhopa. Sîe ðê lof and wuldor nû and
  18 â â â, tô worulde bûtan æ:ghwilcum ende. Amen.

    [Linenotes:

    3-4: #Marian ... Michaeles#. O.E. is inconsistent in the
    treatment of foreign names. They are sometimes naturalized, and
    sometimes retain in part their original inflections. #Marian#,
    an original accusative, is here used as a genitive; while
    #Michaeles# has the O.E. genitive ending.

    17: #Sîe ðê lof#. See § 105, 1.]


III. THE VOYAGES OF OHTHERE AND WULFSTAN.

  [Lauderdale and Cottonian MSS. These voyages are an original
  insertion by Alfred into his translation of Orosius's _Compendious
  History of the World_.

  "They consist," says Ten Brink, "of a complete description of all
  the countries in which the Teutonic tongue prevailed at Alfred's
  time, and a full narrative of the travels of two voyagers, which
  the king wrote down from their own lips. One of these, a Norwegian
  named Ohthere, had quite circumnavigated the coast of Scandinavia
  in his travels, and had even penetrated to the White Sea; the
  other, named Wulfstan, had sailed from Schleswig to Frische Haff.
  The geographical and ethnographical details of both accounts are
  exceedingly interesting, and their style is attractive, clear, and
  concrete."

  Ohthere made two voyages. Sailing first northward along the
  western coast of Norway, he rounded the North Cape, passed into
  the White Sea, and entered the Dwina River (#ân micel êa#). On his
  second voyage he sailed southward along the western coast of
  Norway, entered the Skager Rack (#wîdsæ:#), passed through the
  Cattegat, and anchored at the Danish port of Haddeby (#æt Hæ:þum#),
  modern Schleswig.

  Wulfstan sailed only in the Baltic Sea. His voyage of seven days
  from Schleswig brought him to Drausen (#Trûsô#) on the shore of
  the Drausensea.]


[[page 103]]

#Ohthere's First Voyage.#

   1   Ôthere sæ:de his hlâforde, Ælfrede cyninge, þæt hê
   2 ealra Norðmonna norþmest bûde. Hê cwæð þæt hê bûde
   3 on þæ:m lande norþweardum wiþ þâ Westsæ. Hê sæ:de
   4 þêah þæt þæt land sîe swîþe lang norþ þonan; ac hit is
   5 eal wêste, bûton on fêawum stôwum styccemælum wîciað
   6 Finnas, on huntoðe on wintra, ond on sumera on fiscaþe
   7 be þæ:re sæ:. Hê sæ:de þæt hê æt sumum cirre wolde
   8 fandian hû longe þæt land norþryhte læ:ge, oþþe hwæðer
   9 æ:nig mon be norðan þæ:m wêstenne bûde. Þâ fôr hê
  10 norþryhte be þæ:m lande: lêt him ealne weg þæt wêste
  11 land on ðæt stêorbord, ond þâ wîdsæ: on ðæt bæcbord þrîe
  12 dagas. Þâ wæs hê swâ feor norþ swâ þâ hwælhuntan
  13 firrest faraþ. Þâ fôr hê þâ gîet norþryhte swâ feor swâ
  14 hê meahte on þæ:m ôþrum þrîm dagum gesiglan. Þâ bêag
  15 þæt land þæ:r êastryhte, oþþe sêo sæ: in on ðæt lond, hê
  16 nysse hwæðer, bûton hê wisse ðæt hê ðæ:r bâd westanwindes
  17 ond hwôn norþan, ond siglde ðâ êast be lande
  18 swâ swâ hê meahte on fêower dagum gesiglan. Þâ
  19 sceolde hê ðæ:r bîdan ryhtnorþanwindes, for ðæ:m þæt
  20 land bêag þæ:r sûþryhte, oþþe sêo sæ: in on ðæt land, hê
  21 nysse hwæþer. Þâ siglde hê þonan sûðryhte be lande

[[page 104]]

   1 swâ swâ hê mehte[1] on fîf dagum gesiglan. Ðâ læg þæ:r
   2 ân micel êa ûp in on þæt land. Þâ cirdon hîe ûp in on
   3 ðâ êa, for þæ:m hîe ne dorston forþ bî þæ:re êa siglan for
   4 unfriþe; for þæ:m ðæt land wæs eall gebûn on ôþre healfe
   5 þæ:re êas. Ne mêtte hê æ:r nân gebûn land, siþþan hê
   6 from his âgnum hâm fôr; ac him wæs ealne weg wêste
   7 land on þæt stêorbord, bûtan fiscerum ond fugelerum ônd
   8 huntum, ond þæt wæ:ron eall Finnas; ond him wæs â
   9 wîdsæ: on ðæt bæcbord. Þâ Beormas hæfdon swîþe wel
  10 gebûd hira land: ac hîe ne dorston þæ:r on cuman. Ac
  11 þâra Terfinna land wæs eal wêste, bûton ðæ:r huntan
  12 gewîcodon, oþþe fisceras, oþþe fugeleras.

    [1] = meahte, mihte.

    [Linenotes:

    104.6: #from his âgnum hâm#. An adverbial dative singular
    without an inflectional ending is found with #hâm#, #dæg#,
    #morgen#, and #æ:fen#.

    104.8: #ond þæt wæ:ron#. See § 40, Note 3.]

  13   Fela spella him sæ:don þâ Beormas æ:gþer ge of hiera
  14 âgnum lande ge of þæ:m landum þe ymb hîe ûtan wæ:ron;
  15 ac hê nyste hwæt þæs sôþes wæs, for þæ:m hê hit self ne
  16 geseah. Þâ Finnas, him þûhte, ond þâ Beormas spræ:con
  17 nêah ân geþêode. Swîþost hê fôr ðider, tô êacan þæs
  18 landes scêawunge, for þæ:m horshwælum, for ðæ:m hîe
  19 habbað swîþe æþele bân on hiora[2] tôþum--þâ têð hîe brôhton
  20 sume þæ:m cyninge--ond hiora hy:d bið swîðe gôd tô
  21 sciprâpum. Sê hwæl bið micle læ:ssa þonne ôðre hwalas:
  22 ne bið hê lengra ðonne syfan[3] elna lang; ac on his âgnum
  23 lande is sê betsta hwælhuntað: þâ bêoð eahta and fêowertiges
  24 elna lange, and þâ mæ:stan fîftiges elna lange;
  25 þâra hê sæ:de þæt hê syxa sum ofslôge syxtig on twâm
  26 dagum.

    [2] = hiera.
    [3] = seofon.

    [Linenotes:

    104.15: #hwæt þæs sôþes wæs#. Sweet errs in explaining #sôþes#
    as attracted into the genitive by #þæs#. It is not a predicate
    adjective, but a partitive genitive after #hwæt#.

    104.25: #syxa sum#. See § 91, Note 2.]

[[page 105]]

   1   Hê wæs swy:ðe spêdig man on þæ:m æ:htum þe heora[2]
   2 spêda on bêoð, þæt is, on wildrum. Hê hæfde þâ gy:t, ðâ
   3 hê þone cyningc[5] sôhte, tamra dêora unbebohtra syx hund.
   4 Þâ dêor hî hâtað 'hrânas'; þâra wæ:ron syx stælhrânas;
   5 ðâ bêoð swy:ðe dy:re mid Finnum, for ðæ:m hy: fôð þâ
   6 wildan hrânas mid. Hê wæs mid þæ:m fyrstum mannum
   7 on þæ:m lande: næfde hê þêah mâ ðonne twêntig hry:ðera,
   8 and twêntig scêapa, and twêntig swy:na; and þæt ly:tle
   9 þæt hê erede, hê erede mid horsan.[4] Ac hyra âr is mæ:st
  10 on þæ:m gafole þe ðâ Finnas him gyldað. Þæt gafol bið
  11 on dêora fellum, and on fugela feðerum, and hwales bâne,
  12 and on þæ:m sciprâpum þe bêoð of hwæles hy:de geworht
  13 and of sêoles. Æ:ghwilc gylt be hys gebyrdum. Sê byrdesta
  14 sceall gyldan fîfty:ne mearðes fell, and fîf hrânes,
  15 and ân beren fel, and ty:n ambra feðra, and berenne kyrtel
  16 oððe yterenne, and twêgen sciprâpas; æ:gþer sy: syxtig
  17 elna lang, ôþer sy: of hwæles hy:de geworht, ôþer of sîoles.[6]

    [2] = hiera.
    [4] = horsum.
    [5] = cyning.
    [6] = sêoles.

    [Linenote:

    105.2: #on bêoð#. See § 94, (5).]

  18   Hê sæ:de ðæt Norðmanna land wæ:re swy:þe lang and
  19 swy:ðe smæl. Eal þæt his man âðer oððe ettan oððe erian
  20 mæg, þæt lîð wið ðâ sæ:; and þæt is þêah on sumum
  21 stôwum swy:ðe clûdig; and licgað wilde môras wið êastan
  22 and wið ûpp on emnlange þæ:m by:num lande. On þæ:m
  23 môrum eardiað Finnas. And þæt by:ne land is êasteweard
  24 brâdost, and symle swâ norðor swâ smælre. Êastewerd[7]
  25 hit mæg bîon[8] syxtig mîla brâd, oþþe hwêne bræ:dre;
  26 and middeweard þrîtig oððe brâdre; and norðeweard hê
  27 cwæð, þæ:r hit smalost wæ:re, þæt hit mihte bêon þrêora
  28 mîla brâd tô þæ:m môre; and sê môr syðþan,[9] on sumum

[[page 106]]

   1 stôwum, swâ brâd swâ man mæg on twâm wucum oferfêran;
   2 and on sumum stôwum swâ brâd swâ man mæg
   3 on syx dagum oferfêran.

    [7] = -weard.
    [8] = bêon.
    [9] = siððan.

    [Linenote:

    105.19: #Eal þæt his man#. Pronominal genitives are not always
    possessive in O.E.; #his# is here the partitive genitive of
    #hit#, the succeeding relative pronoun being omitted: _All that
    (portion) of it that may, either-of-the-two, either be grazed or
    plowed_, etc. (§ 70, Note).]

   4   Ðonne is tôemnes þæ:m lande sûðeweardum, on ôðre
   5 healfe þæs môres, Swêoland, oþ þæt land norðeweard;
   6 and tôemnes þæ:m lande norðeweardum, Cwêna land. Þâ
   7 Cwênas hergiað hwîlum on ðâ Norðmen ofer ðone môr,
   8 hwîlum þâ Norðmen on hy:. And þæ:r sint swîðe micle
   9 meras fersce geond þâ môras; and berað þâ Cwênas hyra
  10 scypu ofer land on ðâ meras, and þanon hergiað on ðâ
  11 Norðmen; hy: habbað swy:ðe ly:tle scypa and swy:ðe
  12 leohte.

    [Linenote:

    106.11-12: #scypa ... leohte#. These words exhibit inflections
    more frequent in Late than in Early West Saxon. The normal forms
    would be #scypu#, #leoht#; but in Late West Saxon the -u of
    short-stemmed neuters is generally replaced by -a; and the
    nominative accusative plural neuter of adjectives takes, by
    analogy, the masculine endings; #hwate#, #gôde#, #hâlge#,
    instead of #hwatu#, #gôd#, #hâlgu#.]


#Ohthere's Second Voyage.#

  13   Ôhthere sæ:de þæt sîo[1] scîr hâtte Hâlgoland, þe hê on
  14 bûde. Hê cwæð þæt nân man ne bûde be norðan him.
  15 Þonne is ân port on sûðeweardum þæ:m lande, þone man
  16 hæ:t Sciringeshêal. Þyder hê cwæð þæt man ne mihte
  17 geseglian on ânum mônðe, gyf man on niht wîcode, and
  18 æ:lce dæge hæfde ambyrne wind; and ealle ðâ hwîle hê
  19 sceal seglian be lande. And on þæt stêorbord him bið
  20 æ:rest Îraland, and þonne ðâ îgland þe synd betux Îralande
  21 and þissum lande. Þonne is þis land, oð hê cymð
  22 tô Scirincgeshêale, and ealne weg on þæt bæcbord Norðweg.

[[page 107]]

   1 Wið sûðan þone Sciringeshêal fylð swy:ðe mycel
   2 sæ: ûp in on ðæt land; sêo is brâdre þonne æ:nig man ofer
   3 sêon mæge. And is Gotland on ôðre healfe ongêan, and
   4 siððan Sillende. Sêo sæ: lîð mænig[2] hund mîla ûp in on
   5 þæt land.

    [1] = sêo.
    [2] = monig.

   6   And of Sciringeshêale hê cwæð ðæt hê seglode on fîf
   7 dagan[3] tô þæ:m porte þe mon hæ:t æt Hæ:þum; sê stent
   8 betuh Winedum, and Seaxum, and Angle, and hy:rð in
   9 on Dene. Ðâ hê þiderweard seglode fram Sciringeshêale,
  10 þâ wæs him on þæt bæcbord Denamearc and on
  11 þæt stêorbord wîdsæ: þry: dagas; and þâ, twêgen dagas æ:r
  12 hê tô Hæ:þum côme, him wæs on þæt stêorbord Gotland,
  13 and Sillende, and îglanda fela. On þæ:m landum eardodon
  14 Engle, æ:r hî hider on land côman.[4] And hym wæs
  15 ðâ twêgen dagas on ðæt bæcbord þâ îgland þe in on
  16 Denemearce hy:rað.

    [3] = dagum.
    [4] = cômen.

    [Linenotes:

    107.7: #æt Hæ:þum#. "This pleonastic use of _æt_ with names of
    places occurs elsewhere in the older writings, as in the
    Chronicle (552), 'in þæ:re stôwe þe is genemned æt Searobyrg,'
    where the _æt_ has been erased by some later hand, showing that
    the idiom had become obsolete. _Cp._ the German 'Gasthaus zur
    Krone,' Stamboul = _es tân pólin_." (Sweet.) See, also,
    _Atterbury_, § 28, Note 3.

    107.14-15: #wæs ... þâ îgland#. The singular predicate is due
    again to inversion (p. 100, note on #gefeaht# [[linenote
    100.8]]). The construction is comparatively rare in O.E., but
    frequent in Shakespeare and in the popular speech of to-day. Cf.
    _There is_, _Here is_, _There has been_, etc., with a (single)
    plural subject following.]


#Wulfstan's Voyage.#

  17   Wulfstân sæ:de þæt hê gefôre of Hæ:ðum, þæt hê wæ:re
  18 on Trûsô on syfan dagum and nihtum, þæt þæt scip wæs
  19 ealne weg yrnende under segle. Weonoðland him wæs

[[page 108]]

   1 on stêorbord, and on bæcbord him wæs Langaland, and
   2 Læ:land, and Falster, and Scônêg; and þâs land eall
   3 hy:rað tô Denemearcan. And þonne Burgenda land wæs
   4 ûs on bæcbord, and þâ habbað him sylfe[1] cyning. Þonne
   5 æfter Burgenda lande wæ:ron ûs þâs land, þâ synd hâtene
   6 æ:rest Blêcinga-êg, and Mêore, and Êowland, and Gotland
   7 on bæcbord; and þâs land hy:rað tô Swêom. And Weonodland
   8 wæs ûs ealne weg on stêorbord oð Wîslemûðan.
   9 Sêo Wîsle is swy:ðe mycel êa, and hîo[2] tôlîð Wîtland and
  10 Weonodland; and þæt Wîtland belimpeð tô Estum; and
  11 sêo Wîsle lîð ût of Weonodlande, and lîð in Estmere;
  12 and sê Estmere is hûru fîftêne[3] mîla brâd. Þonne cymeð
  13 Ilfing êastan in Estmere of ðâm mere, ðe Trûsô standeð
  14 in stæðe; and cumað ût samod in Estmere, Ilfing êastan
  15 of Estlande, and Wîsle sûðan of Winodlande. And
  16 þonne benimð Wîsle Ilfing hire naman, and ligeð of þæ:m
  17 mere west and norð on sæ:; for ðy: hit man hæ:t
  18 Wîslemûða.

    [1] = selfe.
    [2] = hêo.
    [3] = fîftîene.

    [Linenote:

    108.1-4: #him ... ûs#. Note the characteristic change of person,
    the transition from _indirect_ to _direct discourse_.]

  19   Þæt Estland is swy:ðe mycel, and þæ:r bið swy:ðe manig
  20 burh, and on æ:lcere byrig bið cyning. And þæ:r bið
  21 swy:ðe mycel hunig, and fiscnað; and sê cyning and þâ
  22 rîcostan men drincað my:ran meolc, and þâ unspêdigan
  23 and þâ þêowan drincað medo.[4] Þæ:r bið swy:ðe mycel
  24 gewinn betwêonan him. And ne bið ðæ:r næ:nig ealo[5]
  25 gebrowen mid Estum, ac þæ:r bið medo genôh. And þæ:r
  26 is mid Estum ðêaw, þonne þæ:r bið man dêad, þæt hê lîð
  27 inne unforbærned mid his mâgum and frêondum mônað,
  28 ge hwîlum twêgen; and þâ cyningas, and þâ ôðre hêahðungene
  29 men, swâ micle lencg[6] swâ hî mâran spêda
  30 habbað, hwîlum healf gêar þæt hî bêoð unforbærned, and

[[page 109]]

   1 licgað bufan eorðan on hyra hûsum. And ealle þâ hwîle
   2 þe þæt lîc bið inne, þæ:r sceal bêon gedrync and plega,
   3 oð ðone dæg þe hî hine forbærnað. Þonne þy: ylcan dæge
   4 þe hî hine tô þæ:m âde beran wyllað, þonne tôdæ:lað hî
   5 his feoh, þæt þæ:r tô lâfe bið æfter þæ:m gedrynce and þæ:m
   6 plegan, on fîf oððe syx, hwy:lum on mâ, swâ swâ þæs fêos
   7 andêfn bið. Âlecgað hit ðonne forhwæga on ânre mîle
   8 þone mæ:stan dæ:l fram þæ:m tûne, þonne ôðerne, ðonne
   9 þone þriddan, oþ þe hyt eall âlêd bið on þæ:re ânre mîle;
  10 and sceall bêon sê læ:sta dæ:l ny:hst þæ:m tûne ðe sê dêada
  11 man on lið. Ðonne sceolon[7] bêon gesamnode ealle ðâ
  12 menn ðe swyftoste hors habbað on þæ:m lande, forhwæga
  13 on fîf mîlum oððe on syx mîlum fram þæ:m fêo. Þonne
  14 ærnað hy: ealle tôweard þæ:m fêo: ðonne cymeð sê man
  15 sê þæt swiftoste hors hafað tô þæ:m æ:restan dæ:le and tô
  16 þæ:m mæ:stan, and swâ æ:lc æfter ôðrum, oþ hit bið eall
  17 genumen; and sê nimð þone læ:stan dæ:l sê ny:hst þæ:m
  18 tûne þæt feoh geærneð. And þonne rîdeð æ:lc hys weges
  19 mid ðæ:m fêo, and hyt môtan[8] habban eall; and for ðy:
  20 þæ:r bêoð þâ swiftan hors ungefôge dy:re. And þonne his
  21 gestrêon bêoð þus eall âspended, þonne byrð man hine ût,
  22 and forbærneð mid his wæ:pnum and hrægle; and swîðost

[[page 110]]

   1 ealle hys spêda hy: forspendað mid þæ:m langan legere
   2 þæs dêadan mannes inne, and þæs þe hy: be þæ:m wegum
   3 âlecgað, þe ðâ fremdan tô ærnað, and nimað. And þæt
   4 is mid Estum þêaw þæt þæ:r sceal æ:lces geðêodes man
   5 bêon forbærned; and gyf þâr[9] man ân bân findeð unforbærned,
   6 hî hit sceolan[7] miclum gebêtan. And þæ:r is mid
   7 Estum ân mæ:gð þæt hî magon cyle gewyrcan; and þy:
   8 þæ:r licgað þâ dêadan men swâ lange, and ne fûliað, þæt
   9 hy: wyrcað þone cyle him on. And þêah man âsette
  10 twêgen fæ:tels full ealað oððe wæteres, hy: gedôð þæt
  11 æ:gþer bið oferfroren, sam hit sy: sumor sam winter.

    [4] = medu.
    [5] = ealu.
    [6] = leng.
    [7] = sculon.
    [8] = môton.
    [9] = ðæ:r.

    [Linenotes:

    109.2: #sceal#. See § 137, Note 2 (2).

    109.7: #Âlecgað hit#. Bosworth illustrates thus:

    vi    v     iv   iii    ii    i      1     2    3    4   5   6
    |     |     |     |     |     |      X
    |     |     |     |     |     |      XX    X    X
    |     |     |     |     |     |      XXX   XX   XX   X   X
    -------------------------------      XXXX  XXX  XXX  XX  XX  X
    _e_  _d_                             _c_   _b_              _a_
    Where the horsemen                 The six parts of the property
      assemble.                          placed within one mile.

    "The horsemen assemble five or six miles from the property, at
    _d_ or _e_, and run towards _c_; the man who has the swiftest
    horse, coming first to 1 or _c_, takes the first and largest
    part. The man who has the horse coming second takes part 2 or
    _b_, and so, in succession, till the least part, 6 or _a_, is
    taken."

    110.5-6: #man ... hî#. Here the plural #hî# refers to the
    singular #man#. _Cf._ p. 109, ll. 18-19, #æ:lc ... môtan#. In
    _Exodus_ xxxii, 24, we find "_Whosoever_ hath any gold, let
    _them_ break it off"; and Addison writes, "I do not mean that I
    think _anyone_ to blame for taking due care of _their_ health."
    The construction, though outlawed now, has been common in all
    periods of our language. Paul remarks (_Prinzipien der
    Sprachgeschichte_, 3d ed., § 186) that "When a word is used as
    an indefinite [one, man, somebody, etc.] it is, strictly
    speaking, incapable of any distinction of number. Since,
    however, in respect of the external form, a particular number
    has to be chosen, it is a matter of indifference which this
    is.... Hence a change of numbers is common in the different
    languages." Paul fails to observe that the change is always from
    singular to plural, not from plural to singular. See _Note on
    the Concord of Collectives and Indefinites_ (Anglia XI, 1901).
    See p. 119, note on ll. 19-21.]


IV. THE STORY OF CÆDMON.

  [From the so-called Alfredian version of Bede's _Ecclesiastical
  History_. The text generally followed is that of MS. Bodley,
  Tanner 10. Miller (_Early English Text Society_, No. 95,
  _Introd._) argues, chiefly from the use of the prepositions, that
  the original O.E. MS. was Mercian, composed possibly in Lichfield
  (Staffordshire). At any rate, O.E. idiom is frequently sacrificed
  to the Latin original.

  "Cædmon, as he is called, is the first Englishman whose name we
  know who wrote poetry in our island of England; and the first to
  embody in verse the new passions and ideas which Christianity had
  brought into England.... Undisturbed by any previous making of
  lighter poetry, he came fresh to the work of Christianising
  English song. It was a great step to make. He built the chariot in
  which all the new religious emotions of England could now drive
  along." (Brooke, _The History of Early English Literature_,
  cap. XV.) There is no reason to doubt the historical existence of
  Cædmon; for Bede, who relates the story, lived near Whitby, and
  was seven years old when Cædmon died (A.D. 680)].

[[page 111]]

   1   In ðysse abbudissan mynstre wæs sum brôðor syndriglîce
   2 mid godcundre gife gemæ:red ond geweorðad, for þon
   3 he gewunade gerisenlîce lêoð wyrcan, þâ ðe tô æ:festnisse[1]
   4 ond tô ârfæstnisse belumpon; swâ ðætte swâ hwæt swâ
   5 hê of godcundum stafum þurh bôceras geleornode, þæt hê
   6 æfter medmiclum fæce in scopgereorde mid þâ mæ:stan
   7 swêtnisse ond inbryrdnisse geglengde, ond in Engliscgereorde
   8 wel geworht forþ brôhte. Ond for his lêoþsongum

[[page 112]]

   1 monigra monna môd oft to worulde forhogdnisse ond tô
   2 geþêodnisse þæs heofonlîcan lîfes onbærnde wæ:ron. Ond
   3 êac swelce[2] monige ôðre æfter him in Ongelþêode ongunnon
   4 æ:feste lêoð wyrcan, ac næ:nig hwæðre him þæt gelîce
   5 dôn ne meahte; for þon hê nâlæs from monnum nê ðurh
   6 mon gelæ:red wæs þæt hê ðone lêoðcræft leornade, ac hê
   7 wæs godcundlîce gefultumod, ond þurh Godes gife þone
   8 songcræft onfêng; ond hê for ðon næ:fre nôht lêasunge,
   9 nê îdles lêoþes wyrcan ne meahte, ac efne þâ ân ðâ ðê tô
  10 æ:festnisse[1] belumpon ond his þâ æ:festan tungan gedafenode
  11 singan.

    [1] = æ:fæstnesse.
    [2] = swilce.

    [Linenotes:

    111.1: #ðysse abbudissan.# The abbess referred to is the famous
    Hild, or Hilda, then living in the monastery at Streones-halh,
    which, according to Bede, means "Bay of the Beacon." The Danes
    afterward gave it the name Whitby, or "White Town." The
    surroundings were eminently fitted to nurture England's first
    poet. "The natural scenery which surrounded him, the valley of
    the Esk, on whose sides he probably lived, the great cliffs, the
    billowy sea, the vast sky seen from the heights over the ocean,
    played incessantly upon him." (Brooke.)

    Note, also, in this connection, the numerous Latin words that
    the introduction of Christianity (A.D. 597) brought into the
    vocabulary of O.E.: #abbudisse#, #mynster#, #bisceop#, #Læ:den#,
    #prêost#, #æstel#, #mancus#.

    112.4-5: The more usual order of words would be #ac næ:nig,
    hwæðre, ne meahte ðæt dôn gelîce him#.

    112.10-11: #ond his ... singan#, _and which it became his (the)
    pious tongue to sing_.]

  12   Wæs hê, sê mon, in weoruldhâde[3] geseted oð þâ tîde þe
  13 hê wæs gely:fdre ylde, ond næ:fre næ:nig lêoð geleornade.
  14 Ond hê for þon oft in gebêorscipe, þonne þæ:r wæs blisse
  15 intinga gedêmed, þæt hêo[4] ealle sceolden þurh endebyrdnesse
  16 be hearpan singan, þonne hê geseah þâ hearpan him
  17 nêalêcan, þonne ârâs hê for scome from þæ:m symble,
  18 ond hâm êode tô his hûse. Þâ hê þæt þâ sumre tîde
  19 dyde, þæt hê forlêt þæt hûs þæs gebêorscipes, ond ût wæs

[[page 113]]

   1 gongende tô nêata scipene, þâra heord him wæs þæ:re
   2 nihte beboden; þâ hê ðâ þæ:r on gelimplîcre tîde his
   3 leomu[5] on reste gesette ond onslêpte, þa stôd him sum
   4 mon æt þurh swefn, ond hine hâlette ond grêtte, ond hine
   5 be his noman nemnde: "Cædmon, sing mê hwæthwugu."
   6 Þâ ondswarede hê, ond cwæð: "Ne con ic nôht singan;
   7 ond ic for þon of þyssum gebêorscipe ût êode ond hider
   8 gewât, for þon ic nâht singan ne cûðe." Eft hê cwæð sê ðe
   9 wið hine sprecende wæs: "Hwæðre þû meaht mê singan."
  10 Þâ cwæð hê: "Hwæt sceal ic singan?" Cwæð hê: "Sing
  11 mê frumsceaft." Þâ hê ðâ þâs andsware onfêng, þâ
  12 ongon hê sôna singan, in herenesse Godes Scyppendes,
  13 þâ fers ond þâ word þe hê næ:fre ne gehy:rde, þâra endebyrdnes
  14 þis is:

    [3] = woruldhâde.
    [4] = hîe.
    [5] = limu.

    [Linenotes:

    112.14-15: #blisse intinga#, _for the sake of joy_; but the
    translator has confused _laetitiae causâ_ (ablative) and
    _laetitiae causa_ (nominative). The proper form would be #for
    blisse# with omission of #intingan#, just as _for my sake_ is
    usually #for mê#; _for his_ (_or their_) _sake_, #for him#. _Cf.
    Mark_ vi, 26: "Yet _for his oath's sake, and for their sakes
    which sat with him_, he would not reject her," #for ðæ:m âðe, ond
    for ðæ:m þe him mid sæ:ton#. _For his sake_ is frequently #for his
    ðingon# (#ðingum#), rarely #for his intingan#. #Þingon# is
    regularly used when the preceding genitive is a noun denoting a
    person: _for my wife's sake_, #for mînes wîfes ðingon#
    (_Genesis_ xx, 11), etc.

    112.18-19: #þæt ... þæt hê forlêt#. The substantival clause
    introduced by the second #þæt# amplifies by apposition the first
    #þæt#: _When he then, at a certain time_ (instrumental case,
    § 98, (2)), _did that, namely, when he left the house_. The
    better Mn.E. would be _this ... that_: "Added yet _this_ above
    all, _that_ he shut up John in prison" (_Luke_ iv, 20).

    113.1-2: #þâra ... beboden#. This does not mean that Cædmon was
    a herdsman, but that he served in turn as did the other secular
    attendants at the monastery.

    113.13-14: #þâra endebyrdnes þis is#. Bede writes _Hic est
    sensus, non autem ordo ipse verborum_, and gives in Latin prose
    a translation of the hymn from the Northumbrian dialect, in
    which Cædmon wrote. The O.E. version given above is, of course,
    not the Northumbrian original (which, however, with some
    variations is preserved in several of the Latin MSS. of Bede's
    _History_), but a West Saxon version made also from the
    Northumbrian, not from the Latin.]

  15    Nû sculon herigean[6]   heofonrîces Weard,
  16    Metodes meahte   ond his môdgeþanc,
  17    weorc Wuldorfæder,   swâ hê wundra gehwæs,
  18    êce Drihten   ôr onstealde.

[[page 114]]

   1    Hê æ:rest scêop   eorðan bearnum
   2    heofon tô hrôfe,   hâlig Scyppend;
   3    þâ middangeard   monncynnes Weard,
   4    êce Drihten,   æfter têode
   5    fîrum foldan,   Frêa ælmihtig.

    [6] = herian.

    [Linenotes:

    113.15: #Nû sculon herigean#, _Now ought we to praise_. The
    subject #wê# is omitted in the best MSS. Note the characteristic
    use of synonyms, or epithets, in this bit of O.E. poetry.
    Observe that it is not the _thought_ that is repeated, but
    rather the _idea_, the _concept_, God. See p. 124.
    [[Poetry: Structure]]

    113.17: #wundra gehwæs#. See p. 140, note on #cênra gehwylcum#
    [[_Beowulf_ 769]].]

   6   Þâ ârâs hê from þæ:m slæ:pe, ond eal þâ þe hê slæ:pende
   7 song fæste in gemynde hæfde; ond þæ:m wordum sôna
   8 monig word in þæt ilce gemet Gode wyrðes songes
   9 tôgeþêodde. Þâ côm hê on morgenne tô þæ:m tûngerêfan,
  10 sê þe his ealdormon wæs: sægde him hwylce gife hê
  11 onfêng; ond hê hine sôna tô þæ:re abbudissan gelæ:dde,
  12 ond hire þæt cy:ðde ond sægde. Þâ heht hêo gesomnian
  13 ealle þâ gelæ:redestan men ond þâ leorneras, ond him
  14 ondweardum hêt secgan þæt swefn, ond þæt lêoð singan,
  15 þæt ealra heora[7] dôme gecoren wæ:re, hwæt oððe hwonan
  16 þæt cumen wæ:re. Þâ wæs him eallum gesewen, swâ swâ
  17 hit wæs, þæt him wæ:re from Drihtne sylfum heofonlîc

[[page 115]]

   1 gifu forgifen. Þâ rehton heo[4] him ond sægdon sum hâlig
   2 spell ond godcundre lâre word: bebudon him þâ, gif hê
   3  meahte, þæt hê in swînsunge lêoþsonges þæt gehwyrfde.
   4 Þâ hê ðâ hæfde þâ wîsan onfongne, þâ êode hê hâm tô
   5  his hûse, ond cwôm eft on morgenne, ond þy: betstan
   6 lêoðe geglenged him âsong ond âgeaf þæt him beboden
   7 wæs.

    [4] = hîe.
    [7] = hiera.

    [Linenotes:

    114.7-9: #ond þæ:m wordum ... tôgeþêodde#, _and to those words he
    soon joined, in the same meter, many (other) words of song
    worthy of God_. But the translator has not only blundered over
    Bede's Latin (_eis mox plura in eundem modum verba Deo digna
    carminis adjunxit_), but sacrificed still more the idiom of
    O.E. The predicate should not come at the end; #in# should be
    followed by the dative; and for #Gode wyrðes songes# the better
    O.E. would be #songes Godes wyrðes#. When used with the dative
    #wyrð# (#weorð#) usually means _dear_ (= _of worth_) _to_.

    114.16: #þâ ... gesewen#. We should expect #from him eallum#;
    but the translator has again closely followed the Latin
    (_visumque est omnibus_), as later (in the _Conversion of
    Edwin_) he renders _Talis mihi videtur_ by #þyslîc mê is
    gesewen#. _Talis_ (#þyslîc#) agreeing with a following _vita_
    (#lîf#). Ælfric, however, with no Latin before him, writes that
    John #wearð ðâ him# [= #from Drihtene#] #inweardlîce gelufod#.
    It would seem that in proportion as a past participle has the
    force of an adjective, the _to_ relation may supplant the _by_
    relation; just as we say _unknown to_ instead of _unknown by_,
    _unknown_ being more adjectival than participial. #Gesewen#,
    therefore, may here be translated _visible_, _evident_, _patent_
    (= #gesynelîc#, #sweotol#); and #gelufod#, _dear_ (= #weorð#,
    #lêof#).

    A survival of adjectival #gesewen# is found in Wycliffe's _New
    Testament_ (1 _Cor._ xv, 5-8): "He was _seyn to_ Cephas, and
    aftir these thingis _to_ enleuene; aftirward he was _seyn to_ mo
    than fyue hundrid britheren togidere ... aftirward he was _seyn
    to_ James, and aftirward _to_ alle the apostlis. And last of
    alle he was _seyn to_ me, as _to_ a deed borun child." The
    construction is frequent in Chaucer.]

   8   Ðâ ongan sêo abbudisse clyppan ond lufigean[8] þâ Godes
   9 gife in þæ:m men, ond hêo hine þâ monade ond læ:rde
  10 þæt hê woruldhâd forlête ond munuchâd onfênge: ond
  11 hê þæt wel þafode. Ond hêo hine in þæt mynster onfêng
  12 mid his gôdum, ond hine geþêodde tô gesomnunge þâra
  13 Godes þêowa, ond heht hine læ:ran þæt getæl þæs hâlgan
  14 stæ:res ond spelles. Ond hê eal þâ hê in gehy:rnesse
  15 geleornian meahte, mid hine gemyndgade, ond swâ swâ
  16 clæ:ne nêten[9] eodorcende in þæt swêteste lêoð gehwyrfde.
  17 Ond his song ond his lêoð wæ:ron swâ wynsumu tô gehy:ranne,
  18 þætte þâ seolfan[10] his lârêowas æt his mûðe writon
  19 ond leornodon. Song hê æ:rest be middangeardes gesceape,
  20 ond bî fruman moncynnes, ond eal þæt stæ:r Genesis (þæt
  21 is sêo æ:reste Moyses bôc); ond eft bî ûtgonge Israhêla
  22 folces of Æ:gypta londe, ond bî ingonge þæs gehâtlandes;
  23 ond bî ôðrum monegum spellum þæs hâlgan gewrites

[[page 116]]

   1 canônes bôca; ond bî Crîstes menniscnesse, ond bî his
   2 þrôwunge, ond bî his ûpâstîgnesse in heofonas; ond bî
   3 þæs Hâlgan Gâstes cyme, ond þâra apostola lâre; ond eft
   4 bî þæ:m dæge þæs tôweardan dômes, ond bî fyrhtu þæs
   5 tintreglîcan wîtes, ond bî swêtnesse þæs heofonlîcan rîces,
   6 hê monig lêoð geworhte; ond swelce[2] êac ôðer monig be
   7 þæ:m godcundan fremsumnessum ond dômum hê geworhte.
   8 In eallum þæ:m hê geornlîce gêmde[11] þæt hê men âtuge
   9 from synna lufan ond mândæ:da, ond tô lufan ond tô
  10 geornfulnesse âwehte gôdra dæ:da, for þon hê wæs, sê
  11 mon, swîþe æ:fest ond regollîcum þêodscipum êaðmôdlîce
  12 underþêoded; ond wið þæ:m þâ ðe in ôðre wîsan dôn woldon,
  13 hê wæs mid welme[12] micelre ellenwôdnisse onbærned.
  14 Ond hê for ðon fægre ende his lîf bety:nde ond geendade.

    [2] = swilce.
    [8] = lufian.
    [9] = nîeten.
    [10] = selfan.
    [11] = gîemde.
    [12] = wielme.

    [Linenotes:

    115.9-10: #ond hêo hine þâ monade ... munuchâd onfênge#. Hild's
    advice has in it the suggestion of a personal experience, for
    she herself had lived half of her life (thirty-three years)
    "before," says Bede, "she dedicated the remaining half to our
    Lord in a monastic life."

    116.6: #hê monig lêoð geworhte#. The opinion is now gaining
    ground that of these "many poems" only the short hymn, already
    given, has come down to us. Of other poems claimed for Cædmon,
    the strongest arguments are advanced in favor of a part of the
    fragmentary poetical paraphrase of _Genesis_.]


V. ALFRED'S PREFACE TO THE PASTORAL CARE.

  [Based on the Hatton MS. Of the year 597, the _Chronicle_ says:
  "In this year, Gregory the Pope sent into Britain Augustine with
  very many monks, who gospelled [preached] God's word to the
  English folk." Gregory I, surnamed "The Great," has ever since
  been considered the apostle of English Christianity, and his
  _Pastoral Care_, which contains instruction in conduct and
  doctrine for all bishops, was a work that Alfred could not afford
  to leave untranslated. For this translation Alfred wrote a
  _Preface_, the historical value of which it would be hard to
  overrate. In it he describes vividly the intellectual ruin that
  the Danes had wrought, and develops at the same time his plan for
  repairing that ruin.

  This _Preface_ and the _Battle of Ashdown_ (p. 99) show the great
  king in his twofold character of warrior and statesman, and
  justify the inscription on the base of the statue erected to him
  in 1877, at Wantage (Berkshire), his birth-place: "Ælfred found
  Learning dead, and he restored it; Education neglected, and he
  revived it; the laws powerless, and he gave them force; the Church
  debased, and he raised it; the Land ravaged by a fearful Enemy,
  from which he delivered it. Ælfred's name will live as long as
  mankind shall respect the Past."]

[[page 117]]

   1   Ælfred kyning hâteð grêtan Wærferð biscep[1] his wordum
   2 luflîce ond frêondlîce; ond ðê cy:ðan hâte ðæt mê côm
   3 swîðe oft on gemynd, hwelce[2] witan îu[3] wæ:ron giond[4]
   4 Angelcynn, æ:gðer ge godcundra hâda ge woruldcundra;
   5 ond hû gesæ:liglîca tîda ðâ wæ:ron giond Angelcynn; ond
   6 hû ðâ kyningas ðe ðone onwald hæfdon ðæs folces on
   7 ðâm dagum Gode ond his æ:rendwrecum hêrsumedon[5];
   8 ond hû hîe æ:gðer ge hiora sibbe ge hiora siodo[6] ge hiora
   9 onweald innanbordes gehîoldon,[4] ond êac ût hiora êðel
  10 gery:mdon; ond hû him ðâ spêow æ:gðer ge mid wîge ge
  11 mid wîsdôme; ond êac ða godcundan hâdas hû giorne
  12 hîe wæ:ron æ:gðer ge ymb lâre ge ymb liornunga, ge ymb
  13 ealle ðâ ðîowotdômas ðe hîe Gode dôn scoldon; ond hû
  14 man ûtanbordes wîsdôm ond lâre hieder on lond sôhte,
  15 ond hû wê hîe nû sceoldon ûte begietan, gif wê hîe habban
  16 sceoldon. Swæ:[7] clæ:ne hîo wæs oðfeallenu on Angelcynne
  17 ðæt swîðe fêawa wæ:ron behionan Humbre ðe hiora ðêninga
  18 cûðen understondan on Englisc oððe furðum ân æ:rendgewrit
  19 of Læ:dene on Englisc âreccean; ond ic wêne ðætte
  20 nôht monige begiondan Humbre næ:ren. Swæ:[7] fêawa
  21 hiora wæ:ron ðæt ic furðum ânne ânlêpne[8] ne mæg geðencean

[[page 118]]

   1 be sûðan Temese, ðâ ðâ ic tô rîce fêng. Gode ælmihtegum
   2 sîe ðonc ðætte wê nû æ:nigne onstâl habbað
   3 lârêowa. Ond for ðon ic ðê bebîode ðæt ðû dô swæ:[7] ic
   4 gelîefe ðæt ðû wille, ðæt ðû ðê ðissa woruldðinga tô ðæ:m
   5  geæ:metige, swæ: ðû oftost mæge, ðæt ðû ðone wîsdôm ðe
   6 ðê God sealde ðæ:r ðæ:r ðû hiene befæstan mæge, befæste.
   7 Geðenc hwelc[9] wîtu ûs ðâ becômon for ðisse worulde, ðâ
   8 ðâ wê hit nôhwæðer nê selfe ne lufodon, nê êac ôðrum
   9 monnum ne lêfdon[10]: ðone naman ânne wê lufodon ðætte
  10 wê Crîstne wæ:ren, ond swîðe fêawe ðâ ðêawas.

    [1] = bisceop.
    [2] = hwilce.
    [3] = gîu.
    [4] = For all words with _io_ (_îo_), consult Glossary under
          _eo_ (_êo_).
    [5] = hîersumedon.
    [6] = sidu (siodu).
    [7] = swâ.
    [8] = ânlîpigne.
    [9] = hwilc.
    [10] = lîefdon.

    [Linenotes:

    117.1-2: #Ælfred kyning hâteð ... hâte#. Note the change from
    the formal and official third person (#hâteð#) to the more
    familiar first person (#hâte#). So Ælfric, in his _Preface to
    Genesis_, writes #Ælfric munuc grêt Æðelwærd ealdormann
    êadmôdlîce. Þû bæ:de mê, lêof, þæt ic#, etc.: _Ælfric, monk,
    greets Æthelweard, alderman, humbly. Thou, beloved, didst bid me
    that I_, etc.

    118.5: Notice that #mæge# (l. 5) and #mæge# (l. 6) are not in
    the subjunctive because the sense requires it, but because they
    have been attracted by #gæ:metige# and #befæste#. #Sîen# (p. 119,
    l. 15) and #hæbben# (p. 119, l. 20) illustrate the same
    construction.

    118.9-10: _We liked only the reputation of being Christians,
    very few_ (_of us_) _the Christian virtues_.]

  11   Ðâ ic ðâ ðis eall gemunde, ðâ gemunde ic êac hû ic
  12 geseah, æ:r ðæ:m ðe hit eall forhergod wæ:re ond forbærned,
  13 hû ðâ ciricean giond eall Angelcynn stôdon
  14 mâðma ond bôca gefylda, ond êac micel menigeo[11] Godes
  15 ðîowa; ond ðâ swîðe ly:tle fiorme ðâra bôca wiston, for
  16 ðæ:m ðe hîe hiora nânwuht[12] ongietan ne meahton, for
  17 ðæ:m ðe hîe næ:ron on hiora âgen geðîode awritene.
  18 Swelce[13] hîe cwæ:den: "Ure ieldran, ðâ ðe ðâs stôwa æ:r
  19 hîoldon, hîe lufodon wîsdôm, ond ðurh ðone hîe begêaton
  20 welan, ond ûs læ:fdon. Hêr mon mæg gîet gesîon hiora
  21 swæð, ac wê him ne cunnon æfter spyrigean,[14] ond for
  22 ðæ:m wê habbað nû æ:gðer forlæ:ten ge ðone welan ge ðone
  23 wîsdôm, for ðæ:m ðe wê noldon tô ðæ:m spore mid ûre
  24 môde onlûtan."

    [11] = menigu.
    [12] = nânwiht.
    [13] = swilce.
    [14] = spyrian.

  25   Ðâ ic ðâ ðis eall gemunde, ðâ wundrade ic swîðe swîðe
  26 ðâra gôdena wiotona[15] ðe gîu wæ:ron giond Angelcynn, ond
  27 ðâ bêc ealla be fullan geliornod hæfdon, ðæt hîe hiora ðâ

[[page 119]]

   1 næ:nne dæ:l noldon on hiora âgen geðîode wendan. Ac
   2 ic ðâ sôna eft mê selfum andwyrde, ond cwæð: "Hîe ne
   3 wêndon þætte æ:fre menn sceolden swæ:[7] reccelêase weorðan,
   4 ond sîo lâr swæ: oðfeallan; for ðæ:re wilnunga hîe
   5 hit forlêton, ond woldon ðæt hêr ðy: mâra wîsdôm on
   6 londe wæ:re ðy: wê mâ geðêoda cûðon."

    [7] = swâ.
    [15] = witena.

   7   Ðâ gemunde ic hû sîo æ: wæs æ:rest on Ebrêisc geðîode
   8 funden, ond eft, ðâ hîe Crêacas geliornodon, ðâ wendon
   9 hîe hîe on hiora âgen geðîode ealle, ond êac ealle ôðre
  10 bêc. Ond eft Læ:denware swæ: same, siððan hîe hîe geliornodon,
  11 hîe hîe wendon ealla ðurh wîse wealhstôdas
  12 on hiora âgen geðîode. Ond êac ealla ôðra Crîstena
  13 ðîoda sumne dæ:l hiora on hiora âgen geðîode wendon.
  14 For ðy: mê ðyncð betre, gif îow swæ: ðyncð, ðæt wê êac
  15 suma bêc, ðâ ðe nîedbeðearfosta sîen eallum monnum
  16 tô wiotonne,[16] ðæt wê ðâ on ðæt geðîode wenden ðe wê
  17 ealle gecnâwan mægen, ond gedôn swæ: wê swîðe êaðe
  18 magon mid Godes fultume, gif wê ðâ stilnesse habbað,
  19 ðætte eall sîo gioguð ðe nû is on Angelcynne friora
  20 monna, ðâra ðe ðâ spêda hæbben ðæt hîe ðæ:m befêolan
  21 mægen, sîen tô liornunga oðfæste, ðâ hwîle ðe hîe tô

[[page 120]]

   1 nânre ôðerre note ne mægen, oð ðone first ðe hîe wel
   2 cunnen Englisc gewrit âræ:dan: læ:re mon siððan furður
   3 on Læ:dengeðîode ðâ ðe mon furðor læ:ran wille, ond tô
   4 hîerran hâde dôn wille. Ðâ ic ðâ gemunde hû sîo lâr
   5 Læ:dengeðîodes æ:r ðissum âfeallen wæs giond Angelcynn,
   6 ond ðeah monige cûðon Englisc gewrit âræ:dan, ðâ
   7 ongan ic ongemang oðrum mislîcum ond manigfealdum
   8 bisgum ðisses kynerîces ðâ bôc wendan on Englisc ðe is
   9 genemned on Læ:den "Pastoralis," ond on Englisc "Hierdebôc,"
  10 hwîlum word be worde, hwîlum andgit of andgiete,
  11 swæ: swæ: ic hîe geliornode æt Plegmunde mînum
  12 ærcebiscepe, ond æt Assere mînum biscepe, ond æt Grimbolde
  13 mînum mæsseprîoste, ond æt Iôhanne mînum mæsseprêoste.
  14 Siððan ic hîe ðâ geliornod hæfde, swæ: swæ:
  15 ic hîe forstôd, ond swæ: ic hîe andgitfullîcost âreccean
  16 meahte, ic hîe on Englisc âwende; ond tô æ:lcum biscepstôle
  17 on mînum rîce wille âne onsendan; ond on æ:lcre
  18 bið ân æstel, sê bið on fîftegum mancessa. Ond ic bebîode
  19 on Godes naman ðæt nân mon ðone æstel from
  20 ðæ:re bêc ne dô, nê ðâ bôc from ðæ:m mynstre; uncûð hû
  21 longe ðæ:r swæ: gelæ:rede biscepas sîen, swæ: swæ: nû, Gode
  22 ðonc, wel hwæ:r siendon. For ðy: ic wolde ðætte hîe ealneg

[[page 121]]

  1 æt ðæ:re stôwe wæ:ren, bûton sê biscep hîe mid him
  2 habban wille, oððe hîo hwæ:r tô læ:ne sîe, oððe hwâ ôðre
  3 bî wrîte.

    [16] = witanne.

    [Linenotes:

    119.14: Alfred is here addressing the bishops collectively, and
    hence uses the plural #îow# (= #êow#), not #þê#.

    119.16: #ðæt wê ðâ#. These three words are not necessary to the
    sense. They constitute the figure known as epanalepsis, in which
    "the same word or phrase is repeated after one or more
    intervening words." #Þâ# is the pronominal substitute for #suma
    bêc#.

    119.17: #Gedôn# is the first person plural subjunctive (from
    infinitive #gedôn#). It and #wenden# are in the same
    construction. Two things seem "better" to Alfred: (1) _that we
    translate_, etc., (2) _that we cause_, etc.

    119.19-21: #sîo gioguð ... is ... hîe ... sîen#. Notice how the
    collective noun, #gioguð#, singular at first both in form and
    function, gradually loses its oneness before the close of the
    sentence is reached, and becomes plural. The construction is
    entirely legitimate in Mn.E. Spanish is the only modern language
    known to me that condemns such an idiom: "Spanish ideas of
    congruity do not permit a collective noun, though denoting a
    plurality, to be accompanied by a plural verb or adjective in
    the same clause" (Ramsey, _Text-Book of Modern Spanish_,
    § 1452).

    120.2: #læ:re mon#. See § 105, 1.

    120.11-13: That none of these advisers of the king, except
    Plegmond, a Mercian, were natives, bears out what Alfred says
    about the scarcity of learned men in England when he began to
    reign. Asser, to whose Latin _Life of Alfred_, in spite of its
    mutilations, we owe almost all of our knowledge of the king,
    came from St. David's (in Wales), and was made Bishop of
    Sherborne.

    121.1: Translate #æ:t ðæ:re stôwe# by _each in its place_. The
    change from plural #hîe# (in #hîe ... wæ:ren#) to singular #hîe#
    (in the clauses that follow) will thus be prepared for.

    121.2-3: #oððe hwâ ôðre bî wrîte#, _or unless some one wish to
    copy a new one_ (_write thereby another_).]




POETRY.

INTRODUCTORY.