[Illustration: MR. F. E. BENNETT, Expert Pistol and Revolver Shot.]




  THE MODERN AMERICAN PISTOL AND REVOLVER

  INCLUDING

  A DESCRIPTION OF MODERN PISTOLS AND
  REVOLVERS OF AMERICAN MAKE; AMMUNITION
  USED IN THESE ARMS; RESULTS ACCOMPLISHED;
  AND SHOOTING-RULES FOLLOWED BY AMERICAN
  MARKSMEN


  BY A. C. GOULD
  _Editor of The Rifle_


  BOSTON
  A. C. GOULD & CO., PUBLISHERS
  1888




  Copyright, 1888
  BY A. C. GOULD & CO.

  PRESS OF
  Rockwell & Churchill,
  BOSTON.




PREFACE.


For many years the author was among the great number of persons who
believed it was impossible to do fine shooting with a pistol beyond a few
yards, and out of the question to secure much accuracy from a revolver.
With the object of learning the limit of accuracy these arms possessed, a
great many experiments were arranged and exhibitions given by the most
skilful marksmen to be found. The spirit of rivalry soon became apparent,
and, without doubt, has considerably aided in determining the
possibilities of the pistol and revolver.

The author feels that his labors have not been in vain, as he has the
testimony of manufacturers of these arms, as well as cartridge-makers,
that the results obtained within a period of three years are finer than it
was thought possible.

As we close this little volume it is apparent that revolver and pistol
shooting is about to become a very popular sport; the cavalry and
artillery of the National Guard in America are likely soon to be equipped
with and instructed in the use of the revolver. As pistol practice
increases in popularity, events herein recorded will, doubtless, be
equalled and excelled many times.

The author begs to acknowledge courtesies extended to him by Messrs. Smith
& Wesson; Colt's Patent Fire-Arms Co.; Merwin, Hulbert, & Co.; Union
Metallic Cartridge Co.; United States Cartridge Co.; Messrs. Wm. R.
Schaefer & Son; John P. Lovell Arms Co.; as well as the many professional
and amateur shots who have devoted time and money to aid in developing the
American pistol and revolver.




CONTENTS.


                                                                      PAGE

  CHAPTER I
    American Pistols and Revolvers                                       5

  CHAPTER II.
    Single-Shot Pistols--Description of Various American Patterns        9

  CHAPTER III.
    American Revolvers--Smith & Wesson's Productions                    21

  CHAPTER IV.
    The Merwin, Hulbert, & Co.'s Revolvers                              36

  CHAPTER V.
    The Colt's Revolver                                                 46

  CHAPTER VI.
    Sights for Revolvers and Pistols                                    56

  CHAPTER VII.
    Ammunition for Pistols and Revolvers                                64

  CHAPTER VIII.
    Reloading Ammunition for Pistols and Revolvers                      75

  CHAPTER IX.
    The Possibilities of the Revolver--Results of Revolver-firing
    up to Fifty Yards                                                   90

  CHAPTER X.
    Pistol and Revolver Shooting at Long Range                         116

  CHAPTER XI.
    Rules for Pistol and Revolver Shooting                             126




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                                      PAGE

  Portrait of Mr. F. E. Bennett                             _Frontispiece_

  Stevens Target Pistol (Lord Model)                                    11

     "      "      "    (Conlin Model)                                  13

  Remington Single-Shot Pistol                                          15

  New 6-inch Barrel Stevens Pistol                                      16

  Colt's National Deringer                                              17

  Remington Vest-Pocket Pistol                                          19

  Smith & Wesson .32-calibre Single-Action Revolver                     23

  Smith & Wesson Revolver (Russian Model) Single Action                 25

  Smith & Wesson Revolver (Russian Model) Double Action                 27

  Smith & Wesson Hammerless Safety Revolver                             33

  Opening the Merwin, Hulbert, & Co. Revolver                           37

  Merwin, Hulbert, & Co.'s Revolver--Manner of Ejecting Shells          39

  Colt's Revolver, .38-calibre, Double Action                           51

    "       "      (Frontier Model)                                     53

    "       "      (Army Model)                                         53

  Sights for Revolvers and Pistols                              58, 59, 61

  Chevalier Ira A. Paine                                                60

  Winchester Reloading Tool                                             76

  Ideal Reloading Tool                                                  79

  Target made by Mr. F. E. Bennett                            84, 100, 114

  Target made by Mr. George Bird                                    92, 96

    "     "   "  Mr. Pierre Lorillard, Jr.                              94

    "     "   "  Mr. J. T. B. Collins                                   99

    "     "   "  Mr. Allen P. Kelly                                    103

    "     "   "  Chevalier Ira A. Paine                                105

    "     "   "  Mr. W. W. Bennett                                     108

    "     "   "  Mr. D. D. Davis                                       109

    "     "   "  Mr. George Bird                                       110

  Position, Mr. F. E. Bennett                                          112

     "      Chevalier Ira A. Paine                                     115

     "      Mr. W. W. Bennett                                          117

     "      Mr. B. J. Robertson                                        119

     "      Mr. Walter Winans                                          121

     "      Miss Annie Oakley                                          127

  Standard American Target                                             125

  Holsters                                                        129, 131

  Six shots with Colt's Frontier Model Revolver                        135




THE MODERN AMERICAN PISTOL AND REVOLVER.




CHAPTER I.


During the years the author has been interested in studying fire-arms, and
endeavoring to learn the greatest amount of accuracy it was possible to
secure from them, his attention has frequently been attracted to the
statements of individuals in relation to pistols and revolvers, which were
mostly in the form of contributions to sportsmen's journals, or in books
chronicling the adventures of living heroes of the plains and
backwoods,--many of the latter passing through the author's hands for
review and criticism. It was noticeable that brief matter in relation to
pistols and revolvers, which was found in print, came from two
classes,--one making the most absurd statements in relation to feats
performed with these arms, which were entirely beyond the possibilities of
both arms and ammunition, and which were immediately recognized as coming
from parties who knew little or nothing about the subject. The statements
which came from the other class--the contributors to sportsmen's
journals--were evidently from parties who had expected to perform the
impossible feats, and, failing to do so, poured out their wrath in print,
condemning the makers of the arms, and making libellous statements in
reference to the arms, which at once indicated that it was lack of skill,
rather than imperfections in the tools.

All skilled marksmen who have handled the modern American pistol and
revolver must be aware that those of standard make are strong, well-made,
safe, and accurate. It is believed that no attempt has ever been made to
learn the possibilities of the various weapons, the greatest accuracy,
range, and power, and record them for comparison in a single volume.
Government tests have been made by the Ordnance Department, but its work
has been almost wholly with revolvers suitable for military purposes. As
there are a number of weapons which possess power, accuracy, and are in
every way equal in effectiveness to those accepted by military
authorities, it is apparent that the reports of government tests do not
fully represent all of the weapons which would properly be classed as
weapons of defence or suitable for military purposes.

Any attempt to record an historical account of the inventions and
improvement in the American pistol and revolver would, doubtless, prove
uninteresting to a majority of the readers of this work, and have but
little practical value; we therefore refrain from any mention of priority
of invention or description of the arms of early manufacture, and confine
our descriptions of the pistol and revolver of to-day. Those in use at the
present time, for extensive and elaborate experiments and investigations,
have impressed the author with the fact that improvements have constantly
been going on, and that the pistol and revolver of the present time are as
much superior to those produced a quarter of a century ago as the modern
rifle is superior to the ancient flint-lock musket. The world moves,
mechanical skill improves, artistic knowledge of form and symmetry is each
year combined with mechanical ingenuity, and at the present time the
American pistol and revolver has reached a degree of perfection previously
unknown; and it is our purpose to describe in this volume the modern
pistol and revolver of American make, those manufactured in quantity known
in trade, and procurable by any one desiring to secure a safe and reliable
weapon. There are a few pistols made in this country by hand, but the
number is so small that they are unknown to the trade; and, although great
stories have occasionally reached us of the accuracy of these arms, we
have never yet found one which would begin to compare with the accuracy of
those constructed by manufacturers who have made the perfection of the arm
a study of years. The standard single-shot pistols of American make at
the present time are the Stevens, Remington, and Wesson. The revolvers,
the Smith & Wesson, Colt's, Merwin & Hulbert, and Remington. The country
is flooded with revolvers of other make, some of them good enough for the
purpose intended, for a very short-range weapon of defence, among them the
products of the Marlin Arms Co., the American Arms Co., and Harrington &
Richardson; but a majority of the revolvers to be found throughout the
country are cheaply made, unreliable, inaccurate, and, above all, unsafe,
and endanger the lives of those who attempt to use them, though they bear
names high-sounding enough to captivate rustics and juvenile purchasers;
and this has always seemed to the author to be the chief cause of so many
condemning the modern revolver. All of the pistols and revolvers described
in the following chapters have been carefully and thoroughly tested by
expert marksmen, a careful comparison made, and the results given, unless
specified, are not the finest results obtainable by the best experts; but
the average results secured, and those it is believed to be within the
reach of ordinary marksmen possessing an average amount of health and
strength.




CHAPTER II.

SINGLE-SHOT PISTOLS.


A number of years ago, when gentlemen sought to vindicate their honor by
duels with pistols, it was the custom to provide themselves with a pair of
duelling-pistols. These were generally of large calibre, often .50 or
1/2-inch, generally of smooth bore and flint-lock. These and even larger
calibres were also made for the cavalrymen in the service. Then came the
percussion pistol, many styles of duelling-pistols, both smooth bore and
rifled, and to-day many Southern gentlemen have in their possession a pair
of these ancient arms handed down to them by their parents and
grandparents. They are used chiefly, at the present time, for decorative
purposes, for their days of usefulness are passed; the modern revolver has
superseded them as arms of defence, and the single-shot breech-loading
pistol, possessing much greater accuracy, far more convenient to load, and
more economical to use, has taken the place of the duelling pistol for
target work, stage shooting, and exhibition work. The single-shot pistol
is used almost wholly for short-range target practice, generally in-doors,
at a distance from five to fifty yards, or for small-game shooting.
Therefore, it is unusual to find at the present time these pistols larger
in bore than .32-calibre, and generally in .22 calibre. As the
.22-calibre is perfectly accurate up to fifty yards, and our own
experiments compared with others lead us to believe the small calibre is
fully as accurate as the larger, and beyond a doubt that with good weather
conditions the larger bore possesses no advantages over the small bore up
to fifty yards in point of accuracy, and the fact that the cost of the.
22-calibre ammunition is so much less, is more compact, allowing a large
number of cartridges to be carried about, and the knowledge that the tiny
bore can be shot so many times without cleaning, makes it the favorite
calibre, in single-shot pistols, for target and small-game shooting within
the distance named.

Any shooting at a distance beyond fifty yards with a pistol is almost
unheard of in America; but it is believed that before long the experts who
become so proficient with the pistol at this range will shoot at much
longer distances, and we shall not be surprised to see matches shot up to
200 yards, and, perhaps, at a longer distance, as the officers in the
European armies practise up to 400 paces and secure good results. When the
shooting is done at long distances with a pistol, it will probably be with
a single-shot arm of calibre from .32 to .40; but until then the calibres
will probably be the .22 and .32.

[Illustration: THE STEVENS TARGET PISTOL, LORD MODEL.]

The Stevens single-shot pistols are deservedly very popular; they are
manufactured by the J. Stevens' Arms and Tool Co., at Chicopee Falls,
Mass. They are made in various styles, as follows:--

Conlin model, 10-inch barrel, .22-cal., weight, 2-1/8 pounds. Lord model,
10-inch barrel, .22 cal., weight, 3 pounds. Diamond model, 10-inch barrel,
.22-cal., weight, 11 ounces. Also, the new 6-inch barrel, .22-cal., Target
pistol.

The barrels are carefully bored and rifled and fitted into a steel frame
in the Lord model, and composition of gun-metal in the Conlin and Diamond
models. A spring is so arranged under the barrel that when a projecting
stud on the side is pressed it releases a catch on the opposite side and
the spring forces the rear part of the barrel up and the forward part
down, this action acting on the shell-ejector, forcing out the shell of
the exploded cartridge; the pistol is then reloaded and barrel closed. The
frame permits of barrels of different calibres being fitted into one
action, in the Lord or Conlin model. There are several varieties of sights
for these pistols to suit the different demands. The triggers are the
side-covered trigger in the smaller models, and the guard-covered trigger
in the Lord model.

The Lord and Conlin models are very popular among professional and expert
pistol-shots. They have been tested and found very reliable, and possess a
degree of accuracy unsurpassed by any arm of its kind in the world, if
properly used.

[Illustration: THE STEVENS SINGLE-SHOT PISTOL (New Model.)]

The Lord model is preferred by persons of herculean frame or possessing
great strength in their arms, it weighing 3 pounds. The Conlin model is
generally selected by those possessing less physical strength; both
pistols have handles of sufficient length to permit of their being grasped
properly.

The trigger on the Lord model is preferred by a majority of pistol-shots,
and, to suit those desiring this style of a trigger in the Conlin model,
the manufacturers have commenced making them in that manner, and can now
supply either style of triggers.

The weight of the Lord model is in its favor, for those who can hold it
secure an advantage in less liability to pull the pistol to one side or
upwards when pressing the trigger,--an error one who uses a light pistol
is quite liable to make. Such experts as Chevalier Ira Paine and Frank
Lord, and even some of the gentler sex, who have astonished the shooting
world by their seemingly impossible feats of marksmanship with the pistol,
unhesitatingly select this heavy pistol, and declare it more reliable, for
the reasons mentioned, than the lighter ones, and as some of the
professional shooters perform hazardous feats when inaccuracies with the
arm would peril the lives of those who assist them in their performances,
it is likely that they have given the matter the fullest investigation.
But the person desiring to select a Stevens pistol for fine work should
examine both models, and be governed by his own judgment in the matter.

[Illustration: THE REMINGTON SINGLE-SHOT PISTOL.]

The other pistols made by this company are intended for pocket-pistols;
they are accurate and reliable, but being more compact, with shorter
barrels and lighter, they are more difficult to shoot accurately than
those fashioned after the shape of the duelling-pistol. One quickly
becomes accustomed to their use, and, if fond of pistol-shooting, they are
a source of great pleasure when carried on a fishing trip or on a tramp
when small-game can be shot.

[Illustration: THE NEW 6-INCH BARREL STEVENS PISTOL.]

A gentleman who makes an annual trip into the woods informed the writer
that he never went without his Stevens pistol, and always killed
considerable small-game for the table with it.

[Illustration: COLT'S NATIONAL DERINGER.]

The Remington single-action pistol is a much less elegant piece of
workmanship than the Stevens pistol, but there are excellent points about
the arm which will be apparent to the inspector as he examines it. It
possesses great strength and wearing qualities, is accurate, and, although
not particularly symmetrical, it is so well-balanced and has such an
excellent handle, that, when grasped, there is a feeling of firmness and
steadiness which is verified when the shooter attempts to sight it on a
small object. The pistol is made in .22 and .32 calibres; it has a barrel
8 inches long. The action is similar to the old-model Remington rifle. The
hammer is brought to a full-cock, a breech block rolled back, which
permits of the barrel, which is screwed into a solid frame, being
inspected from the rear, and easy to be cleaned. All attempts to procure
discharges from this arm with action improperly closed have been
unsuccessful, and we can see no reason why it is not as safe as it is
accurate. Its unusual strength would make it a desirable arm for
long-range pistol-practice, as it would doubtless stand a much heavier
charge than would ever be required for shooting at any range.

The Wesson single-shot pistol is manufactured by Frank Wesson, at
Worcester, Mass. It is operated as follows: the hammer is slightly raised
and held by a pin pressed in from the side; a projecting stud is pressed
at the bottom of the receiver, and the barrel turned over to one
side,--the shell of the exploded cartridge thrown out by the extractor.
The arm is well-balanced, fitted with good sights of different styles, and
accurate.

[Illustration: REMINGTON VEST-POCKET PISTOL (EXACT SIZE).]

The Colt's Patent Fire-Arms Manufacturing Co. manufactures three styles of
single-shot Deringers, one of which is illustrated. To operate this arm
set the hammer at half-cock, grasp the stock in the right hand and drawing
back the steel button with the forefinger, rotate the barrel toward you
with the left hand. Holding the barrel thus turned aside, introduce the
cartridge and then rotate it to its original position. After firing, the
empty shell may be ejected by rotating the barrel as directed for loading.

The weight of the No. 2 is 10 oz., calibre .41. It is a powerful pistol,
intended for a weapon of defence at short range.




CHAPTER III.

AMERICAN REVOLVERS--SMITH & WESSON'S PRODUCTIONS.


The armory of Messrs. Smith & Wesson is located at Springfield, Mass., and
is said to be the most complete establishment for the manufacture of
revolvers in the world. The work produced at this armory has a world-wide
reputation, and their products are sent to nearly every country on the
globe. The revolvers are beautifully made, as perfect as it seems possible
to construct them; they have a perfect contour, are symmetrical, well
balanced, and possess great accuracy. The arm was formerly constructed in
calibres from .22 to .45; but, a few years ago, this firm discontinued
making the .22 calibre. Formerly the .22 and .32 calibres were opened by
pressing a clutch under the action, and the barrel and cylinder were
pushed upwards; the cylinder was then removed, and the shell extracted
from the cylinder by a fixed post. Later the invention of the automatic
shell-ejector was added, and the revolver opened by a clasp, the barrel
and cylinders tip downward, the action at the same time ejecting the
shells. All of the revolvers now made at the factory of Smith & Wesson are
after this model, and are known as follows:--

New Model Army, No. 3: weight, 2-1/2 pounds; central fire; calibre .44;
six shot; length of barrel, 6-1/2 inches.

New Model Navy, No. 3: double action, central fire; calibre .44; six shot;
weight, 2-3/16 pounds; length of barrel, 4, 5 and 6 inches.

New Model 38, No. 2: weight, 16 ounces; central fire; calibre .38; five
shot; length of barrel, 3-1/4, 4, and 5 inches.

New Model 38, No. 2: double action; central fire; calibre .38; five shot;
weight, 18 ounces; length of barrel, 3-1/4, 4, and 5 inches.

New Model 32, No. 1-1/2: weight, 12-1/2 ounces; central fire; calibre .32;
five shot; length of barrel, 3 and 3-1/2 inches.

New Model 32, No. 1-1/2: double action; central fire; calibre .32; five
shot; weight, 14 ounces; length of barrel, 3 and 3-1/2 inches.

New Model Hammerless Safety Revolver; central fire; calibres .32, .38 and
.44; weight, in .38 calibre, 18-1/2 oz.; with barrels of different
lengths.

New Target Revolver: single action; central fire; calibre .32; six shots;
weight, 2-12/16 pounds; length of barrel, 6-1/2 inches.

Probably the chief reason why the products of Smith & Wesson are so
excellent, is because, since 1859, this firm has been engaged exclusively
in the manufacture of revolvers. They endeavored to procure and construct
the most complete and perfect machinery for the manufacture of their
revolvers; and, by the system of inspection of parts adopted by this
firm, the slightest imperfection in material and workmanship may be
detected, and, when discovered, is instantly condemned.

[Illustration: SMITH & WESSON REVOLVER, .32 CALIBRE, SINGLE ACTION.]

The barrels, cylinders, and all the small parts, are made of the best
quality of cast-steel, and the framework of Bessemer steel, made at Troy,
N.Y.

We have closely watched the impressions made upon some of the most skilful
mechanics in America when a Smith & Wesson revolver was submitted for
their inspection, and these severest of critics would invariably seem to
revel in the pleasure they experienced in seeing such a perfect piece of
mechanical work, and unhesitatingly commended the workmanship in the
highest terms. One famous maker of hand-made duelling-pistols in France,
spent days in examining the Smith & Wesson, Russian Model Army pistol,
using a magnifying-glass for the purpose of putting on the finest possible
finish in the mechanism, in order to gain an absolute perfect working of
the parts. He pronounced it the finest work he had ever seen made by
machinery.

One of the noticeable points of excellence in the Smith & Wesson
revolvers, insured by the perfection of the parts, is the perfect
revolution of the cylinder, which brings the chamber exactly opposite the
barrel when the revolver is cocked, it being absolutely necessary that the
cylinder be opposite the barrel at the moment of the discharge of the
weapon to secure accurate results at a good distance. We have fired shots
from revolvers well known to the trade where the cylinder did not bring
the chambers exactly opposite the barrel, and found one side of the bullet
shaved or scraped off, which we believe the reader will see is likely to
impair the shooting of the arm. This fault is not found in the Smith &
Wesson revolver.

[Illustration: SMITH & WESSON REVOLVER, RUSSIAN MODEL, .44 CALIBRE, SINGLE
ACTION.]

The arm is operated as follows: Holding the revolver by the handle in the
right hand, lift the barrel-catch with the left thumb and forefinger. When
the barrel-catch is clear of the barrel the cylinder tips downward, when
the cartridges are placed in the chambers the barrel is then swung back
into position, when the barrel-catch locks the parts together, the hammer
cocked, the arm discharged, then opened as before described, the barrel
brought down to a certain point, which acts automatically, and ejects the
shells.

[Illustration: SMITH & WESSON REVOLVER, RUSSIAN MODEL, .44 CALIBRE DOUBLE
ACTION.]

The .32 and .38 calibre revolvers manufactured by this firm are chiefly
used for pocket weapons; but some are manufactured with barrels six inches
in length, which make excellent target-pistols for 25 or 50 yards'
shooting. As revolver-shooting is becoming so popular in America, probably
a more intelligent study of this arm is now being made by marksmen then
ever before; and, while the advantages of a solid-framed revolver with a
fixed barrel are admitted for certain uses, it seems to be generally
admitted that, for fine work, where accuracy is the chief object, no
revolver is equal to one which permits of an inspection of the inside of
the barrel. Any revolver which takes a cartridge of sufficient power to
make it a suitable weapon of defence will foul, with the present
ammunition in use, to such an extent as to impair its accuracy after a
dozen shots, and many individuals believe with a less number. It is
therefore the custom of all the best revolver-shots the writer has ever
met, when using full charges, and wishing to do fine work, to clean the
inside of the barrel as often as every ten shots; and, from the difficulty
often experienced in removing the adamantine-like crust which adheres to
the inside of the barrel, we believe we are correct in asserting that a
majority of revolver-shooters, when they are fully aware of the necessity
for keeping the barrel clean, will select a revolver which permits of the
cleaning-brush being passed through the barrel from the breach end, and
thorough inspection of the barrel, which can be done so readily and
satisfactorily in the Smith & Wesson revolver. It would seem from the fact
that nearly every manufacturer of the cheaper grades of revolvers,
manufactured in such enormous quantities for the masses, have imitated the
action of Smith & Wesson, which seems to show that this principle is most
in demand by the trade.

Revolvers with a barrel of five inches, or less, in length are generally
classed as pocket revolvers, and those of the Smith & Wesson make are
accurate up to twenty yards; doubtless good shooting can be done at a
longer distance, depending entirely upon what the shooter would call fine
work; but, as one or two additional inches in length make the arm capable
of doing so much finer work, that most revolver-shooters readily perceive
the difference, and, waiving the convenience of a revolver with a
five-inch barrel, which can be carried in the pocket, they select one with
a barrel not less than six inches, and as the distance of out-of-door
revolver-shooting, in America, is from 25 to 50 yards, they have a weapon
capable of great accuracy at these distances.

The old American model Smith & Wesson revolver was formerly a great
favorite with many who knew what weapon to select to do good work with.
Many are in use to-day, and highly valued as a very accurate weapon; but
this model has been superseded by a new model army revolver, which is
generally known as the .44-cal. Russian model, the name being given on
account of the Russian government purchasing 150,000 of this model for her
cavalry. This model seems to grow in popularity each year, and many of the
best revolver-shots in America have selected it as their choice of
weapons. Some time ago when Chevalier Ira Paine, the expert pistol-shot,
decided to introduce revolver-shooting as one of the attractions of his
exhibitions, he consulted Gastine Renette, the famous pistol-manufacturer
of France, as to the best weapon for his purpose. Their object was to find
the most accurate revolver which would shoot a light charge at short
range, in-doors, avoiding noise and smoke, and a charge powerful enough to
do accurate shooting up to fifty yards or more, and be powerful enough to
be an army pistol. These two experts spent a great amount of time in this
work, firing thousands of shots from a rest, from a vise, and off-hand.
Among other things they learned was what the writer found, that, with
revolvers of some make, the cylinder not running exactly opposite the
barrel, the accuracy was affected; but in all their experiments none came
so near perfection as the .44-cal., Russian model, Smith & Wesson
revolver, and Chevalier Paine uses that revolver exclusively in his stage
work, using a light charge and round ball, and in his out-door shooting
the regular charge, always the factory ammunition.

As there are many who wish for a light charge for target-work, but
recognize that the 6-inch barrel is necessary, as well as a handle of
proper size to grasp, the manufacturers have produced a .32-calibre in
this model, which is becoming very popular, for it is very accurate, and
has excellent sights for fine work. Among those who select the Smith &
Wesson revolver there are a majority who choose the Russian model, a
portion selecting the .32-calibre and many the .44-calibre; those who
choose the .44 desiring to shoot a weapon which is both powerful and
accurate, and the Russian model possesses both of these points. In testing
this model .44-calibre for accuracy at a distance of fifty yards, taking
six shots for a test, this being the number of chambers in the cylinder,
the testers have repeatedly, when shooting the arm with a rest, placed the
six shots in a three-inch circle at fifty yards.

A new departure in revolvers is made in the Smith & Wesson Hammerless,
Safety Revolver, which has recently been put on the market, and possesses
many points of originality and excellence. The inventor of this novel
mechanism is Mr. D. B. Wesson, who has previously contributed so much
towards developing the American revolver.

A hammerless revolver, a short time ago, would have been considered an
unsafe weapon. In this new revolver will be found less liability to
accidental discharge than in any weapon of this class we have ever
inspected, this being one of the chief objects kept in mind while the
inventor developed his mechanism.

A large proportion of the accidents which occur with revolvers arise from
carelessly manipulating the hammer or trigger, or from leaving the weapon
full-cocked for some child or novice to find and accidentally discharge.
The pulls on different revolvers vary to such an extent that when a
strange revolver with an outside hammer is in the hands of an expert even
an accidental discharge is liable to occur; this is avoided in the new
hammerless revolver.

In addition to the visible hammer being the cause of many accidents is the
constant annoyance caused by its projecting and interfering with quickly
drawing the weapon from the pocket or holster. The weapon described is for
the use of the soldier, the police officer, or for those called upon to
use this weapon of defence rapidly and effectively; hence a self-acting or
self-cocking revolver is necessary, and by dispensing with the projecting
outside hammer the rapidity of action in drawing the weapon is increased,
and therefore a very desirable point is gained.

The illustration shows the mechanism of the new arm:--

A is the safety lever, B safety-latch, C hammer, D trigger, F main-spring,
G safety-latch spring. The hammer C, which is acted upon and raised by the
trigger D, as in their self-cocking arms, is kept constantly locked by the
safety-latch B, which is held in position by the safety-latch spring G.
The point is emphasized, that when not in use the arm cannot be
discharged, as will be seen from the arrangement of the parts. When held
in the hand for firing, the natural pressure exerted by the hand in the
movement of pulling the trigger upon the safety-lever A causes it to act
upon the safety-latch B, raising it and releasing the hammer.

[Illustration: SMITH & WESSON HAMMERLESS, SAFETY REVOLVER.]

It will be observed that it is among the impossibilities to cock and
discharge this revolver when held in an improper manner, as a child or
novice would be likely to do.

The arrangement of the mechanism is such that the safety catch and trigger
must act in unison, and it is necessary that an amount of grasp and
strength, not possessed by a child, be applied in order to discharge the
weapon.

By those familiar with revolvers the question will naturally arise, With
all these advantages can you secure accuracy? We confess we were among the
disbelievers that great accuracy could be secured with a self-cocking
revolver, and even now if we were to confine our shooting to target and
game shooting would give preference to the other revolvers made by this
firm; but for a self-cocking revolver this weapon possesses, besides the
elements of safety and rapidity of manipulation, the important feature of
accuracy. We were full of doubts of our ability to secure accurate
shooting, or to observe it in others; but a trial has fully convinced us
that with practice one could nearly, if not quite, equal their
performances with a single-action revolver.

One soon familiarizes himself with the operations of this weapon. Pressure
is applied to the trigger, and the approach to the point where the last
ounce of pressure discharges the weapon is easily detected; previous to
the last ounce of pressure being given, a careful aim is taken, the final
pressure applied, and the weapon discharged.




CHAPTER IV.

THE MERWIN, HULBERT, & CO.'S REVOLVERS.


The Merwin, Hulbert, & Co.'s Automatic revolver is manufactured at
Norwich, Conn. The mechanism of this arm is entirely different from any
other make of American revolvers. It is well constructed, the parts being
made with great care and with a nicety of fitting which is highly
creditable to the manufacturers. The material from which they are
constructed is forged steel.

The mode of operating the arm is as follows:--

TO LOAD.--Place the hammer at half-cock, press the loading gate downward,
and insert the cartridges.

TO EJECT THE SHELLS.--Take the revolver in the right hand, place the left
hand on the barrel with the thumb on the button under the frame, push the
button toward the guard, turn the barrel outward and draw forward, when
the shells will fall out.

TO TAKE THE ARM APART.--When the barrel and cylinder are drawn forward, as
above described, press the barrel-catch down and draw forward. No
screw-driver is needed to take the arm apart or interchange the barrels.

[Illustration: Opening the Merwin, Hulbert, & Co. Revolver.]

There are a number of different models manufactured with and without the
folding hammer. In .32, .38, and .44 calibre there are barrels from 3
inches to 5-1/2 inches in length, with five and seven chambers, with the
regular hammer, the .38 and .44 calibre. This firm also makes a solid
frame revolver of cheap grade.

In inspecting the revolvers made by this firm, there will be found a
number which are not adapted to fine shooting, but would be classed as
short-range weapons of defence, or pocket-revolvers. Those with the
3-1/2-inch barrels would never be selected by the person desiring accuracy
at any distance beyond a few yards. But the .32 and .38 calibres, with a
5-1/2-inch barrel, are considered by many as very fine shooting weapons.
Cuts 3 and 4 .32 target revolvers, with extra barrel for converting into a
pocket-revolver.

It is evident that Merwin, Hulbert, & Co.'s action possesses greater
strength than most of the revolver-actions on the market. It also permits
of being taken apart with ease and despatch, which enables the user to
clean the barrel and cylinder in the most thorough manner, as it is known
by all who have shot revolvers for fine results that this operation is
absolutely necessary, with the present ammunition on the market, to secure
fine work.

[Illustration: Revolver open, showing manner of ejecting shells.]

After cleaning, the arm can be quickly assembled; more so, it is thought,
than any American revolver. It can be loaded very quickly by pressing
the button under the frame towards the guard, turning the barrel outward,
and drawing forward, when the shell falls out, the action rapidly closed,
the gate pushed downward, and fresh cartridges inserted. The rapidity of
operation of this arm can hardly be credited until one witnesses the
revolver manipulated by a person familiar with its operation.

A very noticeable point about this weapon is the ability to combine a
target-revolver with a pocket-revolver, as with a number of the models two
barrels are supplied: one 5-1/2-in. and the other 3 or 3-1/2-in. barrel.

The .32 and .38 calibre revolvers with 5-1/2-in. barrels and folding
hammer are nicely balanced arms, and when properly sighted are capable of
doing fine work; but, unfortunately, they are double action, and while
this feature may be a desirable point in revolvers for defence, for
target-practice, or fine shooting, it is a detriment rather than an
advantage; but this firm also makes a single action with a regular hammer
in .38 calibre, in which the trigger-pull can be brought to a state of
smoothness and firmness which, if the arm is handled by a good shot, will
show excellent work.

The Army revolver is made in single and double action, with and without
the folding hammer. Most of the army models are chambered to take the
Winchester rifle cartridge, .44 calibre, holding 40 grains of powder and
200 grains of lead, although a special cartridge, specially prepared for
the Mexican trade, is supplied.

Each American revolver described in this paper has special points of
excellence which commend themselves to the investigator, and are
appreciated by revolver-shooters; and there are a number of excellent
features in the Merwin, Hulbert, & Co.'s revolver not found in other arms,
which make it, in many cases, the favorite revolver of fine marksmen.

The Merwin, Hulbert, & Co.'s revolver has been thoroughly tested by the
Government Ordnance Board, which reports as follows on its tests of a
six-shot, .42-calibre, 7-inch barrel revolver, weight, 2 pounds 11-1/2
ounces, using a charge of 23 grains of powder and a 252-grain bullet:--

REGULAR TESTS.--One round was fired from each chamber by the exhibitor.
The revolver worked satisfactorily.

DISMOUNTING AND ASSEMBLING.--The time required to completely dismount the
revolver was 8 minutes 15 seconds, and that for assembling, 14 minutes.

INITIAL VELOCITIES.--Ten shots were fired, and the initial velocities
determined by the Boulenge chronograph: Extreme variation, 77; mean,
20.'3.

PENETRATION AND RECOIL.--Mean of five shots: Penetration, 45; recoil, 74.

TESTS FOR ACCURACY.--Ten rounds were fired for accuracy, at 25 yards, and
also at 100 yards. A fixed rest was used. The results were as follows for
ten shots: Mean horizontal deviation, 2."9; mean vertical deviation, 4."2;
mean absolute deviation, 5."1.

RAPIDITY OF LOADING AND EJECTING.--Time required to fire 18 shots,
commencing and ending with chambers empty: 1 minute 45 seconds.

ENDURANCE.--Two hundred and fifty rounds were fired, the revolver working
without difficulty throughout. It was allowed five minutes to cool after
each 50 rounds.

FOULING.--The revolver remained uncleaned forty-eight hours, after which
it was fired 50 rounds. It was allowed five minutes to cool after the
12th, 24th, and 36th rounds. Though badly fouled at the rear of the
cylinder, by the escape of gas at the primer (the ammunition being outside
priming) the arm worked satisfactorily.

DUSTING TEST.--The revolver was next cleaned and thoroughly dusted with
fine sand. It was then wiped off with the hands alone. Twelve rounds were
fired. The revolver was then dusted as before, to ascertain the combined
effects of dusting and fouling. Six rounds were fired. The revolver worked
freely throughout.

RUSTING TEST.--The revolver was cleaned--all oil being carefully
removed--and dipped for ten minutes in a solution of sal-ammoniac, after
which it was exposed in the open air for forty-eight hours. At the
expiration of this time it was considerably rusted, but still operated
quite freely. It was fired 12 rounds, loaded without cleaning, and again
immersed for ten minutes in the sal-ammoniac solution. It was then exposed
in the open air for another period of forty-eight hours.

In order to prevent the rusting of the rifling, both ends of the barrel
were closed with cork, and in the first dipping the cylinder chambers were
protected in a similar manner.

At the end of the prescribed time the revolver was found very badly
rusted. The rust was so thick on the sides of the hammer that it could not
be cocked without the rust first being scraped off with a screw-driver.
The trigger was rusted in a similar manner, and had to be scraped and
forced back and forth in order to operate it. The locking-bolt slide was
rusted so that it could not be started by hand. It was driven back by
tapping on the thumb-screw with a hammer. The barrel was then partly
turned to the left by hand, but the base-pin was so much rusted that the
barrel had to be secured in a vise in order to complete the turning and
draw it to the front along the pin.

About twenty minutes were consumed in getting the pistol in condition to
fire the remaining rounds required by the prescribed test.

Considering how badly the pistol was rusted, it worked very
satisfactorily.

The claims made for this revolver by the exhibitors are:--

1. Beauty of outline.

2. No salient points which will prevent its ready insertion in the
holster.

3. Non-liability to tear the hands, since nearly all surfaces are neatly
rounded. Cleaning is also facilitated by the smooth surfaces.

4. The fluting on the cylinder do not run out at the front, thus
increasing the strength and neatness of the whole.

5. Safety, owing to the fact that the locking-device cannot be opened,
permitting of dismounting the barrel without the piece being at half-cock.
If the piece be not at half-cock, the cylinder and barrel cannot be
assembled to the frame.

6. Front sight solid with the barrel.

7. The extractor-ring prevents the interior of the lock and the ratchet
from fouling by escape of gas about the primer when using outside primed
ammunition.

8. The hood on the front of the cylinder, about the base-pin hole,
prevents fouling of base-pin.

9. The recoil-plate protects the head of the cartridge from exposure or
abrasion; it also prevents sand, etc., getting in between the cylinder and
recoil-plate, checking-rotation.

10. The cylinder and barrel can be dismounted without the use of a
screw-driver.

Other claims, since made, are appended, marked "B." It is not thought that
they require special comment.

This Board assents generally to claims 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. No
particular advantage is thought to be found in the 4th; and the 5th, so
far from being advantageous, is regarded as unnecessary and hurtful,
hampering one, as it does, in the use of the pistol.

On the whole, the Board regards this as a very good pistol, it having
endured the tests in a fairly satisfactory manner. It should be bored up
to cal. .45, in order that it may use service ammunition, when it may be
more intelligently compared with other arms now in service.

Stocks of walnut and hard rubber were furnished with this pistol. The
rubber appears to be fully equal, if not superior, to the walnut in
hardness and tenacity. To ascertain the effect of heat, it was placed in a
covered tin cup, which was in turn placed in a vessel of water slowly
heated to 150 deg. The rubber did not soften in the slightest degree. It was
then placed between two blocks of ice until thoroughly chilled, when it
was repeatedly struck with a hammer. It was not at all brittle. The rubber
admits of a very neat finish.




CHAPTER V.

THE COLT'S REVOLVER.


The armory of the Colt's Patent Fire-Arms Manufacturing Company is located
at Hartford, Conn., and here are manufactured the famous Colt's revolvers,
so favorably known throughout the world. Samuel Colt, the inventor of the
Colt's revolver, commenced devising the mechanism of this arm as early as
1830, and the result of his ingenuity and skill is the large plant at
Hartford, where the Colt's revolver has been manufactured in enormous
quantities for half a century, during which time improvements have been
made: and the popularity which the Colt's revolver has secured is attested
by the enormous sales in all parts of the world. The variety of revolvers
made by this company are as follows:--

New Model Army, single action: length of pistol, 12-1/2 inches: length of
barrel, 7-1/2 inches: bore or calibre, .45 inch; weight, 2 lbs. 5 oz.
Rifling, six grooves, one revolution in 16 inches; depth of groove, .005
inch. Six-shot.

CARTRIDGE.--Weight of powder, 30 grains; weight of lead, 250 grains.
Central fire, external priming.

New Model Army, double action: length of pistol, 12-1/2 inches; length of
barrel, 7-1/2 inches; weight of pistol with 7-1/2-inch barrel, 2 lbs. 7
oz.; calibre, .45 inch; six-shot. Made with barrels of any length, and for
the U.S. regulation cartridge, or the .44-calibre magazine
rifle-cartridge. Revolvers taking the latter cartridge are known as the
Frontier model.

New Model, .41, double-action weight; central fire; calibre, .41;
six-shot. Length of barrels, 4-1/2, 5, and 6 inches.

New Model, .38, double action; central fire; calibre, .38; six-shot.
Length of barrels, 2-1/2, 3-1/2, 6, and 7 inches.

New Police, .38, single action; central fire; calibre, .38; six-shot.
Length of barrels, 4-1/2, 5, and 6 inches.

New target-revolver, in .38 and .32 calibre, made in the Army model frame.

Pocket-revolvers, in calibres .22, .30, .32, .38, and .41, with 2-inch
barrels.

The above models, we believe, represent the various models made at the
Colt's armory at the time of writing, but there will be found in use many
Colt's revolvers made up differently than those mentioned. There are
thousands of the old model Army and Navy revolvers in existence to-day
which load at the muzzle of the cylinder, also the .38 calibre. Many of
these have been altered to breech-loaders, to shoot the central-fire
cartridges, and are accurate and fine shooting arms. There are also in
use, in the old and new models, Colt's revolvers with various lengths of
barrels and odd calibres, to suit the whims and fancies of individuals
requiring a revolver for a particular kind of work; revolvers in single
action of various calibres, without a trigger, and fired by drawing back
the hammer with the thumb, and releasing it as well as by pressing back
the hammer with the left hand, and releasing it with the object of
discharging the arm more rapidly than it could by checking the revolver;
Army and Frontier models with very short barrels, for parties desiring the
most powerful revolver made in the most compact form, suitable for short
range only, and sacrificing accuracy. These special revolvers will be
referred to later under another department, and the present chapter
devoted to the standard models of the Colt's revolver manufactured to-day.
The Colt's revolvers differ from those previously described in the
following points, viz.:--

The hand, or finger, or pawl, which revolves the cylinder, has two points,
one above the other. The upper engages the ratchet of the cylinder when
the revolution begins. But before the necessary sixth of a revolution
could be made, as the pawl moves in a plane, and the ratchet tooth in the
arc of a circle whose plane is perpendicular to the pawl's plane of
motion, the pawl would lose its hold on the tooth, and the revolution of
the cylinder would stop. To prevent this, the second point is added, and
just as the first point will disengage from the ratchet, the second or
lower point engages another tooth of the ratchet and completes the
revolution. By this arrangement the pawl actuates a larger ratchet than it
could otherwise, and therefore exerts more force upon the cylinder, by
acting upon a longer lever-arm. This permits a smaller-sized cylinder for
the same diameter of ratchet.

The cylinder has a bushing, which projects in front of it, and gives three
surfaces upon which the cylinder revolves, thus diminishing the chance of
sticking from dirt or rust, and also giving a very small axis upon which
to revolve, decreasing the moment of friction.

When the ejector is used it springs back to its place and is ready for use
again, avoiding the necessity of putting it back.

TO TAKE APART THE REVOLVER.--Half-cock the revolver, loosen the
catch-screw which holds the centre-pin, draw out the centre-pin, open the
gate, and the cylinder can then be withdrawn.

To remove the ejector, turn out the ejector tube screw, then push the
front end away from the barrel and pull it towards the muzzle. The barrel
can then be unscrewed.

The stock can be removed by turning out the two screws just behind the
hammer, and that at the bottom of the strap. All the parts of the lock are
then displayed, and can be readily separated.

The cylinder bushing should be pushed out for cleaning.

To remove the gate, turn out a screw in the lower side of the frame
(hidden by the trigger-guard), then the gate-spring and catch can be
withdrawn, and the gate can be pushed out. The best sperm-oil should be
used for oiling the parts.

TO LOAD THE ARM.--1st motion: holding the revolver in the left hand,
muzzle downwards, half-cock it with the right hand and open the gate. 2d
motion: insert the cartridges in succession with the right hand, close the
gate, cock and fire it (taking it in the right hand), or bring the hammer
to the safety-notch, as may be desired.

TO EJECT THE CARTRIDGE SHELLS.--1st motion: holding the arm in the left
hand, half-cock with the right hand and open the gate. 2d motion: eject
the shells in succession with the ejector pushed by the right hand, moving
the cylinder with the thumb and forefinger of the left hand. When the
shells have been ejected, the pistol is ready for the 2d motion of
loading.

There are three notches in the hammer of this arm. The first is the
safety-notch, the second is the half-cock notch, and the third is the
cock-notch. The pistol cannot be fired when the hammer rests in the
safety-notch or half-cock notch, and can be fired by pulling the trigger
when the hammer rests in the cock-notch. The pistol should be carried
habitually with the hammer resting in the safety-notch.

[Illustration: COLT'S .38-CALIBRE, DOUBLE ACTION.]

There will always be a class of revolver-shooters who will prefer an arm
with a solid frame. These persons will unhesitatingly select the Colt's
revolver. The strength of this arm is undoubted, and it is believed that
an unbiassed judge would award the claim of superiority in standing rough
usage to the Colt's revolver. The author has devoted much time to testing
the Smith & Wesson, the Merwin, Hulbert, & Co., and the Colt's revolvers,
and has for several years corresponded with experts, and observed the
shooting and solicited the opinion of persons who have had extensive
experience with these arms. A careful summarizing the opinions shows that
a majority of revolver experts believe that the Colt's revolver is not
made with such delicacy of parts as the other arms mentioned; but it is
evident that this very want of delicacy of the parts is much in favor of
its adoption by those desiring a revolver powerful, accurate, and less
affected by exposure to the elements, neglect of care after using, and
requiring less attention while using. It is believed that more shots can
be fired from the Colt's revolver without cleaning, and have it work well,
than any other revolver of American make; and it certainly can more than
the other two makes, judging from our own experience. But with the
cleaning found necessary to secure accuracy even with this arm, it seems
to require less cleaning than other revolvers; and accurate shooting has
been secured repeatedly, even after firing a hundred shots, by simply
swabbing out the barrel with a brush or cleaning-rod with a cloth drawn
through a slot, and without removing the cylinder, which worked well after
firing two hundred shots. The combined points of the solid frame and the
arm being unaffected, so far as operating it is concerned, by neglecting
to clean it while using or afterwards, has made the Colt's revolver the
chosen arm of many frontiersmen, and, doubtless, has influenced the
members of the Government Ordnance Board to favor this arm.

[Illustration: COLT'S FRONTIER MODEL AND ARMY, DOUBLE ACTION.]

[Illustration: COLT'S FRONTIER OR ARMY MODEL, SINGLE ACTION.]

It is doubtless true that if several battalions of cavalry were armed with
the revolvers of different make, the one equipped with the Colt's revolver
would find less disabled arms, after a rough campaign, than those armed
with other American revolvers.

The Army .45 calibre and Frontier model .44 calibre are identical in the
model, the difference being in the calibre and chambering. The U.S.
Government .45-calibre straight cartridge is loaded with 30 grains of
powder and a 250-grain bullet. The .44-calibre Frontier model takes a
magazine rifle-cartridge holding 40 grains of powder and a 200-grain
bullet. Both these cartridges are powerful and accurate. There is an
apparent difference in the recoil, it being less in the .44-calibre
rifle-cartridges, the 50 grains more of lead in the .45-calibre Government
cartridge being noticeable by the increased recoil. In a number of tests
made with these two cartridges the best results were generally secured
with the .44-calibre rifle-cartridge, taking six shots for a standard, it
being the number of chambers in these revolvers. It was not difficult to
place the six shots in a 5-inch circle at a distance of fifty yards, and
often a 4-inch circle, and occasionally, with the .44-calibre 40-200
cartridge, a 3-inch circle would touch or enclose all of the shots.

The .41-.38-calibre revolvers of this company's make are very accurate and
reliable arms, the .38-calibre, with 6 and 7 inch barrels, are chosen by
persons desiring an accurate, quite powerful, and pleasant shooting
weapon. The .38 calibre with the 6 and 7 inch barrels are very accurate up
to 50 yards; the recoil is light and not unpleasant. The charge is less
powerful than the .44 and .45, but about as heavy as is possible in an arm
of the size and weight, and retains a satisfactory degree of accuracy. It
is not difficult in shooting with a rest to place six shots within a
3-inch circle at 50 yards; and this feat has been accomplished in off-hand
shooting with a .38-calibre Colt's revolver with a 7-inch barrel.

The .32, .30, and .22 calibre Colt's revolvers are intended for
pocket-revolvers, and for short-range weapons unreliable beyond a few
yards.




CHAPTER VI.

SIGHTS FOR REVOLVERS AND PISTOLS.


Nearly all revolvers and pistols have sights affixed to the barrels, which
are very properly supposed by purchasers to aid them in hitting the object
at which they shoot. In many cases the sights which the manufacturers
place on their pistols and revolvers are very little, if any, aid to the
shooter. Persons unfamiliar with these fire-arms, when they test a new
pistol or revolver, generally commence by aiming at the object desired to
hit, and if their holding is good they are likely to find the shots
grouped quite a distance above the object aimed at. The heavier the charge
and lighter the arm the greater the flip or kick-up. The shooter, when he
observes this result, generally corrects the fault by holding under the
object, and some wonderfully good shooting has been done by aiming
eighteen or twenty inches under the object. It is, however, apparent that
in most cases, where good as well as regular results have been obtained by
this mode of sighting, it has been at a regular distance and where some
object is found at the proper distance below the object desired to hit to
enable the marksman to sight at each time.

When Chevalier Ira Paine gave his first exhibition of revolver-shooting at
50 yards at the range of the Massachusetts Rifle Association, on firing a
few sighting-shots before commencing his one hundred shots, he found that
his elegant .44-calibre Russian model, Smith & Wesson, revolver, which was
perfectly sighted for about twelve yards when using the light loads and
round-ball shot in his exhibitions, with the heavy or full charge, shot
eighteen inches over the bull's-eye. He immediately asked permission to
place a spot at this distance below the bull's-eye, which was given; but
as he had only a few sighting-shots to judge the difference in the
elevation between the two cartridges, he did not make what he proved he
was capable of doing at a second exhibition, when he had the same revolver
he used at the first trial, but with a different sight, which permitted
him to aim directly at the bull's-eye.

It is generally believed that the manufacturers of revolvers never
supposed the fine work which is being done with their arms at the present
time was in the weapon, and the arms were intended for quick and deadly
work at short range, and for this reason but little attention has been
paid to perfecting sights.

Having witnessed considerable revolver-shooting, and not a little in a
section of this country where the arm was carried for protection, and
after many practice shoots to almost invariably hear the shooters remark,
"Any one of these shots would have hit a man," the writer formed the
impression that the majority of persons who carried revolvers were content
with an arm which, when fired, would hit the size of a man. On the
supposition that this is the case, it is not strange that so little has
been done to improve the accuracy of the revolver by correctly sighting
it. The sights which come on the most popular revolvers of to-day are
arranged, so far as the height is concerned which affects the elevation,
in such a manner that they shoot over from six to thirty inches when fired
from twenty to sixty yards. If the charge is reduced considerably, the
sights which come on the revolver can be used in aiming directly at the
object desired to hit; but with a full, heavy charge the over-shooting
mentioned is experienced.

The accompanying illustrations show, approximately, the difference
required in shooting a Smith & Wesson Russian model .44-calibre revolver
with a light and heavy or full charge.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

Fig. 1 shows the target-sight which is attached to this revolver when
purchased. If a sight of this height is used with the full charge at 50
yards, and a sight taken on the bull's-eye at 6 o'clock, if held
properly, the bullet will strike about 18 inches over the bull's-eye. The
same result will be experienced with the plain open-sight which comes on
this favorite arm, as well as most of the other revolvers of American
make, of large calibre. If, however, the shooter desires to use a light
charge of ten to fifteen grains of powder, he will find this sight
approximately correct in regard to height. As many of the finest shots
prefer to use the full charge, desiring to practise with a practical
charge, such as they would use in warfare or defence, and knowing that, if
properly held, it will give fine results, they procure another sight,
similar in shape, but higher, as shown in Fig. 2. This additional height
depresses the muzzle of the barrel, and counteracts the flip or kick-up,
and the shooter can sight directly at the bull's-eye at a distance of 50
yards. For shooting at 30 yards, a distance which most of the shooting is
likely to be done in the future, and on the Standard American 100-yard
rifle target, a sight slightly higher than the one shown in Fig. 2 should
be used.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

[Illustration: CHEVALIER IRA A. PAINE, Professional Pistol and Revolver
Shot.]

To do fine shooting with pistol or revolver requires fine sights. At the
time of writing this chapter such a feeling is growing, and many improved
devices are being brought out. The most favored sight by expert shots at
the present time is the sight shown in Figs. 1 and 2 for a forward sight,
and the rear sight as shown in Fig. 3, which has a semicircular notch to
draw the top of the front-sight into. This style of sight was devised by
Chevalier Ira Paine, and adopted by Messrs. Smith & Wesson, who style them
"Paine Sights," it giving the effect of a pin-head sight. Some good shots
prefer a fine plain front-sight without the bead, and some use a straight
rear bar without a notch, but a platinum line in the centre.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

An improvement in the rear-sight is made by dovetailing a lateral
sliding-bar across the barrel clutch of the Smith & Wesson revolvers,
which makes an effective wind-gauge. Those desiring to test the accuracy
of revolvers at a rest can do so very effectually by attaching to the
rear-sight a piece of thin metal to convert the semicircle notch into a
round aperture which, with a temporary aperture front-sight or the sight
shown, enables the tester to obtain a good sight, which is quite difficult
when shooting in this manner with open front and rear sights, which are so
near together.

There are several ways of taking sight with pistol and revolver. It is
believed that a majority of the best shots draw a very fine bead on the
front-sight, and touch the object aimed at at the lower part of the
bull's-eye at 6 o'clock. Other good shots prefer to place the sight on the
object or on the bull's-eye, while still others place the sight on the
object or on the bull's-eye, and see the tip at 12 o'clock. It is believed
that those who sight at the lower or bottom of the object aimed at possess
more advantages than in the other ways mentioned; but the shooter should
try the several ways, and, as soon as satisfied of his preference, adhere
firmly to one manner of sighting, if permissible. It will be found that
different makes and lots of ammunition vary considerably, affecting
elevations; different weather conditions also affect elevations; this will
be perceived with a few shots, and the error corrected by taking a finer
or coarser sight.

Doubtless in the near future there will be a rear elevating and wind-gauge
sight for pistols and revolvers. One has been devised by Messrs. Smith &
Wesson, which is a great improvement over any heretofore placed on the
market. It seems to be quite a difficult thing to perfect a
revolver-sight, as several firms know who have been endeavoring to
accomplish it for some time past. As with heavy charges the desired object
is to depress the barrel or lower the elevation, rather than raise; while,
with light charges, as you increase your distance you are obliged to
raise your rear-sight. A very high front-sight, which is necessary for the
large charges, is considered unsymmetrical by manufacturers, and until
some ingenious person devises a means of raising and lowering the
front-sight of a revolver, the person who desires to shoot several kinds
of ammunition accurately in one revolver, and at various distances, must
carry about with him several front-sights of various heights which will
interchange.




CHAPTER VII.

AMMUNITION FOR PISTOLS AND REVOLVERS.


Nearly all the modern American pistols and revolvers are made to shoot
metallic cartridges. There are a few fine muzzle-loading duelling and
target pistols in use at the present time, but the great amount of time
necessary to load them, in comparison with the modern breech-loading arms,
makes them unpopular with most of the pistol-shots, and out of the
question for revolvers for military use, where rapidity of firing and
reloading is required. The difference between a muzzle and breech loading
single-shot pistol is apparently the same as the difference between the
two systems of rifles. If loaded a certain way there is no advantage in
one over another. Probably a muzzle-loading pistol, loaded the usual way
of duelling pistols, would show finer work than a breech-loading pistol of
the same weight, length of barrel and bore, loaded with a factory metallic
cartridge. But if two pistols exactly alike, with the exception of one
being a muzzle-loader and the other a breech-loader, were loaded with the
same charge, one being loaded at the muzzle, the other at the breech; but
instead of using a factory metallic cartridge the bullet was seated in the
rifling, and the shell loaded flush to its top, and placed in the chamber,
after the manner of loading the modern breech-loading target rifle,--it
is believed that one pistol would shoot as well as the other. Many of the
foreign target and duelling pistols of recent manufacture are made
breech-loading, and loaded in the manner described. The expert pistol-shot
is well aware that he can secure a great advantage by preparing ammunition
for certain purposes in a manner different from the way the manufacturer
makes it for the trade; but this point will be described later.

With the exception of the pistols alluded to, all modern American pistols
and revolvers take the metallic cartridges, which are produced in enormous
quantities and variety of styles in this country. These cartridges vary in
size, and are known to the trade from .22 to .50 calibre, and contain
charges of powder from 3 grains to 40, and bullets weighing from 30 to 300
grains.

The cartridge companies in America manufacture the following cartridges,
which are used in American pistols and revolvers:--

_Rim-Fire Cartridges._

Conical-ball cartridge for indoors, .22-calibre. .22-calibre: powder, 3
grains; lead, 30 grains. .22-calibre (long): powder, 5; lead, 30.
.25-calibre: powder, 5; lead, 38. .30-calibre: powder, 6; lead, 55.
.30-calibre (long): powder, 9; lead, 55. .32-calibre (ex. short): powder,
6; lead, 55. .32-calibre (short): powder, 9; lead, 82. .32-calibre
(long): powder, 13; lead, 90. .38-calibre (short): powder, 18; lead, 150.
.38-calibre (long): powder, 21; lead, 148. .41-calibre: powder, 13; lead,
130. .41-calibre (long): powder, 16; lead, 130. .44-calibre (short):
powder, 21; lead, 200. .44-calibre: powder, 26; lead, 200. .44-calibre:
powder, 23; lead, 200. .46-calibre: powder, 26; lead, 230.

_Centre-Fire Cartridges._

.22-calibre: powder, 15 grains; lead, 45 grains. .32-calibre Smith &
Wesson: powder, 9; lead, 85. .32-calibre Colt: powder, 12; lead, 90.
.32-calibre (short): powder, 9; lead, 82. .32-calibre (long): powder, 13;
lead, 90. .32-calibre Winchester: powder, 20; lead, 115. .32-calibre Smith
& Wesson rifle and .32-calibre Smith & Wesson, .32-.44: powder, 17; lead,
100. .38-calibre Merwin & Hulbert: powder, 14; lead, 145. .38-calibre
Smith & Wesson: powder, 14; lead, 145. .38-calibre (short): powder, 18;
lead, 130. .38-calibre (long): powder, 21; lead, 148. .41-calibre: powder,
20; lead, 130. .41-calibre Colt's D. A.: powder, 14; lead, 160.
.41-calibre D. A.: powder, 21; lead, 200. .44-calibre Webley: powder, 18;
lead, 200. .44-calibre Bull Dog: powder, 15; lead, 168. .44-calibre Colt:
powder, 23; lead, 210. .44-calibre Smith & Wesson, American model: powder,
25; lead, 205. .44-calibre Smith & Wesson, Russian model: powder, 22;
lead, 235. .44-calibre Winchester: powder, 40; lead, 200. .44-calibre
Merwin & Hulbert: powder, 30; lead, 220. .44-calibre Smith & Wesson,
Russian model, gallery: powder, 7. .44-calibre Smith & Wesson, Russian
model, gallery, round ball: powder, 7. .45-calibre Webley: powder, 20;
lead, 230. .45-calibre Colt's: powder, 35; lead, 260. .45-calibre Smith &
Wesson (Schofield): powder, 30; lead, 250. .50-calibre: powder, 25; lead,
300.

The above list comprises all the metallic cartridges known to the author
which can be found in the market at the time of writing this chapter. Many
of these cartridges are adapted to almost obsolete patterns of pistols and
revolvers, and would never be selected by skilled marksmen to do fine
work, for the reason that both pistol and cartridge are not suitable for
good shooting. We have previously alluded to the great number of cheap,
worthless pistols and revolvers to be found in the American market. Many
of the cartridges are for these arms. We have also mentioned the great
quantity of pistols and revolvers intended for weapons of defence at short
range. Among this list are numerous cartridges for these weapons, and
still others are for the best and most accurate of American pistols and
revolvers; these, with a few for foreign weapons, make up the list.

Among the cartridges largely used in single-shot pistols at the present
time are the following:--

_Rim-Fire Cartridges._

.22-calibre, conical balls; .22-calibre, short.

_Centre-Fire Cartridges._

.32-calibre Smith & Wesson; .32-calibre Colt; .32-calibre (short);
.32-calibre (long); .32-calibre Winchester rifle-cartridge; .32-calibre
Smith & Wesson rifle.

For revolvers no expert marksmen, unless obliged to, would use a rim-fire
cartridge, and the centre-fire cartridges giving the best results are as
follows: .32-calibre Smith & Wesson; .32-calibre Colt; .32-calibre
(short); .32-calibre (long); .32-calibre Smith & Wesson rifle, with round
or conical ball, light and full charge; .32-calibre Smith & Wesson,
.32-.44, Russian model; .38-calibre Merwin & Hulbert; .38-calibre Smith &
Wesson; .38-calibre (short); .38-calibre (long); 41-calibre; .44-calibre
Colt; .44-calibre Smith & Wesson, American model; .44-calibre Smith &
Wesson, Russian model, full charge and light charge, with round or light
conical bullet; .44-calibre Winchester; .45-calibre Webley; .45-calibre
Colt's Army; .45-calibre Smith & Wesson (Schofield). In rim-fire
cartridges the .22-calibre conical-ball cartridge is used in considerable
quantity. It makes very little report and hardly any smoke, and is used
largely by persons desiring practice indoors, where smoke and noise would
be objectionable. Manufacturers claim that this cartridge possesses great
accuracy at short range (ten or fifteen yards), and will not injure the
pistol. It is true that very fine shooting can often be done with this
cartridge, but the explosive substance with which this cartridge is
charged is tremendously powerful, and the slightest variation in the
quantity affects the power of a cartridge, and it is not unusual to get a
wild shot with good holding, and it is not uncommon to have a bullet
lodged in the barrel of the pistol from lack of power in the cartridge
sufficient to force it out. The question of its not injuring a pistol may
be true; but we should hesitate to use them in a pistol we desired to keep
for the finest work, although the sport which can be obtained with these
tiny cartridges tempts many enthusiasts to use them in great quantities.
There are conical ball .22-calibre cartridges in the market with very
thick, irregular heads. In using them there is much danger of premature
discharges, as by closing the pistol the head of the cartridge is jammed,
and an explosion is likely to occur, as they did several times in the
writer's hands. This fact well illustrates the greater danger in handling
rim-fire over centre-fire cartridges. The .22-calibre (short) cartridge is
consumed annually by the million in America by pistol-shooters. It is
probably as accurate, if properly made, as any cartridge in the world up
to a distance of fifty yards. It doubtless will continue in popularity for
many years, for it is difficult, if not impossible, to make a cartridge of
this size to sell for the price this cartridge does, and have it
centre-fire, besides the difficulty of making a primer small enough to fit
a .22-calibre straight shell. In all calibres above .22 the rim-fire
cartridge is fast becoming obsolete, and they are never chosen now for the
expert pistol-shot. The chief faults of the rim-fire cartridges are danger
and unreliability caused by the action of heat on the lubricant. Rim-fire
cartridges can be spoiled by placing them near a hot stove or where great
heat can reach them, or even by placing them in a show-window where the
sun strikes them; and ammunition which would shoot well on leaving the
factory, from the causes mentioned, would be liable to either miss fire or
shoot wild. Centre-fire cartridges are safer to handle, less liable to be
injured by temperature, but far from perfect. The pistols and revolvers
described in this work are probably not absolutely perfect; but it is
believed that they are much nearer so than the ammunition advertised to
use in them. Prominent among the faults in American pistol-cartridges
to-day are the following:--

1. The exterior diameter of the cartridge, instead of the interior
diameter, conforming to the bore of the pistol.

2. The excessive crimping of the shell to hold the bullet.

3. The placing of the lubricant on the exposed part of the bullet, instead
of in cannelures covered by the shell.

4. The want of a proper powder to load the cartridge.

The first fault may properly be laid to the door of the manufacturer of
the arms, which we are glad to say is found mostly in the cheap revolvers.

The second fault is being overcome by cartridge-makers, and, as a result,
better shooting is being done.

The third fault has taken the writer a long time to correct. The
Government Ordnance Board wisely saw this fault, and made the Government
revolver cartridge with no exposed lubricant. The Winchester model, 1873,
rifle cartridge has no outside lubricant. This is one reason why the Colt
frontier revolver is the favorite arm of thousands of frontiersmen, when
experiments would probably convince the most sceptical that the Russian
model cartridge as a charge possesses far greater accuracy, and if in the
hands of a battalion of cavalry would show much better results than the
army cartridge or the .44 Winchester. The Smith & Wesson Russian model
cartridge was designed by officers of the Russian government, but why they
decided to have an outside lubricant the writer could never conceive.
This cartridge, in a Smith & Wesson revolver, in cold weather, if shot
slowly out of doors, will foul a revolver to such an extent as to disable
it; and as Russia is a cold country, it would seem easy to imagine the
difficulty likely to arise from this cause. The writer, perceiving this
fault in the Russian model cartridge, visited the factory of the Union
Metallic Cartridge Co. and suggested a change. The superintendent of the
works immediately invited the writer to the testing-room, where fifty
shots were fired rapidly without cleaning, and the result offered as proof
of the excellence of the cartridge. It was suggested that a box be placed
out of doors, it being a cold day, which was done, and after a brief time
the cartridges were shot slowly, and before the box was half consumed the
revolver could not be cocked, from the excessive fouling. This
enterprising company at once saw the fault in this cartridge, and in a
short time the writer had the pleasure of receiving a box of the new
cartridges, with no outside lubricant, which, upon testing, were found
much cleaner; and it is believed that twenty, or perhaps more, of these
new cartridges can be fired in a Smith & Wesson revolver, and accurate
shooting secured. The improvement was so apparent that this company
discontinued the old manner of making this cartridge, and manufacture
their entire product of this cartridge with no exposed lubricant; and
other companies are to follow their example.

All ammunition which is intended to be carried in a belt or the pocket
should have no outside lubricant. When the exposed part of the bullet is
freely lubricated it is likely to become detached on one side, and
experiments have shown that a bullet, with grease on one side only, will
not shoot accurately; and we shall not be surprised later to see
cartridges for smaller calibres made with an increased number of
cannelures and no exposed lubricant. The chief trouble with revolver
ammunition to-day is its excessive fouling from the grease and powder. By
firing bullets into soft snow from a revolver which has been shot a few
times, the investigator will find a ragged bullet, which shows how it
raked over the adamantine-like crust which adheres to the inside of a
revolver-barrel, which impairs its accuracy; therefore the fine shot
cleans his revolver about once in every ten shots, if shooting the full
charge. We have seen frontiersmen who stated they seldom clean their
revolver except when they go hunting for a victim; but, as these
individuals never did what is now called fine shooting, and the man who
cleans his revolver as often as every ten shots puts ten consecutive shots
in a four-inch bull's-eye at thirty yards, it is evident that keeping a
revolver clean is conducive to good marksmanship.

Most shooters believe a great improvement will, before long, be made in
powder, and it is thought that this will lessen the fouling of revolvers;
but this difficulty is not likely to be wholly overcome.

Newly-made ammunition is more desirable than old, if great accuracy is
desired; hence many marksmen prefer to load their own ammunition, the mode
of which will be found in another chapter.




CHAPTER VIII.

RELOADING AMMUNITION FOR PISTOLS AND REVOLVERS.


There is a general impression among the shooting fraternity that reloaded
ammunition is superior to the factory made. This is doubtless true if
prepared by an expert, but it is safe to say that a majority of persons
would secure much better results from the factory-made cartridges than
they would with those prepared by themselves. It is necessary to have
perfect fire-arms to secure fine and regular shooting; but unless the
proper ammunition is used, the superiority of the pistol or revolver will
not be apparent.

As marksmen become skilful, they notice errors in shooting; if they
possess enthusiasm enough to become experts, they are constantly studying
to improve their shooting, and a large share of their attention is devoted
to the ammunition. It is not uncommon to find cartridges with the bullet
improperly seated in the cartridge-case or shell; the bullet is sometimes
jambed over one side of the shell, and instead of being wholly seated in
the shell has the full length of the bullet on one side exposed. The
common mode of lubricating by dipping in the lubricant, after the bullet
is seated in the shell, hides many defects in factory-made cartridges,
and the indifferent shooter fires the cartridges without thinking or
investigating the cause of wild shots, until he notices what is
technically known as "key-holes," or the bullets going through the target
sideways instead of point on.

[Illustration: THE WINCHESTER RELOADING TOOL FOR PISTOL AND REVOLVER
CARTRIDGES.]

Other faults in factory-made ammunition are caused by age, which
deteriorates the cartridge, causing the powder to cake, and the shell,
bullet, and lubricant to oxidize; the latter cause also affecting the
efficacy of the primer. As some cartridge companies have used one formula
for making lubricant for cold weather, another for warm weather, and as
lots of ammunition get scattered in all sections, and sometimes carried in
stock for several years, it can be said that one would not be likely to
get so good results from factory cartridges as from those freshly prepared
of home make.

There are other reasons why many of the shooting fraternity prefer to
reload their ammunition; it is a piece of economy not to be despised, and
being located in an inaccessible place, away from towns or cities where
cartridges can be purchased, compels some individuals to make their own
ammunition.

The marksman, in attempting to reload ammunition, will be beset with many
obstacles, and is not likely to produce so good cartridges at the first
trials as he can purchase in stores where they have been received fresh
from the factories; but to those who desire to prepare their own
ammunition, the following mode, practised by different pistol and revolver
experts, will doubtless prove a guide to many.

If the finest work is to be attempted, the use of new shells is
recommended. If old shells are to be reloaded, the exploded primer should
first be removed, the shells then washed and thoroughly rinsed in water,
warm if convenient, and, if desirable to remove the stains from the
shells, a little acid may be dropped into the water. After washing
thoroughly, dry perfectly, but do not heat enough to draw the temper.
Special care should be taken to have the water dried out of the pockets or
primer-holes. The next process, if the shell was previously crimped, is to
expand it at the mouth.

[Illustration: THE IDEAL RELOADING TOOL, FOR PISTOL AND REVOLVER
CARTRIDGES.]

The reloading tools supplied by manufacturers are advertised to expand as
well as decap the shell, but do so very ineffectually, and a tool is
recommended specially for this purpose. Unless the shell is sufficiently
expanded, the bullet cannot be properly seated in the shell, and this is
one of the first difficulties the beginner is likely to encounter. After
expanding the shell, the next operation is to reprime the shells. It will
be found necessary to use the copper primer for most of the American
shells. Considerable care should be used in seating the primer, as most of
the shells are not solid head, and a heavy pressure on the capper will
seat the primer too deep, and often force it through the pocket and
spoil the shell. If the full charge of powder is to be used in the
cartridge, the shells should then receive it; but if a reduced charge is
to be used in a large calibre, with the object of making cartridges for
in-door shooting, many experts use a wad of pasteboard of the exact size
of the inside diameter of the shell, with a hole about one-half the
diameter of the wad in its centre. The wad is seated in the base of the
shell, and the light charge of powder poured in. The object of this wad is
to have the powder ignite quicker than it is supposed it would if spread
over the base of a large shell. By the hole in the centre of the wad, much
of the small charge of fine powder is directly in front of the primer, and
the theory of experts is that the full force of the charge of powder is
more quickly secured than if spread over the base of a large shell.

The question of powder is a very important one, and has provoked an
endless amount of discussion and experimenting among manufacturers and
shooters. The most desirable point is cleanliness, as much fouling means
inaccurate shooting; and as that is a very marked defect in nearly all
black powders at the present time, many believe that the effectiveness and
accuracy of the revolver will be increased when improvements in powder are
made.

In the smaller calibres and in short-barrelled pistols a finer grain of
powder should be used; the fine-grain powder is also better for light
charges.

A request to the leading American powder manufacturers to state the brands
of powder they recommended for pistol and revolver shooting brought the
following responses:--

  Boston, Mass., 1887.

_Editor of The Rifle_:--

_Dear Sir_,--I enclose one of our later folders, by which you will see
that, in sizes, the Telegraph runs from No. 1 to No. 5, inclusive. I
think, however, for pistol cartridges I should not recommend anything
coarser than No. 2; _i.e._, Telegraph, Nos. 2 to 5; Rifle Cartridge, Nos.
3 to 5 (No. 2 is used in rim-fire cartridges, which are not reloadable);
also "Dead Shot." Yours,

  F. A. ADAMS.



  DUPONT'S POWDER,
    87 BEAVER STREET, NEW YORK.

_Editor of The Rifle_:--

DEAR SIR,--Yours of 10th inst. duly received, and in reply would say that
for pistol cartridges we would recommend the powders specially made for
that purpose and known as _FFF B_ cartridge powder, and also _FFF A_
powder.

The Eagle Duck No. 3 is also used for pistol cartridges; but Mr. Conlin,
the expert in such matters, and who keeps a gallery in this city for
pistol-shooting principally, states that "the _FFF B_ brand of powder,
introduced to revolver shooters, would prove the best adapted to revolver
cartridges, as I find it to be the best that I have yet tried." Yours
truly,

  E. I. DUPONT DE NEMOURS & CO.



  BOSTON, Dec. 15, 1887.

_Editor of The Rifle_:--

DEAR SIR,--Yours of 10th inst. is received. We would recommend for pistol
cartridges our Wing Shot, No. 2 or No. 3 grain, or Western Sporting, _Fg_
or _FFg_ grain. Yours truly,

  ORIENTAL POWDER MILLS.



  THE HAZARD POWDER COMPANY,
    MANUFACTURERS OF GUNPOWDER,
      NEW YORK.

_Editor of The Rifle_:--

DEAR SIR,--Yours of the 9th just received. The difference of opinion is so
varied regarding the best powder for pistol cartridges that we hesitate to
recommend. The calibre may be .32 or .45; yet, if the pistol barrel be
long, it requires for accurate shooting a much coarser grain powder than
does a short barrel. We enclose herewith our circular and diagram card,
and remain,

  Yours truly,
    THE HAZARD POWDER CO.


(EXTRACT FROM CIRCULAR.)

For pistol-shooting--A fine grain is preferred, of "Electric," "American
Sporting," or "Kentucky Rifle."

In addition to the American brands of black powder mentioned is the
American wood powder, which is favored by some pistol-shots on account of
its non-fouling qualities. The English powder, Curtis & Harvey No. 3, is
also excellent. It is quite clean and uniform, but its cost is very high,
the expense of a pound being about $1.50. The American Powder Works'
products are used by many experts, the Hazard's Kentucky Rifle is also a
favorite brand, but there are many opinions as to the best powder; if a
shooter get good results with a certain brand, it is wisdom to use it
exclusively, if possible, as the different brands vary considerably in
strength and effect elevations. Mr. F. J. Rabbeth, an acknowledged expert
in fire-arms, has devoted considerable time to experimenting with powders,
shooting many hundred shots at a rest, with revolvers fitted with fine
sights, to learn, if possible, the merits of different brands of powder
for pistol-shooting. His experiments with wood powder show excellent
results; but a majority of the pistol-shots at the present time do not
seem to favor this kind of powder, but there exists a feeling that before
long a powder will be produced which will cause less fouling than that in
use at the present time, and such a compound will be welcomed by
pistol-shots.

[Illustration: Score of 90 out of a possible 100, at 30 yards, with
gallery ammunition, in .44-calibre Smith & Wesson Russian-model revolver,
made by Mr. F. E. BENNETT, at Walnut Hill, Mass., Oct. 12, 1887. Reduced
one-half.]

After placing the powder in the shell the bullet is inserted, generally
without a wad, and seated in the shell. In cartridges with full charges
the bullet is generally seated with a tool made expressly for the purpose.
With reduced charges, a round ball is often used, which is seated down in
the shell touching the powder. It is then necessary to lubricate the
cartridge, and as there are no cannelures to hold the grease, it is
necessary to place the lubrication around the upper edges of the bullet.
There are several ways of doing this, the most approved manner being to
place a bit of cold lubricant in each shell after the bullet has been
seated, then with a plug with a concave end, of about the same diameter as
the shell, force the lubricant down on top of the bullet, and by a few
turns of the plug the lubricant will be placed evenly around the edge of
the ball. Evenly distributing the lubricant is essential to secure even
shooting.

If desirable to make the bullets, we cannot add anything to the directions
given by Mr. F. J. Rabbeth to the readers of THE RIFLE in a recent issue,
from which we extract the following:--

"Ever since the combination of cartridge manufacturers went into effect,
by which the prices of bullets were advanced some 20 per cent., I have
been tempted to tell riflemen what I know about making bullets, thereby
enabling such as have not mastered the art, but who have the time and
inclination,--as also the disposition to save a penny,--to quickly acquire
it, and at the same time become independent of all combinations of
bullet-makers in the future.

"It is evident from the quality of moulds furnished by the various
manufacturers that there has been very little effort by any of them to
furnish their customers with a practical implement. Indeed, I believe
their policy has usually been to discourage people from making their own
ammunition. I have searched the market through and have never yet found a
thoroughly practical mould on sale. In fact, as compared with a
first-class implement, a large majority of these things are absolutely
worthless; but it would take too much space to point out all their various
defects, and it will be much easier to describe how a good mould should be
made. To begin, the mould should be of brass or composition, as lead flows
to that metal better than iron or steel, and is worth more than the
difference in cost. The two halves should be pivoted together, like a pair
of blacksmith's tongs (not like a nut-cracker, as many of them are), with
a large, well-fitted hinge-screw, with a body part one-eighth larger than
thread part, so that it may be screwed solid against this enlarged body
part without binding the mould too tightly together. Unless these
hinge-screws are so fitted with shoulder they are continually working
loose, and causing delay and trouble. After the mould is pivoted together
and properly jointed, it should have one well-fitted dowel-pin placed as
far from the pivot-screw as possible in the centre of the mould-head. The
mould should be ample in size at the pivot or hinge, and at the head, so
that it will not be likely to get sprung out of adjustment by rough usage;
also that its mass may retain heat, and so preserve a more uniform
temperature while in use. The cut-off should be of cast-steel, one-eighth
to three-sixteenths of an inch thick, and pivoted on a substantial,
well-fitted screw, with enlarged body part, as described for hinge-screw,
and for the same purpose, _i.e._, that it may stay put when secured to
place.

"The sprew-hole for any ordinary-sized bullet should not exceed one-tenth
inch in diameter. The cut-off should project about one and a half inches
beyond mould-head, and should swing far enough to one side to entirely
uncover the base of the bullet. The shanks of the mould should be adapted
to receive wood handles, and with handles attached, for comfort in use,
should measure about nine inches to hinge-screw.

"For melting the lead a small plumber's kettle should be had that will
hold, when full, about twenty pounds. For dipping from this, a small
Monroe ladle, with round nozzle that will enter the counter-sink or
sprew-hole of the cut-off. Heat the mould till it is near the melting
temperature of lead, and when the lead in kettle is sufficiently hot, dip
from kettle with ladle. Apply mould to nozzle while in a horizontal
position, then while still holding mould in contact, quickly elevate ladle
above mould, holding them in that position for a few seconds. This gives
the full pressure of the lead in the ladle on the mould while it is
cooling, and by this method as perfect a bullet can be cast as can be made
by swaging. They can be cast at the average rate of 225 per hour. A gas
stove is much the best means of melting the lead, as a more even
temperature can be maintained; but it is not difficult to cast good
bullets, using almost any kind of a coal fire.

"The lead and moulds should be kept at a temperature that will require a
few seconds, say five to ten, for the lead in the sprew-hole to solidify
after the ladle has been separated from the mould. This is the true test;
and while this temperature is maintained, the bullets will be cast
perfect. The mould should be held over the kettle while casting, so that
any lead spilled may fall into main body.

"The best method for lubricating grooved bullets is to mix beeswax and
cylinder or other heavy oil,--one part oil to four beeswax. Procure a pair
of ordinary ten-cent tweezers, file away the centre so they will grasp the
bullet near the point and not slip off too readily. Dip the bullets to
cover all the grooves, and set them on a board to cool. When cool, remove
surplus lubricant by forcing bullets through a tube the size of bullet.
This is cheaply made by cutting off the head of a shell and soldering a
tapering tin extension to the shell, say six inches long. Shove this tube
on to the bullets as they stand on the board, and empty the tube as often
as it fills with bullets. If the grooves are not too wide--they should not
be more than 1/25-inch wide, say twelve to the inch--this method will give
perfect lubrication. Another method about equally good is to set a
quantity of bullets in a shallow pan, points up, then to pour melted
lubricant among them till there is sufficient in the pan to cover all the
grooves; set aside till lubricant is sufficiently cooled, then use the
tube as described above to remove surplus. Bullets so cast and lubricated
will do very fine shooting either with clean or dirty barrel."

Cartridges should not be exposed to the sun, and should be kept in a dry,
cool place.




CHAPTER IX.

THE POSSIBILITIES OF THE REVOLVER.


_Results of Revolver-firing up to Fifty Yards._

It was believed by many of the experts with fire-arms, as well as the
author, for a number of years, that the possibilities of the revolver were
not generally, if at all, known. Many were aware that the single-shot
pistol with a long barrel, suitable sights, and proper charge was capable
of doing excellent work at short and long range; but the revolver, on
account of its revolving cylinder, permitting an escape of gas, as well as
the comparatively short barrel, was capable of shooting accurately only at
short range; 25 yards or 100 feet was generally the chosen distance in
most revolver contests, and it was thought necessary to have a target as
coarse as the Creedmoor 200-yard rifle target to shoot on at these
distances. Believing that the revolver was capable of doing much finer
work than any previously recorded work it was possible for the author to
learn of, he closely watched the results obtained with this arm in various
parts of the world; sought and obtained the services of the most skilful
marksmen he could find; arranged public and private exhibitions; spent
days upon the rifle-ranges where experiments were tried, thousands of
shots fired from revolvers and pistols, at a rest with fine sights by
acknowledged experts in this style of shooting; professional and expert
amateurs' services obtained; and revolvers and pistols, of various makes,
shot from 7 up to 500 yards. Factories where the revolvers were
manufactured were visited, shooting witnessed and done, and the results
obtained carefully preserved.

As the author became impressed that the results secured from time to time
were beyond what was believed the revolver was capable of doing, he
forwarded targets or reports to manufacturers of the arms used, with a
request to be informed if the results were equal or superior to what they
had obtained, or thought were likely to be secured. In every instance
replies indicated that they were surprised at the excellence of the
results; and in most cases they frankly acknowledged that the accuracy was
beyond what they supposed the arms possessed. These replies have
influenced the author to record in this little work the results of pistol
and revolver firing which have come under his personal observation,
believing that they are much beyond what was generally believed to be
possible to do with those arms, more complete than has ever been
previously recorded; but at the same time firmly believing that if pistol
and revolver shooting becomes a popular sport in America,--if it is
indulged in to one-half the extent rifle-shooting is at the time of
preparing this work,--the feats chronicled in this volume will not be the
best results possible, and, doubtless, many an amateur will surpass them.

[Illustration: Eighteen shots with a revolver, by Mr. GEORGE BIRD, at 12
yards, winner of first prize in revolver match, Conlin's Gallery, New
York. Score, 210; possible, 216.]

Parties who essay to perform such feats as lighting matches and driving
tacks with a bullet usually attempt them at a distance of about 7 yards,
as that is about as long a distance as the average person can see such
objects. Ten and 12 yards is about the shortest distance at which
target-shooting is practised; at this distance the modern revolver, with a
barrel from four inches upwards, if properly charged and held, if all the
cylinders are loaded, ought to place every shot in a group which could be
enclosed or touched by a circle one inch in diameter. It requires a good
revolver, proper ammunition, as well as a skilful marksman, to do such
work; but it is no uncommon occurrence in galleries where the range is 12
yards, as will be seen by the illustrations in this chapter.

It is nothing uncommon for experts with pistol or revolver to place a
series of shots in a smaller circle than one inch, at 12 yards, especially
if a .22-calibre, single-shot, heavy pistol is used; but it should be
stated that such shooting is generally done with light charges; but it can
and has been done with full, heavy charges. At 20 yards it is not uncommon
to place all the shots, when fired at a rest, in or touched by a circle
one and one-half inches in diameter.

When revolver-shooting was introduced as an adjunct to rifle-shooting it
was thought that the Standard American target for 200 yards rifle practice
was the proper thing for revolver-shooting at a distance of 25 yards. A
match was first announced at the annual meeting at Creedmoor, in 1886, in
which there were three scores of 48 out of a possible 50 in five shots
secured. There were three scores to count, or possible 150 points. The
highest three scores in this match were 143, 140, 134. There were five
scores only of five shots each in which the shots were all inside of the
nine-circle, which is 5-54/100 inches in diameter. A month later the
Massachusetts Rifle Association announced a revolver match, in the annual
fall meeting programme, under similar conditions, excepting the match
called for five scores to count. As both matches were unlimited reentry
matches, the best three scores of the highest four individuals are taken
to compare with the results secured at Creedmoor. Four scores are selected
because the person at the head of the list was a professional shot, and
his skill at that time was considerably in advance of his competitors.

[Illustration: Six shots with a Smith & Wesson .32-calibre revolver, at 12
yards, made in Conlin's Gallery, New York City, February 8, 1887, by Mr.
PIERRE LORILLARD, Jr.]

The second, third, and fourth prize-winners secured an aggregate of 142,
142, 141.

The professional shot was Chevalier Paine, who on his sixth entry secured
the possible of 50 in five shots and two scores of 49, making 148 out of a
possible 150, or the 15 shots (not consecutive) in a 5-54/100 inch circle.
This gentleman fired 40 shots. Of this number there were 27 in the 10
circle, which is 3-36/100 inches in diameter. Soon after this meeting
revolver-shooting sprung into popularity, and it was shown by the shooting
of the members of the Massachusetts Rifle Association that, if
revolver-shooting was continued at 25 yards, the possible would be secured
so frequently as to make the sport uninteresting. It is worthy of record
that Mr. A. L. Brackett of that association made the following 10-shot
score at 25 yards on the Standard American target:--

  10 10 10 10 10 10 10 8 10 10 = 98

It was decided by this club to change the distance to 50 yards.

Chevalier Ira Paine was the first individual known to fire 100 shots on
this target at this distance, which he did Oct. 15, 1886, at Walnut Hill
range, using a .44-calibre Russian-model army revolver and factory
ammunition made by Union Metallic Cartridge Co.

The 100 shots were as follows:--

   7    7    8    6    9    7    6    8    9    9 =  76
   9   10    8    7    8    9    6    9    5    8 =  79
   9    9    7    8    7    9    7    6   10    6 =  78
   9    5    8    6    7    9    8   10   10   10 =  82
   8    6    9    8    8    7    7    6    8   10 =  77
   6   10    9    6    8    9    7    9    7    9 =  80
   9    9   10    8    6    9    7   10    9    7 =  84
   9    6    9    9    6   10   10    8    7    9 =  82
  10    8   10    7    8    8    8    6    9    6 =  80
   8    6    9    8    6    7    7    8    6    8 =  73

        Total                                       791

[Illustration: Six shots with a Smith & Wesson Frontier-model revolver, at
12 yards, reduced charge, made by Mr. GEORGE BIRD, at Conlin's Gallery,
New York, April 23, 1887.]

The first person who attempted to equal Chevalier Paine's record was Dr.
C. C. Foster, who fired 100 shots with a Colt's .38-calibre double-action
revolver on same target, at the same distance, at Walnut Hill, Nov. 20,
1886, he securing 782 points. The next attempt at raising the record was
by Chevalier Paine, who shot against his own record at Walnut Hill with
the same weapon he used in the first 50-yard match. He shot on March 17,
1887, with the following result:--

   9    5    7   10   10   10    9   10    9    8 =  87
   7    6    6    7    6    9    9   10    7    5 =  72
  10    9   10    7    7    7    9   10    9    7 =  85
  10   10    9    7    9    6    7   10    9    9 =  86
  10   10    6   10   10    8   10    7   10    9 =  90
   9    8    7    8    7    9   10    6    8    7 =  79
  10    8    9    9    8   10    9    8    6    9 =  86
  10    7    8    9   10    9   10   10    6    8 =  87
   8    8    8    6   10    9    7    9   10    7 =  82
  10    6    9   10    9    8    7   10    9    9 =  87

        Total                                       841

It will be observed that 70 of the 100 shots were bull's-eyes; 29 of the
shots were tens, or in the 3-36/100 circle. The first 10 shots broke all
previous 10-shot records; the fifth string counted 90, and was at that
time the best 10-shot record at 50 yards. The aggregate of 841 for the 100
shots was 50 points over his previous record, and 59 points more than had
ever been secured by any other individual in a 100-shot match.

This 100-shot was unbroken until Nov. 4, 1887; but on May 21, 1887, Mr. W.
W. Bennett broke the 10-shot 50 yards' record on the Standard American
target, by recording the following score at Walnut Hill:--

  10 8 10 6 10 7 10 10 10 10 = 91

On November 4 Mr. F. E Bennett fired 100 shots at 50 yards with a Smith &
Wesson Russian-model, .44-calibre army revolver, with factory ammunition,
with the declared object of breaking the 100-shot record. He scored the
following result:--

   1    7    8   10   10    9    7   10    7    9   10 =  87
   2    8    9    8    9    7   10    8    6    9    9 =  83
   3    6   10    9    8   10   10    9    8   10    7 =  87
   4    8    9   10    9    6   10    7   10    8    8 =  85
   5    7    9    8    8    9    5    6    9   10    7 =  78
   6    9   10    8    7   10   10    8   10    6    9 =  87
   7   10    9    9    8   10   10   10    7    7    9 =  89
   8   10    9    9    7    9    9    7   10    8    7 =  85
   9    9   10    7    9   10    7    8    9    7   10 =  86
  10   10    8    9   10    8    8   10    9    9    9 =  90

        Total                                            857

This score was 16 points higher than any previous record.

On November 14 a second match was shot by him, under similar conditions as
the first, resulting as follows:--

   1    7    9   10   10    9    8   10    8    8    6 =  85
   2    9    9   10   10    9   10    9   10    9    7 =  92
   3   10    9   10   10    8    9   10    9    9    7 =  91
   4    7   10    9    8   10    8    8    8   10    7 =  85
   5    7    9    9   10    8   10   10   10    9    9 =  91
   6   10    8   10    8   10    7    9   10    7    9 =  88
   7    7    8    8    8    9    9    7   10    8    7 =  81
   8    7    9   10    5    9    8    8    9    9    9 =  83
   9    9    9   10   10    7   10   10   10    9    8 =  92
  10    7   10    9    9    7   10    9   10    8   10 =  89

        Total                                            877

This aggregate being 20 points higher than any previous record.

On Nov. 25, 1887, Mr. F. E. Bennett fired 100 shots, under similar
conditions, the 10-shot aggregate being:--

  85 89 87 86 88 81 95 89 = 852

He fell short of the 100-shot record, but broke the 10-shot record by the
following score:--

  10 10 10 9 9 10 9 10 9 9 = 95

[Illustration: Six shots with a Smith & Wesson .44-calibre Russian-model
revolver, reduced charge, made in Conlin's Gallery, New York, Feb. 12,
1887, by Mr. J. T. B. COLLINS.]

A diagram of this target is shown on page 100, in an illustration reduced
one-quarter.

[Illustration: 95 out of a possible 100, on Standard American target, in
10 consecutive shots, at 50 yards, with a Smith & Wesson .44-calibre
Russian-model revolver, with Union Metallic Cartridge Co. ammunition, made
at Walnut Hill, Mass., Nov. 25, 1887, by Mr. F. E. BENNETT. Reduced
one-quarter.]

In November, 1887, a wager was made that Mr. F. E. Bennett would equal or
surpass 841 points or better for six consecutive days, firing 100 shots a
day, at 50 yards, on the Standard American target, using factory
ammunition. He commenced his task December 5, and following is the score
in detail:--

_December 5._

   1    6   10    8   10    7   10   10   10   10   10 =  91
   2    8   10    9   10    7    9    9    9   10    8 =  89
   3    9   10   10    6    9   10    9   10   10   10 =  93
   4   10    9    9    6   10   10   10    8    9    9 =  90
   5    8   10    7    6    9    8    9    9   10    9 =  85
   6    8    9    9   10   10   10   10   10   10    8 =  94
   7    7    9   10   10    6    9   10    8    7    6 =  82
   8   10   10    9   10    7    9    8    9    7    9 =  88
   9   10   10    8    8   10    9   10   10    7    8 =  90
  10    9    7    7   10   10    8    8    9    9    7 =  84

        Total                                            886

_December 6._

   1    5    7   10    9   10   10   10    9    9    8 =  87
   2    8    9   10    7    6    9   10   10   10   10 =  89
   3    8    9   10    8   10    7    8   10   10    9 =  89
   4    8    9   10    7    7    8    9    9    8   10 =  85
   5    9   10    7   10   10   10   10   10   10    8 =  94
   6    9    9   10   10    0    7   10    9    9   10 =  83
   7    6    7    9   10    9    9   10    9    9    6 =  84
   8    8    9   10    9    9   10   10    8    6    8 =  87
   9   10   10    8    9   10   10   10    9    8    8 =  92
  10    8    6    7    8    7    9   10    8    6    8 =  77

        Total                                            867

_December 7._

   1   10    8    9    0   10    6    6    9    6    7 =  71
   2    7    8   10    8    7    8    9    8    8   10 =  83
   3    7    9    6    7   10    7    8    8    9    7 =  78
   4    7    9   10    7    9   10    7    9   10    6 =  84
   5    8    8    8    9    9    8    8   10    9    9 =  86
   6   10    7    8   10   10   10   10    9   10   10 =  94
   7    7    9    8   10    9    8   10    6    9   10 =  86
   8    8    7    8    7    7   10    9    9    8    7 =  80
   9    9    9    9    9   10    8    8   10    9    9 =  90
  10    8   10    8    8    7    8    8    8    8    7 =  80

        Total                                            832

_December 8._

   1    8    7   10    9    8    9    7    7   10    8 =  83
   2    8    7    7    9    9    8    7   10    9    8 =  82
   3   10    5    9    8    5   10    8    9    8    6 =  78
   4   10    6    9   10    8    9    9    9   10   10 =  90
   5    8   10   10    8   10    7   10    9    9   10 =  91
   6    7    6    9    9    6   10   10   10    7   10 =  84
   7    7    8    7    9    8    8    8    8    7   10 =  80
   8    9    7    8   10   10   10   10    6   10   10 =  90
   9    9    8    9    9    7    8    9    6    9   10 =  84
  10    5    6    8   10    7    6    9   10   10   10 =  81

        Total                                            843

_December 9._

   1   10    7    9    9    7   10   10    8    7    8 =  85
   2    7    9    8   10    7    9   10    7    9    8 =  84
   3    8    8   10    9    9   10    9    8    9   10 =  90
   4    7    8   10    9    9   10   10    7   10   10 =  90
   5    7    8   10    8    9    9   10    9    9    8 =  87
   6   10    8    9    9    9    8    8    9   10    6 =  86
   7    9   10    7    9    8   10   10    9    8    8 =  88
   8   10    7   10    8    9    8    8   10    8    7 =  85
   9    9    8    9    9    7    9    8    8   10   10 =  87
  10    7    7    9    8   10    7   10    8   10   10 =  86

        Total                                            868

_December 10._

   1    9    8    8    9   10   10    9    9   10    8 =  90
   2    7   10    7   10    8   10   10    7    9    9 =  87
   3   10    8    9    6    9    8    7    8    8   10 =  83
   4   10    9   10   10    9    8   10    7   10    9 =  92
   5    9    9    7   10    9    9    8   10    8    8 =  87
   6   10    8   10   10   10    9    7    9    9    8 =  90
   7    9   10    9   10   10    7    6    9    9    8 =  87
   8    9    7   10    6   10    8   10    9    8    8 =  85
   9    9   10    6    9   10   10   10    9   10   10 =  93
  10    6    7    9    9    9    5    8   10   10    9 =  82

        Total                                            876

[Illustration: Eighteen consecutive shots, made by Mr. ALLEN P. KELLY, in
Conlin's Gallery, New York City, in revolver match, Massachusetts Rifle
Association target.]

The shooting of Mr. F. E. Bennett attracted the attention of Chevalier
Paine, who, on December 9, fired 100 shots, using a .38/44-calibre Smith
& Wesson revolver, this arm being the same as the .44 calibre in exterior,
but is bored .38 calibre instead of.44. It has a straight shell, which
extends entirely through the cylinder, coming flush with the end of
cylinder. This was a special arm, made to order, and took
specially-prepared ammunition. Only the aggregate for 100 shots was
preserved, which was 878 points. This was one point higher than had
previously been scored.

On December 13 Chevalier Paine fired 190 shots with a Smith & Wesson
.44-calibre revolver, but as 100-shot records were being compared, we take
the first 100 shots which made the most favorable showing, and the 10-shot
strings aggregated as follows:--

  90 92 87 89 86 85 92 85 85 91 = 882

The next trial was on Thursday, December 15, using same revolver and
ammunition, with the following result:--

  92 89 89 89 86 88 85 85 83 85 = 871

On December 17 he again faced the target, firing 210 shots, the first and
second 100 shots showing the following results:--

  94 96 90 85 87 86 81 92 88 87 = 886
  89 96 90 89 91 86 87 85 89 86 = 888

The last 100-shot score of 888 being two points more than any previous
record. The 10-shot record was also broken by two strings, which
aggregated 96 points; higher by one point than any previously known
record.

[Illustration: Score of 96 out of a possible 100, in 10 consecutive shots,
on Standard American target, at 50 yards, made by CHEVALIER IRA A. PAINE,
at Narragansett Gun Club grounds, Providence, R.I., Dec. 17, 1887, with
Smith & Wesson .44-calibre Russian-model revolver, with factory ammunition
of Union Metallic Cartridge Co. make. Reduced one-quarter.]

On December 22 Chevalier Paine fired 100 consecutive shots in the presence
of the author, attempting to beat all previous records. The shooting was
done at the Narragansett Gun Club grounds, at Providence, R.I. The
revolver used was the Smith & Wesson Russian-model .44 calibre, with
factory ammunition. The score was as follows:--

   8    8   10   10    8    9   10   10    9    9 =  91
   9    9    7   10    9    9    7    7   10   10 =  87
  10   10    8    7    9    8   10   10    9    8 =  89
  10    9    8   10   10   10    9   10    7    9 =  92
   7    9   10   10    8    9    8    8    7   10 =  86
  10    7    8    9   10   10   10    9   10    9 =  92
  10    8   10   10   10   10    8    9    9   10 =  94
   8    9   10   10   10    7   10    9   10   10 =  93
  10    8    9    9   10    8   10    8    7   10 =  89
  10    8    8    9   10   10    9    8    9   10 =  91

        Total                                       904

This aggregate raised the record 16 points.

It was generally supposed, when Chevalier Ira Paine secured an aggregate
of 904 points on the Standard American target at 50 yards with a Smith &
Wesson .44-calibre revolver, that the 100-shot record would not be
disturbed for some time. Mr. W. W. Bennett repeatedly stated that he would
never attempt to break his brother's record of 886 points, but would
contest against the record of any other individual. When it was announced
that Chevalier Paine had secured 904 points Mr. W. W. Bennett quietly
announced his intention of surpassing this record, earnestly went to work,
and, in the presence of reliable witnesses, rolled up the unprecedented
record of 914 points,--10 points higher than had ever been previously
secured, and twice during the shooting equalled the best 10-shot record of
96 points.

He shot at Walnut Hill range December 23, using a .44-calibre,
single-action Smith & Wesson Russian-model army revolver, loaded with
factory ammunition of Union Metallic Cartridge Co. make. The scores in
detail are as follows:--

   1    9   10   10   10   10    8    9   10   10   10 =  96
   2    8   10   10    9    9    9    9   10    8    7 =  90
   3    8    9   10   10    9    9   10    8    9   10 =  92
   4    8    9   10    9   10    7   10    9    8   10 =  90
   5   10    9    9   10   10   10   10   10   10    8 =  96
   6    9   10    8   10    7   10    9   10   10    9 =  92
   7   10   10    9    7   10    7    9    9   10    8 =  89
   8    8    7    8    9   10   10    9   10    7    8 =  86
   9    9    8   10    8   10    9   10   10   10    9 =  93
  10   10    7    9   10    9    9    9   10    9    8 =  90

        Total                                            914

It should here be recorded that Chevalier Paine on his first and second
trial cleaned his revolver between every 10 shots. Mr. F. E. Bennett in
all of his shooting cleaned only between each 10 shots. In the balance of
Chevalier Paine's shooting he insisted on cleaning his revolver between
every 5 or 6 shots; and Mr. W. W. Bennett, after Chevalier Paine departed
from the custom of cleaning between each 10 shots, run a brush through
the inside of his barrel after every shot. There being no established
rules for pistol and revolver shooting in regard to cleaning, the results
were accepted as records of performances with revolvers. It is also
believed that Chevalier Paine's shooting, as well as Mr. W. W. Bennett's,
and a portion of Mr. F. E. Bennett's shooting, was done with a
trigger-pull of less than 3 pounds.

[Illustration: 96 out of a possible 100, on Standard American target, at
50 yards, in 10 consecutive shots, with a Smith & Wesson .44-calibre
Russian-model revolver, with Union Metallic Cartridge Co. ammunition, made
at Walnut Hill, Mass., Dec. 23, 1887, by Mr. W. W. BENNETT. Reduced
one-quarter.]

[Illustration: Six shots with a Smith & Wesson .38-calibre revolver, at 12
yards, made in Conlin's Gallery, New York City, April 1, 1887, by Mr. D.
D. DAVIS.]

It will be found that within a period of two years the possibilities of
the revolver have been proven to be considerably beyond what the
manufacturers of the arms, the makers of the ammunition, and the experts
using the weapons supposed were its capabilities.

The first 100-shot record was 791 points, the last 914 points, or an
increase of 123 points.

[Illustration: Six shots with a .44-calibre revolver, at 12 yards, reduced
charge, by Mr. GEORGE BIRD, New York. Score, 71; possible, 72.]

In order to carry the shooting at 50 yards from its commencement on the
Standard American target to latest known record with no diversion, the
author now finds it necessary to go back several months to chronicle an
event worthy of note.

It has been stated that the first revolver competition on the Standard
American target was shot at 25 yards, and it has been shown that the
distance was too short for that target. When the programme of the 1886
annual meeting at Creedmoor was being arranged, it was proposed to use the
200-yard Standard American target at 30 yards, the author urged the
gentlemen in charge of this tournament to use the 100-yard Rifle target at
this distance, and by showing what had been accomplished on the 200-yard
target, it convinced them that a 100-yard Rifle target with a 4-inch
bull's eye was better for revolver or pistol shooting at 30 yards; and
that target and distance were selected for the revolver match at Creedmoor
in 1887, and many of the rifle and pistol clubs throughout the country
arranged similar matches. The first record established on the 30-yard
pistol target was in a 5-shot reentry match at the spring meeting of the
Massachusetts Rifle Association, in June, 1887. The score of 43 out of a
possible 50 was made by Mr. W. W. Bennett, and was the highest score made
during the three-days' tournament. It was the opinion of a majority of
revolver-shooters at that time that this target at 30 yards was a
difficult one to roll up a high score on, and that 40 for 5-shots and 80
for 10-shots was good shooting. At the annual meeting of the National
Rifle Association at Creedmoor in September, 1887, the highest scores
recorded at 30 yards were by Mr. J. T. B. Collins, who secured three
aggregates of 44, and Mr. G. L. Garrigues, who also secured one score of
44, this being the highest aggregate secured in five shots at that time.

[Illustration: POSITION FORMERLY ADOPTED BY MR. F. E. BENNETT. (From a
photograph taken while shooting.)]

At the fall meeting of the Massachusetts Rifle Association Mr. F. E.
Bennett won the first prize in the revolver competition, with the
following scores:--

   9   10    9    9    7 = 44
   8   10   10    9    8 = 45
  10    8    7   10   10 = 45
   9    9    9    8   10 = 45
  10   10   10    8   10 = 48

This made 48 the best 5-shot record.

The next event at this range was the recording of the following 10-shot
score at Walnut Hill on Oct. 12, 1887, by Mr. F. E. Bennett:--

  10 9 10 9 8 8 10 7 10 9 = 90

This being the best 10-shot record. This shooting was followed by
Chevalier Ira Paine, who, in November, 1887, recorded the same aggregate
at Walnut Hill.

A week later Mr. F. E. Bennett recorded in a regular match at Walnut Hill
an aggregate of 91, which, at the time of closing this chapter, is the
best known 10-shot record.

[Illustration: Score of 48 out of a possible 50, in 5 consecutive shots,
on Standard American target, at 30 yards, made by Mr. F. E. BENNETT, in a
match at Walnut Hill, Mass., Oct. 6, with a Smith & Wesson Russian-model
.44-calibre revolver, and factory ammunition, Union Metallic Cartridge Co.
make. Reduced one-half.]

[Illustration: CHEVALIER IRA A. PAINE'S POSITION. (From a photograph taken
while shooting.)]




CHAPTER X.

PISTOL AND REVOLVER SHOOTING AT LONG RANGE.


Pistol and revolver shooting has been almost wholly confined to short
range, both in America and Europe. Occasional reports have reached this
country of shooting in Austria to a distance of about 400 yards. This
shooting was done with heavy single-shot pistols, weighing from three to
five pounds, of about .40 calibre, fitted with sights capable of very fine
adjustment, with set triggers and appliances to aid in securing good
results.

To learn the capabilities of an American-made single-shot pistol, the
author ordered a pair of the Remingtons, with 12-inch barrels, .32
calibre, and chambered for the cartridge made by the Winchester Repeating
Arms Co. for the .32-calibre repeating rifle; the charge being 20 grains
of powder and 115 grains of lead. The sights fitted to these pistols were
very crude, and not suitable for the work attempted. With better sights,
doubtless much finer results would be chronicled. The first attempt at
long-range shooting with these pistols was made by Mr. W. W. Bennett, at
Walnut Hill. He shot on the 50-yard Standard American revolver target,
at a distance of 75 yards, scoring as follows:--

  8 10 5 10 9 10 9 9 8 7 = 85

[Illustration: MR. W. W. BENNETT, EXPERT PISTOL AND REVOLVER SHOT.
(Shooting a Stevens Pistol.)]

Falling back to 100 yards and using the same target, he made the following
scores:--

   5 7 7 6  8 4 5 9 8 7 = 66
  10 5 5 5 10 8 5 5 7 7 = 67

Nineteen of the twenty shots being in a circle of 19-68/100 inches. He
then proceeded to the 200-yard firing-point, where military marksmen were
practising, and several times scored in ten shots 36 points out of 50.

Considerable difficulty was experienced in sighting on the eight-inch
bull's eye at a distance of 200 yards, and a trial was given on the
second-class target, which has the following dimensions:--

  Size of target, 6 x 6 feet.
  Bull's-eye, circular, 22 inches in diameter.
  Centre,        "      38   "          "
  Inner,         "      54   "          "
  Outer, remainder of target.

The first trial was at a distance of 150 yards, where the following scores
were made:--

_Six shots, possible 30._

  5 5 5 5 5 4 = 29

_200 yards._

  3 5 5 4 5 5 = 27

[Illustration: Mr. B. J. ROBERTSON, Expert Revolver Shot. (Champion of
Kentucky, 1887.)]

_250 yards._

  3 4 4 3 5 5 = 24

_300 yards._

  2 5 2 3 3 5 = 20

_350 yards._

  5 5 3 4 3 4 = 24

All of the above shooting was done off-hand, with the right arm fully
extended.

It was generally believed among the expert pistol-shots the author has
met, that the modern American revolver could not be depended on much
beyond 75 yards, and it was thought useless to try to accomplish good work
beyond.

On Oct. 27, 1887, Chevalier Paine devoted the entire day, in company with
a representative of THE RIFLE, in experimenting with the revolver at
Walnut Hill. Among the numerous experiments tried was shooting with Smith
& Wesson revolvers, at long range. It was decided to shoot on the
second-class target, commencing at 125 yards and falling back until it was
thought the limit of accuracy with the revolver was found. It was agreed
that each one should take sighting-shots at the several distances until
the target was hit, the first shot striking the target and the following
five to count.

[Illustration: Mr. WALTER WINANS, EXPERT REVOLVER SHOT.]

The result was as follows:--

                                      REPRESENTATIVE
  CHEVALIER PAINE.                    OF THE RIFLE.

                      _125 yards._
  3 2 5 4 5 5 = 24                    2 4 5 5 4 5 = 25

                      _150 yards._
  3 4 5 5 5 5 = 27                    4 4 5 5 4 4 = 26

                      _200 yards._
  5 2 2 4 0 5 = 18                    4 3 3 3 3 4 = 20

                      _250 yards._
  3 4 5 3 2 3 = 20                    4 3 2 4 0 0 = 13

                      _300 yards._
  4 5 0 0 4 0 = 13                    2 0 2 0 2 4 = 10

In some cases the first sighting-shot struck the target. At 300 yards it
took three shots from one party to find the target; at all other times one
or two shots were sufficient. The scores given above are not intended to
show excellence in marksmanship, but to record the results obtained at the
first trial by persons unacquainted with the range of the revolver and the
sights. The ammunition used was a condemned lot sent to the range by
mistake, but which, doubtless, was better than supposed to be. It had been
loaded several years, and the lubricant was hard, and in many cases
partially detached from the bullet. After the first score had been secured
at the several distances, Chevalier Paine shot at 200 yards, and secured
29 out of a possible 30, making five bull's-eyes and one centre.

Two weeks later Mr. F. E. Bennett, with a .44-calibre Russian-model Smith
& Wesson revolver, shot over about the same distances, with the following
results:--

_2d class target.--150 yards._

  5 5 5 5 5 5 = 30

_200 yards._

  5 2 4 0 4 5 = 20

_250 yards._

  3 4 5 4 3 0 = 19

_300 yards._

  5 3 0 0 0 0 = 8

If the revolver is properly sighted, there is little doubt that good
shooting with this arm can be done up to about 300 yards, under favorable
weather conditions. With a single-shot pistol it has been shown that good
work can be done at 400 yards. The revolver being a more practical weapon
than the pistol, it is likely that the single-shot pistol will in future
be confined almost wholly to indoor target practice, and the revolver will
be used exclusively in many clubs who shoot their matches out of doors. It
has been proven that the revolver is a powerful and accurate weapon from
10 to 250 yards. The results of experiments which have been recorded in
this chapter were made with the object of showing that a marksman, or
soldier with ordinary skill, ought to hit every time, with a shot from an
army revolver, a standing object the size of a mounted cavalryman, from 50
to 250 yards off. As stated, the results given in this chapter were the
first attempts with no previous knowledge of the range of the weapon, and
if practice is carried on it will not surprise the writer to hear that
perfect six-shot scores have been made on the second-class target at
distances from 100 to 250 yards. With the sights used on a Smith & Wesson
.44-calibre Russian-model revolver at 30 and 50 yards one can shoot up to
250 yards without aiming off the target.

[Illustration: Standard American Target, reduced from 50-yard target,
one-sixteenth; from 30-yard, one-eighth. Designed by Major C. W. HINMAN.
Adopted and used by American Pistol and Revolver Clubs.]




CHAPTER XI.

RULES FOR PISTOL AND REVOLVER SHOOTING.


The need of rules governing pistol and revolver competitions has been
apparent during the past three years. The distance, trigger-pull, and some
general rules were briefly laid down by the clubs where matches were shot.
For a time it has been generally believed that the arms used in these
competitions should be classed; that a decision arrived at in regard to
trigger-pull, the sights permitted clearly defined, ammunition described,
and rules determining the amount of cleaning permitted, manner of loading
and firing, positions permitted, and other rules explicitly stated. The
Massachusetts Rifle Association, after a long and careful consideration,
adopted the following rules:--

All meetings for competitions will be conducted by an executive officer,
aided by assistants.

The executive officer shall have control of the range for the conduct of
matches, and shall give such directions to the employes of the club as in
his judgment are necessary for the proper management of the same, and for
the preservation of order.

The executive officer and his assistants are required to see that the
regulations, and such directions as the executive officer may give, are
rigidly complied with by competitors and all other persons upon the range.

[Illustration: MISS ANNIE OAKLEY, Expert Lady Pistol Shot.]

They will see that the squads of competitors are stationed in rear of
firing-points, and that each competitor remains there until called by the
score-keeper to take his position at the firing-point. The score-keepers
will be seated in rear of the firing-points.

Score-keepers shall, as each shot is signalled, call in a loud voice the
name of the competitor and the value of the shot, and, at the conclusion
of the score of each competitor, announce in like manner his name and
total score.

All competitors shall be allowed to examine the records of the
score-keeper during the progress of the match, but in such a manner as not
to interfere with or inconvenience the score-keeper.

Any competitor feeling himself aggrieved by the ruling of the executive
officer, may make to the secretary a statement of his grievance in
writing, which shall be handed at once to the executive committee for its
consideration. The decision of the executive committee shall be final,
subject, however, to the discretion of said committee, or any two members
of it, to refer the matter to the board of directors for its decision.

Challenges will only be permitted at the discretion of the executive
officer. The executive officer may, in his discretion, challenge the
marking of any shot the allowance of which would be unjust to other
competitors, and correct the score accordingly.

[Illustration: HOLSTERS FOR REVOLVERS. 1. Leather. 2. Rubber. 3. Leather.]

Any objection to the scoring of a shot as signalled, or to one not
signalled, must be made before another shot shall have been fired on the
same target.

It shall be the right of the shooter to challenge the scoring, and the
executive officer may decide upon the evidence the actual value of the
shot.

Any alteration of a scoring-ticket must be witnessed by an officer in
charge of the firing-point, and indorsed with his initials.

Double entries are prohibited, no shot being allowed to count in more than
one match.

No sighting-shots shall be allowed except on targets specially designated
for that purpose by the executive officer, and in no case on targets on
which a match is in progress, unless in an emergency, to be decided by the
executive officer.

Unfinished scores shall be considered worthless after having been
withdrawn from the scorer, and no shots can be claimed under or by virtue
of the same after having been so withdrawn.

No scorer is allowed to have at one time more than one score-card for each
shooter, and no shooter is allowed to shoot without having an unfinished
score-card deposited with the scorer.

Ties shall be decided as follows, viz.: each competitor shooting three
shots, until decided.

[Illustration: BEAN'S PERSPIRATION-PROOF PISTOL HOLSTERS. (Manufactured by
John P. Lovell Arms Company, Boston.)]

No scores with handicap shall exceed a perfect score.

Competitors who have to shoot off ties will be notified as soon after each
match as practicable. When the ties are shot off one sighting-shot shall
be allowed without charge. Competitors not present at the firing-points at
the hour named for shooting off the ties lose their right to shoot, and
will be placed accordingly.

Temporary discontinuance of matches, on account of bad weather, and the
closing limit for receiving entries shall be at the discretion of the
executive officer.

An entry-ticket, except when sold in block, maybe transferred at any
reasonable time, by presenting it to the statistical officer for exchange.
Any erasure or substitution of name by the holder will forfeit the ticket.

In single-entry matches no entry shall be made after the firing begins if
any participant objects.

Competitors will have choice of prizes unless otherwise stated.

PENALTIES.--Competitors must make themselves acquainted with the
regulations, as the plea of ignorance will not be entertained.

No competitor shall be allowed to use more than one name besides his own
in any one match.

A competitor failing to report at the time and target to which he is
assigned, or shooting at pool or practice after the hour set for the
simultaneous opening of a match, shall forfeit his entry. (The last
clause will not prevent pool-shooting between scores in reentry matches.)
Any member shooting at pool or practice between shots of a score shall
forfeit the score.

All competitors and other persons must preserve order and decorum, submit
to the direction and decisions of the executive officer, and make all
objections and protests, if any, to the proper officials, in a manner
which will not disturb others.

Pistols and revolvers may be discharged only in firing at the target in
pools or matches, or into such warming-pits as may be designated (in that
case without bullet), and any competitor or other person discharging
pistols or revolvers otherwise, or having a loaded shell inserted in his
pistol or revolver while elsewhere than upon the actual firing-point, may
be disqualified for the time being, or fined a sum not exceeding three
dollars, at the discretion of the executive officer.

Any violation of rules or discreditable conduct which the executive
officer may consider of such magnitude as to require it, shall be reported
to the directors for their action.

Any shooter firing upon the wrong target shall be recorded a miss.

The rules governing rifle competitions, so far as they are applicable,
shall be in force in all pistol competitions.

In all matches, when not otherwise mentioned, either single-shot pistols
or revolvers will be permitted upon equal conditions; but if matches call
for the revolver the single-shot pistol will not be admitted, unless
specially mentioned.


SPECIAL RULES.

Pistols and revolvers allowed in competitions must conform to the
following conditions:--

    _A._--Army or navy revolver.

    _B._--Any revolver.

    _C._--Any pistol.

_A._--_Army or Navy Revolvers_ must be such as have been adopted by any
government for the armament of its army or navy, and must conform in all
respects of model, sights, and ammunition used, to the service revolver of
such nation.

_B._--_Any Revolver._--Revolvers of any calibre, maximum weight, three
pounds; maximum length of bore, including cylinder, ten inches.

_C._--_Single-Shot Pistols._--Any breech or muzzle loading pistol, maximum
weight, three pounds; maximum length of bore, ten inches.

_Trigger-Pull._--In all matches, or in practice shooting, the minimum
trigger-pull shall be three pounds.

_Sights for any Pistols or Revolvers._--The front and rear sights must be
open; the notch of a rear sight, to be considered open, must be as wide at
the top of the notch as at any part; no aperture or peep sights, nor any
manner of covered sights, shall be permitted. Lateral sliding-bars or
wind-gauge may be used on rear open sight, also any elevating front or
rear open sight. The use of a notch for a front sight will not be
permitted. Sights may be smoked or blackened in any desired manner. No
device shall be worn on or over the eye, or on glasses, to secure the
sight through an aperture.

[Illustration: Diagram of six consecutive shots, fired from a rest, at 50
yards, with a Colt's Frontier Model revolver, .44 calibre, full
charge,--40 grains of powder, 200 grains of lead.]

_Ammunition._--If factory ammunition is called for it shall be of any
make, of any established manufacturer, generally procurable in stores, and
brought to the shooting-point in unbroken boxes, with the label of the
manufacturer intact.

_Cleaning._--In any match where both pistols and revolvers are allowed,
competitors may clean their arms at will, provided such cleaning does not
delay the firing, which shall be at the rate of one shot per minute, or
oftener during the firing of each score, except in case of accident. In
such case the time may be extended, in the discretion of the executive
officer.

In matches confined to revolvers the cylinder must be fully charged, or a
sufficient number of chambers charged to complete the score. Blowing into
or cleaning the barrel in any way will not be permitted, except when the
cylinder is completely discharged.

_Loading and Firing._--No arms shall be loaded except at the firing-point,
the muzzle of piece being kept in the direction of the target till the
arm is either discharged or unloaded.

Miss-fires shall not count; but an accidental discharge shall, in every
instance, be counted.

_Position._--The position shall be as follows: Standing, free from any
other artificial support; the pistol or revolver held in one hand only,
with the arm extended free from the body, and unsupported in any way. The
rear sight of the pistol or revolver shall not be nearer to the eye than
twelve inches.

_Targets._--The Standard American target, full size, having an eight-inch
bull, shall be used in matches at fifty yards' distance. The same target
reduced to one-half size, having a four-inch bull, in matches at thirty
yards' distance. The same target reduced to one-quarter size, having a
two-inch bull, in matches at twenty yards' distance. The target reduced in
the same proportion to distance, in matches of a lesser range.

_Marking and Scoring._--Unless otherwise specified, each competitor will
have a separate target provided and will fire his score throughout, when
the target will be examined by the scorer and the score recorded. In case
of any dispute as to the value of a shot, the same may be challenged, as
provided for in Rule 3, sec. 4, of shooting rules governing rifle
competitions.