CHAPTER XIII

LOVE

The golden sands, the purple cliffs, the translucent blue of the
heavens, and the group of picturesque rascals jabbering and
gesticulating and pressing about their chief, made a picture Kathlyn
was never to forget.

"Patience, my little ones!" said the chief, showing his white strong
teeth in what was more of a snarl than a smile.  "There is plenty of
time."

Bruce leaned toward Kathlyn.

"Stand perfectly still, just as you are.  I believe I can reach the
knot back of your hands.  This squabbling is the very thing needed.
They will not pay any attention to us for a few minutes, and if I can
read signs they'll all be at one another's throats shortly."

"But even if we get free what can we do?"

Kathlyn was beginning to lose both faith and heart.  The sight of her
father being led back to Allaha by Durga Ram, after all the misery to
which he had been subjected, shook the courage which had held her up
these long happy weeks.  For she realized that her father was still
weak, and that any additional suffering would kill him.

"You mustn't talk like that," said Bruce.  "You've been in tighter
places than this.  If we can get free, leave the rest to me.  So long
as one can see and hear and move, there's hope."

"I'm becoming a coward.  Do what you can.  I promise to obey you in all
things."

Bruce bent as far as he could, and went desperately to work at the knot
with his teeth.  Success or failure did not really matter; simply, he
did not propose to die without making a mighty struggle to avoid death.
The first knot became loose, then another.  Kathlyn stirred her hands
cautiously.

"Now!" he whispered.

She twisted her hands two or three times and found them free.

"Mine, now!" said Bruce.  "Hurry!"

It was a simple matter for her to release Bruce.

"God bless those rupees!" he murmured.  "There'll be a fine row in a
minute.  Keep perfectly still, and when the moment comes follow me into
the cave.  They have left their guns in there."

"You are a brave and ready man, Mr. Bruce."

"You called me John once."

"Well, then, John," a ghost of a smile flitting across her lips.  Men
were not generally sentimental in the face of death.

"There are nine of us!" screamed one of the brigands.

"And I claim one bag because without my help and brains you would have
had nothing," roared the chief.  "Who warned you against the opium?
Ha, pig!"

The first blow was struck.  Instantly the chief drew his knife and
lunged at the two nearest him.

"Treachery!"

"Ha!  Pigs!  Dogs!  Come, I'll show you who is master!"

"Thief!"

The remaining brigands closed in upon their leader and bore him upon
his back.

"To the tiger with him!"

"Now!" cried Bruce.

He flung the rope from his hands, caught Kathlyn by the arm, and
running and stumbling, they gained the cave, either ignored or
unobserved by the victorious brigands.

They dragged the stunned leader to his feet and haled him to the cage,
lashing him to a wheel.  Next, they seized the rope which operated the
door and retired to the mouth of the cave.

"Rob us, would he!"

"Take the lion's share when we did all the work!"

"Swine!"

"I will give it all to you!" whined the whilom chief, mad with terror.

"And knife us in the back when we sleep!  No, no!  You have kicked and
cuffed us for the last time!"

Bruce picked up one of the rifles and drew Kathlyn farther into the
cave.

"Get behind me and crouch low.  They'll come around to us presently."

The rascals gave the rope a savage pull, and from where he stood Bruce
could see the lean striped body of the furious tiger leap to freedom.

"Keep your eyes shut.  It will not be a pleasant thing to look at," he
warned the girl.

But Kathlyn could not have closed her eyes if she had tried.  She saw
the brute pause, turn and strike at the helpless man at the wheel, then
lope off, doubtless having in mind to test his freedom before he fed.
The remaining brigands rushed out and gathered up the bags of rupees.

This was the opportunity for which Bruce had waited.

"Come.  There may be some outlet to this cave.  Here is another rifle.
Let us cut for it!  When thieves fall out; you know the old saying."

They ran back several yards and discovered a kind of chasm leading
diagonally upward.

"Thank God!  We can get out of this after all.  Are you strong enough
for a stiff climb?"

"I've got to be--John!"

"Trust me, Kathlyn," he replied simply.  He had but one life, but he
determined then and there to make it equal or outlast the six lives
which stood between him and liberty.

The brigands, having succeeded in their mutiny, bethought themselves of
their prisoners, only to find that they had vanished.  Familiar with
the cave and its outlet, they started eagerly in pursuit.  They
reasoned that if an old man was worth three bags of rupees, two young
people might naturally be worth twice as much.  And besides, being
tigers, they had tasted blood.

A shout caused Bruce to turn.  Instantly he raised his rifle, and
pulled the trigger.  The result was merely a snap.  The gun had not
been loaded.  He snatched Kathlyn's rifle, but this, too, was useless.
The brigands yelled exultantly and began to swarm up the ragged cliff.
Bruce flung aside the gun and turned his attention to a boulder.
Halfway up the chasm had a width which was little broader than the
shoulders of an ordinary man.  He waited till he saw the wretches
within a yard or so of this spot, then pushed this boulder.  It roared
and crashed and bounded, and before it reached the narrow pathway Bruce
had started a mate to it.  Then a third followed.  This caused a
terrific slide of rocks and boulders, and the brigands turned for their
lives.

"That will be about all for the present," said Bruce, wiping his
forehead.  "Now if we can make that village we shall be all right.
Bala Khan's men will not leave with the camels till they learn whether
we are dead or alive.  It will be a hard trek, Miss Kathlyn.  Ten miles
over sand is worse than fifty over turf.  I don't think we'll see any
more of those ruffians."

"Kathlyn," she said.

"Well--Kathlyn!"

"Or, better still, at home they call me Kit."

They smiled into each other's eyes, and no words were needed.  Thus
quickly youth discards its burdens!

That he did not take her into his arms at once proved the caliber of
the man.  And Kathlyn respected him none the less for his control.  She
knew now; and she was certain that her eyes had told him as frankly as
any words would have done; and she fell into his stride, strangely
embarrassed and not a little frightened.  The firm grasp of his hand as
here and there he steadied her sent a thrill of exquisite pleasure
through her.

Love!  She laughed softly; and he stopped and eyed her in astonishment.

"What is it?"

"Nothing," she answered.

But she went on with the thought which had provoked her laughter.
Love!  Danger all about, unseen, hidden; misery in the foreground, and
perhaps death beyond; her father back in chains, to face she knew not
what horrors, and yet she could pause by the wayside and think of love!

"There was something," he insisted.  "That wasn't happy laughter.  What
caused it?"

"Some day I will tell you--if we live."

"Live?"  Then he laughed.

And she was not slow to recognize the Homeric quality of his laughter.

"Kit, I am going to get you and your father out of all this, if but for
one thing."

"And what is that?" curious in her turn.

"I'll tell you later."  And there the matter stood.

The journey to the village proved frightfully exhausting.  The two were
in a sorry plight when they reached the well.

The camel men were overjoyed at the sight of them.  For hours they had
waited in dread, contemplating flight which would take them anywhere
but to Bala Khan, who rewarded cowardice in one fashion only.  For, but
for their cowardly inactivity, their charges might by now be safe in
the seaport toward which they had been journeying.  So they brought
food for the two and begged that they would not be accused of cowardice
to Bala Khan.

"Poor devils!" said Bruce.  "Had they shown the least resistance those
brigand chaps would have killed them off like rats."  He beckoned to
the head man.  "Take us back to Bala Khan in the morning, and we
promise that no harm shall befall you.  Now, find us a place to sleep."

Nevertheless, it was hard work to keep that promise.  Bala Khan stormed
and swore that death was too good for the watery hearts of his camel
men.  They should be crucified on the wall.  Kathlyn's diplomacy alone
averted the tragedy.  Finally, with a good deal of reluctance, Bala
Khan gave his word.

So Bruce and Kathlyn planned to return to Allaha, and it was the Khan
himself who devised the method.  The two young people should stain
their skins and don native dress.  He would give them two camels
outright, only they would be obliged to make the journey without
servants.

"But if harm comes to you, and I hear of it, by the beard of the
prophet, I'll throw into Allaha such a swarm of stinging bees that all
Hind shall hear of it.  Now go, and may Allah watch over you, infidels
though you be!"



Umballa sent a messenger on before, for he loved the theatrical, which
is innate in all Orientals.  He desired to enter the city to the
shrilling of reeds and the booming of tom-toms; to impress upon this
unruly populace that he, Durga Ram, was a man of his word, that when he
set out to accomplish a thing it was as good as done.  His arrival was
greeted with cheers, but there was an undertone of groans that was not
pleasant to his keen ears.  Deep in his heart he cursed, for by these
sounds he knew that only the froth was his, the froth and scum of the
town.  The iron heel; so they would have it in preference to his
friendship.  Oh, for some way to trap Ramabai, to hold him up in
ridicule, to smash him down from his pedestal, known but as yet unseen!

He wondered if he would find any more of those anonymous notes relating
to the inviolable person of Ramabai.  Woe to him who laid them about,
could he but put his hand upon him!  He, Durga Ram, held Allaha in the
hollow of his hand, and this day he would prove it.

So he put a rope about the waist of Colonel Hare, and led him through
the streets, as the ancient Romans he had read about did to the
vanquished.  He himself recognized the absurdity of all these things,
but his safety lay in the fact that the populace at large were
incapable of reasoning for themselves; they saw only that which was
visible to the eye.

On the palace steps he harangued the people, praising his deeds.  He
alone had gone into the wilderness and faced death to ransom their
lawful king.  Why these bonds?  The king had shirked his duty; he had
betrayed his trust; but in order that the people should be no longer
without a head, this man should become their prisoner king; he should
be forced to sign laws for their betterment.  Without the royal
signature the treasury could not be touched, and now the soldiers
should be paid in full.

From the soldiers about came wild huzzahs.

Ahmed and Lal Singh, packed away in the heart of the crowd, exchanged
gloomy looks.  Once the army was Umballa's, they readily understood
what would follow: Umballa would acclaim himself, and the troops would
back him.

"We have a thousand guns and ten thousand rounds of ammunition,"
murmured Lal Singh.

"Perhaps we had best prevail upon Ramabai to strike at once.  But wait.
The Colonel Sahib understands.  He knows that if he signs anything it
will directly proved his death-warrant.  There is still an obstacle at
Umballa's feet.  Listen!"

Sadly Umballa recounted his adventure in full.  The daughter of the
king and his friend, the American hunter, were dead.  He, Umballa, had
arrived too late.

The colonel, mad with rage, was about to give Umballa the lie publicly,
when he saw a warning hand uplifted, and below that hand the face of
Ahmed.  Ahmed shook his head.  The colonel's shoulders drooped.  In
that sign he read danger.

"They live," said Ahmed.  "That is enough for the present.  Let us
begone to the house of Ramabai."

"The Colonel Sahib is safe for the time being."

"And will be so long as he refuses to open the treasury door to
Umballa.  There is a great deal to smile about, Lal Singh.  Here is a
treasury, guarded by seven leopards, savage as savage can be.  Only two
keepers ever dare approach them, and these keepers refuse to cage the
leopards without a formal order from the king or queen.  Superstition
forbids Umballa to make way with the brutes.  The people, your people
and mine, Lal Singh, believe that these leopards are sacred, and any
who kills them commits sacrilege, and you know what that amounts to
here.  So there he dodders; too cowardly to fly in the face of
superstition.  He must torture and humiliate the Colonel Sahib and his
daughter.  Ah, these white people!  They have heads and hearts of
steel.  I know."

"And Umballa has the heart of a flea-bitten pariah dog.  When the time
comes he will grovel and squirm and whine."

"He will," agreed Ahmed.  "His feet are even now itching for the
treadmill."

The colonel was taken to one of the palace chambers, given a tub and
fresh clothing.  Outside in the corridors guards patrolled, and there
were four who watched the window.  He was a king, but well guarded.
Well, they had crowned him, but never should Umballa, through any
signature of his, put his hand into the royal treasury.  Besides, this
time he had seen pity and sympathy in the faces of many who had looked
upon his entrance to the city.  The one ray of comfort lay in the
knowledge that faithful Ahmed lived.

He dared not think of Kathlyn.  He forced his mind to dwell upon his
surroundings, his own state of misery.  Bruce was there, and Bruce was
a man of action and resource.  He would give a good account of himself
before those bronze devils in the desert made away with him.  He feared
not for Kathlyn's death, only her future.  For they doubtless had lied
to Umballa.  They would not kill Kathlyn so long as they believed she
was worth a single rupee.

Umballa came in, followed by four troopers, who stationed themselves on
each side of the door.

"Your Majesty----"

"Wait!" thundered the colonel.  Suddenly he turned to the troopers.
"Am I your king?"

"Yes, Majesty!"

The four men salaamed.

"Then I order you to arrest this man Durga Ram for treason against the
person of your king!"

The troopers stared, dumfounded, first at the colonel, then at Umballa.

"I command it!"

Umballa laughed.  The troopers did not stir.

"Ah," said the colonel.  "That is all I desire to know.  I am not a
king.  I am merely a prisoner.  Therefore those papers which you bring
me can not lawfully be signed by me."  The colonel turned his back to
Umballa, sought the latticed window and peered forth.

"There are ways," blazed forth Umballa.

"Bah!  You black fool!" replied the colonel, wheeling.  "Have I not yet
convinced you that all you can do is to kill me?  Don't waste your time
in torturing me.  It will neither open my lips nor compel me to take a
character brush in my hand.  If my daughter is dead, so be it.  At any
rate, she is at present beyond your clutches.  You overreached
yourself.  Had you brought her back it is quite possible I might have
surrendered.  But I am alone now."

"You refuse to tell where the filigree basket is hidden?"

"I do."

"You refuse to exercise your prerogative to open the doors of the
treasury?"

"I do."

Umballa opened the door, motioning to the troopers to pass out.  He
framed the threshold and curiously eyed this unbendable man.  Presently
he would bend.  Umballa smiled.

"Colonel Sahib, I am not yet at the end of my resources," and with this
he went out, closing the door.

That smile troubled the colonel.  What deviltry was the scoundrel up to
now?  What could he possibly do?

Later, as he paced wearily to and fro, he saw something white slip
under the door.  He stooped and picked up a note, folded European
fashion.  His heart thrilled as he read the stilted script:

"Ahmed and I shall watch over you.  Be patient.  This time I am
pretending to be your enemy, and you must act accordingly.  A messenger
has arrived from Bala Khan.  Your daughter and Bruce Sahib are alive,
and, more, on the way to Allaha in native guise.  Be of good cheer,
Ramabai."'

And Umballa, as he lifted his fruit dish at supper, espied another of
those sinister warnings.  "Beware!"  This time he summoned his entire
household and threatened death to each and all of them if they did not
immediately disclose to him the person who had placed this note under
the fruit dish.  They cringed and wept and wailed, but nothing could be
got out of them.  He had several flogged on general principles.

Kathlyn and Bruce returned to Allaha without mishap.  Neither animal
nor vagabond molested them.  When they arrived they immediately found
means to acquaint Ramabai, who with Pundita set out to meet them.

In their picturesque disguises Kathlyn and Bruce made a handsome pair
of high caste natives.  The blue eyes alone might have caused remarks,
but this was a negligible danger, since color and costume detracted.
Kathlyn's hair, however, was securely hidden, and must be kept so.  A
bit of carelessness on her part, a sportive wind, and she would be
lost.  She had been for dyeing her hair, but Bruce would not hear of
this desecration.

So they entered the lion's den, or, rather, the jackal's.

At Ramabai's house Ahmed fell on his knees in thankfulness; not that
his Mem-sahib was in Allaha, but that she was alive.

During the evening meal Ramabai outlined his plot to circumvent
Umballa.  He had heard from one of his faithful followers that Umballa
intended to force the colonel into a native marriage; later, to dispose
of the colonel and marry the queen himself.  Suttee had fallen in
disuse in Allaha.  He, Ramabai, would now apparently side with Umballa
as against Colonel Hare, who would understand perfectly.  As the
colonel would refuse to marry, he, Ramabai, would suggest that the
colonel be married by proxy.  However suspicious Umballa might be, he
would not be able to find fault with this plan.  The betrothal would
take place in about a fortnight.  The Mem-sahib would be chosen as
consort out of all the assembled high caste ladies of the state.

Ahmed threw up his hands in horror, but Lal Singh bade him be patient.
What did the Mem-sahib say to this?  The Mem-sahib answered that she
placed herself unreservedly in Ramabai's hands; that Umballa was a
madman and must be treated as one.

"Ramabai, why not strike now?" suggested Ahmed.

"The promise Umballa has made to the soldiers has reunited them
temporarily.  Have patience, Ahmed."  Lal Singh selected a leaf with
betel-nut and began to chew with satisfaction.

"Patience?" said Ahmed?  "Have I none?"

So the call went forth for a bride throughout the principality, and was
answered from the four points of the compass.

Between the announcement and the fulfilment of these remarkable
proceedings there arrived in the blazing city of Calcutta a young maid.
Her face was very stern for one so youthful, and it was as fearless as
it was stern.  Umballa's last card, had she but known the treachery
which had lured her to this mystic shore.  The young maid was Winnie,
come, as she supposed, at the urgent call of her father and sister, and
particularly warned to confide in no one and to hide with the utmost
secrecy her destination.




CHAPTER XIV

THE VEILED CANDIDATES

From the four ends of the principality they came, the veiled
candidates; from the north, the east, the south and west.  They came in
marvelous palanquins, in curtained howdahs, on camels, in splendid
bullock carts.  Many a rupee resolved itself into new-bought finery,
upon the vague chance of getting it back with compound interest.

What was most unusual, they came without pedigree or dowry, this being
Ramabai's idea; though, in truth, Umballa objected at first to the lack
of dowry.  He had expected to inherit this dowry.  He gave way to
Ramabai because he did not care to have Ramabai suspect what his inner
thoughts were.  Let the fool Ramabai pick out his chestnuts for him.
Umballa laughed in his voluminous sleeve.

Some one of these matrimonially inclined houris the colonel would have
to select; if he refused, then should Ramabai do the selecting.  More,
he would marry the fortunate woman by proxy.  There was no possible
loophole for the colonel.

The populace was charmed, enchanted, as it always is over a new
excitement.  Much as they individually despised Umballa, collectively
they admired his ingenuity in devising fresh amusements.  Extra feast
days came one after another.  The Oriental dislikes work; and any one
who could invent means of avoiding it was worthy of gratitude.  So,
then, the populace fell in with Umballa's scheme agreeably.  The bhang
and betel and toddy sellers did a fine business during the festival of
Rama.

There was merrymaking in the streets, day and night.  The temples and
mosques were filled to overflowing.  Musicians with reeds and tom-toms
paraded the bazaars.  In nearly every square the Nautch girl danced, or
the juggler plied his trade, or there was a mongoose-cobra fight (the
cobra, of course, bereft of its fangs), and fakirs grew mango trees out
of nothing.  There was a flurry in the slave mart, too.

The troops swaggered about, overbearing.  They were soon to get their
pay.  The gold and silver were rotting in the treasury.  Why leave it
there, since gold and silver were minted to be spent?

There were elephant fights in the reconstructed arena; tigers attacked
wild boars, who fought with enormous razor-like tusks, as swift and
deadly as any Malay kris.  The half forgotten ceremony of feeding the
wild pig before sundown each day was given life again.  And drove after
drove came in from the jungles for the grain, which was distributed
from a platform.  And wild peacocks followed the pigs.  A wonderful
sight it was to see several thousand pigs come trotting in, each drove
headed by its fighting boar.  When the old fellows met there was
carnage; squealing and grunting, they fought.  The peacocks shrilled
and hopped from back to back for such grain as fell upon the bristly
backs of the pigs.  Here and there a white peacock would be snared, or
a boar whose tusks promised a battle royal with some leopard or tiger.

And through all this turmoil and clamor Ahmed and Lal Singh moved,
sounding the true sentiments of the people.  They did not want white
kings or white queens; they desired to be ruled by their kind, who
would not start innovations but would let affairs drift on as they had
done for centuries.

Nor was Bruce inactive.  Many a time Umballa had stood within an arm's
length of death; but always Bruce had resisted the impulse.  It would
be rank folly to upset Ramabai's plans, which were to culminate in
Umballa's overthrow.

But upon a certain hour Ramabai came to Bruce, much alarmed.  During
his absence with Pundita at some palace affair his home had been
entered, ransacked, and ten thousand rupees had been stolen.  His real
fortune, however, was hidden securely.  The real trouble was that these
ten thousand rupees would practically undo much of what had been
accomplished.  He was certain that Umballa had instigated this theft,
and that the money would be doled out to the soldiers.  For upon their
dissatisfaction rested his future.

"Take Bala Khan at his word," suggested Bruce, "and ask him for his
five thousand hillmen."

Ramabai smiled.  "And have Bala Khan constitute himself the king of
Allaha!  No, Sahib; he is a good friend, but he is also a dangerous
one.  We must have patience."

"Patience!" exploded Bruce.

"I have waited several years.  Do you not see that when I strike I must
succeed?"

"But these warnings to Umballa?"

"He is not molesting me, is he?" returned Ramabai calmly.

"Well, it is more than I could stand."

"Ah, you white people waste so much life and money by acting upon your
impulses!  Trust me; my way is best; and that is, for the present we
must wait."

"God knows," sighed Bruce, "but I am beginning to believe in the
colonel's guru."

"Who can say?  There are some in this land who possess mighty wills,
who can make man sleep by looking into his eyes, who can override and
destroy weaker minds.  I know; I have seen.  You have heard of
suspended animation?  Well, I have seen examples of it; and so have my
people.  Can you wonder at their easiness in being swayed this way and
that?  But these men I refer to do not sit about in the bazaars with
wooden bowls for coppers.  It is said, however, that all curses die
with their makers.  It depends upon how old the Colonel Sahib's guru
is.  I know priests who are more than a hundred years old, and wrinkled
like the bride of Hathi, the god of elephants."

"But a child could see through all this rigmarole."

"Can Bruce Sahib?"  Again Ramabai smiled.  "My people are sometimes
children in that they need constant amusement.  Have patience, my
friend; for I understand.  Do I not love Pundita even as you love the
Mem-sahib?"

"What do you mean?" demanded Bruce roughly,

"I have eyes."

"Well, yes; it is true.  Behind you are your people; behind us,
nothing.  That is why I am frantic.  Umballa, whenever he finds himself
checkmated, digs up what he purports to be an unused law.  There is
none to contest it.  I tell you, Ramabai, we must escape soon, or we
never will.  You suggested this impossible marriage.  It is horrible."

"But it lulls Umballa; and lulled, he becomes careless.  Beyond the
north gate there are ever ready men and elephants.  And when the moment
arrives, thither we shall fly, all of us.  But," mysteriously, "we may
not have to fly.  When Umballa learns that the Colonel Sahib will
refuse to sign the necessary treasury release the soldiers will
understand that once again they have been trifled with."

"We must wait.  But it's mighty hard."

The garden of brides has already been described.  But on this day when
the ten veiled candidates sat in waiting there was spring in the air;
and there were roses climbing trellises, climbing over the marble
walls, and the pomegranate blossoms set fire to it all.  At the gate
stood Ramabai, dressed according to his station, and representing by
proxy the king.  Presently a splendid palanquin arrived, and within it
a tardy candidate.  She was laden with jewels, armlets, anklets and
head ornaments; pearls and uncut sapphires and rubies.  Upon lifting
her veil she revealed a beautiful high caste face.  Ramabai bade her
pass on.  No sooner had she taken her place than still another
palanquin was announced, and this last was drawn by fat sleek bullocks,
all of a color.

Ramabai held up his hand.  The bullock drivers stopped their charges,
and from the palanquin emerged a veiled woman.  This was Kathlyn.

The selected candidates were now all present.  As master of ceremonies,
Ramabai conducted them into the palace, thence into the throne room
gaily decorated for the occasion.  In a balcony directly above the
canopy of the throne were musicians, playing the mournful harmonies so
dear to the oriental heart.

Upon the throne sat Colonel Hare, gorgeously attired, but cold and
stern of visage, prepared to play his part in this unutterable
buffoonery.  Near by stood Durga Ram, so-called Umballa, smiling.  It
was going to be very simple; once yonder stubborn white fool was
wedded, he should be made to disappear; and there should be another
wedding in which he, Durga Ram, should take the part of the bridegroom.
Then for the treasury, flight, and, later, ease abroad.  Let the
filigree basket of gems stay where it was; there were millions in the
treasury, the accumulated hoardings of many decades.

The council and high priests also wore their state robes, and behind
them were officers and other dignitaries.

There was a stir as Ramabai entered with the veiled candidates.  The
colonel in vain tried to hide his interest and anxiety.  Kathlyn was
there, somewhere among these kotowing women; but there was nothing by
which he could recognize her.  As the women spread about the throne,
Ramabai signified to the musicians to cease.

Silence.

Then Ramabai brought candidate after candidate close to the colonel, so
that he alone might see the face behind the veil.  At each uplifting of
the veil the colonel shook his head.  A dark frown began to settle over
Umballa's face.  If the colonel refused the last candidate for nuptial
honors, he should die.  But as Ramabai lifted the veil of this last
woman the colonel nodded sharply; and Kathlyn, for a brief space, gazed
into her father's eyes.  The same thought occurred to both; what a
horrible mockery it all was, and where would it lead finally?

"Take care!" whispered Kathlyn as she saw her father's fingers move
nervously with suppressed longing to reach out and touch her.

The spectators of this little drama which was hidden from them evinced
their approval by a murmuring which had something like applause in it.
A queen was chosen!  A real queen at last had been chosen.  Ramabai had
accomplished by diplomacy what yonder Durga Ram had failed to do by
force.  But Umballa secretly smiled as he sensed this undercurrent.
Presently they should see.

The colonel extended his hand and drew Kathlyn up beside him; and now
for a moment the whole affair trembled in the balance: Kathlyn felt
herself possessed with a wild desire to laugh.

The chain of gold, representing the betrothal, was now ordered brought
from the treasury.

The populace, outside the palace, having been acquainted with what was
taking place, burst out into cheers.

The treasure room, guarded by leopards in charge of incorruptible
keepers, was now approached by Umballa and his captain of the guard.
Umballa presented his order on the treasury.  The leopards were driven
into their cages, and the magic door swung open.  The two gasped for
breath; for Umballa had never before looked within.  Everywhere gold
and gems; fabulous riches, enough to make a man ten times a king.

"Highness," whispered the captain, "there is enough riches here to
purchase the whole of Hind!"

As he stared Umballa surrendered to a passing dream.  Presently he
shook himself, sought the chain for which he had come, and reluctantly
stepped out into the corridor again.  He would return soon to this
door.  But for that fool of a white man who had saved the king from the
leopard, he would have opened this door long since.  As he walked to
the outer door he thought briefly of the beauty of Kathlyn.  She was
dead, and dead likewise was his passion for her.

Beyond the gate to the garden of brides Ahmed and Lal Singh waited with
elephants.  From here they would make the north gate, transfer to new
elephants, and leave Allaha and its evil schemes behind.  They created
no suspicion.  There were many elephants about the palace this day.  In
one of the howdahs sat Bruce, armed; in the other, Pundita, trembling
with dread.  So many arms had Siva, that evil spawn, that Pundita would
not believe all was well till they had crossed the frontier.

"They will be coming soon, Sahib," said Ahmed.  Bruce wiped the sweat
from his palms and nodded.

Now, when Umballa and his captain of the guard departed with the
betrothal chain they did not firmly close the outer door, which shut
off the leopards from the main palace.  The leopards were immediately
freed and began their prowling through the corridors, snarling and
growling as they scented the air through which the two men had just
passed.  One paused by the door, impatiently thrusting out a paw.

The door gave.

In the throne room the mockery of the betrothal was gone through, and
then the calm Ramabai secretly signified that the hour for escape was
at hand; for everywhere, now that the ceremony was done, vigilance
would be lax.

Immediately the high priest announced that the successful candidate
would be conducted to the palace zenana and confined there till the
final ceremonies were over.

Umballa dreamed of what he had seen.

To Ramabai was given the exalted honor of conducting the king and his
betrothed to their respective quarters.  Once in the private passageway
to the harem, or zenana, Ramabai threw caution to the winds.

"We must go a roundabout way to the garden of brides, which will be
deserted.  Outside the gate Bruce Sahib and Ahmed and Lal Singh await
with elephants.  Once we can join them we are safe.  And in a month's
time I shall return."

Meantime one of the leopard keepers rushed frantically into the throne
room, exclaiming that the seven guardian leopards were at large.  Even
as he spoke one of the leopards appeared in the musicians' balcony.
The panic which followed was not to be described.  A wild scramble
ensued toward all exits.

The fugitives entered the royal zenana.  Kathlyn proceeded at once to
the exit which led to the garden of brides.  There she waited for her
father and Ramabai, who had paused by the door of one of the zenana
chambers.  Between them and Kathlyn lay the plunge.

Ramabai addressed the lady of the zenana, telling her that if guards
should come to state that Kathlyn was concealed in her own chamber.  To
this the young woman readily agreed.

Suddenly a leopard appeared behind the colonel and Ramabai.  Kathlyn,
being first to discover the presence of the animal, cried out a warning.

"Fly, Kit!  Save yourself!  I am accursed!" called the colonel.

Ramabai and the young woman at the chamber door hurriedly drew the
colonel into the chamber and shut the door.  The colonel struggled, but
Ramabai held him tightly.

"We are unarmed, Sahib," he said; "and the Mem-sahib never loses her
head."

"Ramabai, I tell you I shall die here.  It is useless to attempt to aid
me.  I am accursed, accursed!  Kit, Kit!"

The leopard stood undecided before the door which had closed in his
face.  Then he discovered Kathlyn, fumbling at the wicker door at the
far side of the swimming pool.  There was something upon which to wreak
his temper; for all this unusual commotion and freedom had disturbed
him greatly.  Kathlyn opened the wicker door, closing it behind her.
Clear headed, as Ramabai had said, she recollected the palanquin which
had been last to enter the garden of brides.  She ran into the garden,
flew to the palanquin just as she heard the leopard crash through the
flimsy wicker door.  She reached and entered the palanquin not a moment
too soon.  She huddled down close to the door.  The leopard trotted
round and round, snarling and sniffing.  Presently he was joined by
another.  From afar she could hear shouting.  She readily understood.
Through some carelessness the leopards of the treasury were at liberty,
and that of her own and her father was in jeopardy.  Just without the
garden of brides was Bruce and help, and she dared not move!

Bruce, from his howdah, heard the noise in the palace; female shrieks,
commands, a shot from a musket.  What in heaven's name had happened?
Where was Kathlyn?  Why did she not appear?  He fingered his revolvers.
But Ahmed signaled to him not to stir.  The knowledge of whatever had
happened must be brought to them; on their lives they dared not go in
search of it.

"This comes from your damnable oriental way of doing things.  If I had
had my way, Umballa would be dead and buried."

"All in good time, Sahib."

The elephants stirred restlessly, for they scented the cat whom they
hated.

Within the palanquin Kathlyn dared scarcely to breathe; for outside
seven leopards prowled and sniffed and snarled!




CHAPTER XV

THE SEVEN LEOPARDS

Crouched in the palanquin Kathlyn waited for the onslaught of the
leopards.  Once she heard a tremendous scratching at the rear of her
hiding-place; the palanquin tottered.  But the animal was not trying to
get inside; he was merely sharpening his claws after the manner of his
kind, claws which were sharp enough, heaven knew, since, regularly,
once a month the keepers filed them to needle-points.

An elephant trumpeted near by, and Kathlyn could have wept in despair.
Outside the wall were friends, doubtless by this time joined by her
father and Ramabai, and all wondering where she was.  She dared not
call out for fear of attracting the leopards, whose movements she could
hear constantly: the jar of their padded feet as they trotted under and
about the palanquin, the sniff-sniff of their wet noses, an occasional
yawning.

By and by her curiosity could not be withstood, even though she might
be courting death.  Cautiously and soundlessly she moved the curtain
which faced the wall.  A mass of heavy vines ran from the ground to the
top of this wall.  If only she could reach it; if only she dared try!
Presently the keepers, armed with goads and ropes, would be
forthcoming, and all hope of flight banished.  Umballa, upon close
inspection, would recognize her despite her darkened skin and Indian
dress.

From the other window she peered.  There, in the path, were two
leopards, boxing and frolicking in play.  As she watched, always
interested in the gambols of such animals, she noticed that two other
leopards left off prowling, approached, sat upon their haunches, and
critically followed the friendly set-to.  Then the other three, seeking
diversity, sauntered into view.  Kathlyn quickened with life and hope.
The seven leopards were at least half a dozen yards away.  It was but a
step to the vines sprawling over the wall.

To think that all depended upon the handle of the palanquin door!  If
it opened without noise there was a chance.  If it creaked she was
lost; for she would fall into the hands of the keepers if not under the
merciless paws of the cats.

But the longer she hesitated the less time she would have.  Bravely,
then, she tried her hand upon the door handle and slowly but firmly
turned it.  There was no sound that she could hear.  She pressed it
outward with a slow steady movement.  Fortunately the dress of the
Hindu was short, somewhat above the ankles, and within her strong young
body was free of those modern contrivances known as corsets and stays.

She sprang out, dashed for the vines and drew herself up rapidly.  In
unison the seven leopards whirled and flew at her.  But the half a
dozen yards which they had first to cover to reach the wall saved her.
Up, up, desperately, wildly, with a nervous energy which did far more
for her than her natural strength.  The cats leaped and snarled at her
heels.  She went on.  Beneath her the leopards tore at the vines and
tried to follow, one succeeding in tearing her skirt with a desperate
slash of his paw.  He lost his hold and tumbled back among his mates.

But every minute the vines, sturdy as they were, threatened to come
tumbling to the ground.

Her long and lonely experiences in the jungle had taught her the need
of climbing quickly yet lightly.  She flung herself across the top of
the wall, exhausted.  For the time being, at least, she was safe.  She
hung there for a few minutes till she had fully recovered her breath.
Below the leopards were still leaping and striking futilely! and even
in her terror she could not but admire their grace and beauty.  And,
oddly, she recalled the pet at home.  Doubtless by this time he had
fallen back into his savage state.

When she dared risk it she gained a securer position on the wall and
sat up, flinging her legs over the side of it.  She saw things in a bit
of blur at first, her heart had been called upon so strenuously; but
after a little objects resumed their real shapes, and she espied the
two elephants.  She called, waving her hands.

"It is Kathlyn!" cried Bruce.

"Kit!" shouted the colonel, who shared the howdah with Bruce.  "Kit,
hang on for a moment longer!  Ahmed, to the wall!"

The colonel and Ramabai had left the zenana by one of the windows
overlooking the passage which ran past the garden of brides.  They had
had no trouble whatever in reaching the elephants.  But the subsequent
waiting for Kathlyn had keyed them all up to the breaking point.  The
pity of it was, they dared not stir, dared not start in search of her.
Had it been leopards only, Bruce would have made short work of it; but
it would have been rank folly to have gone in search of the girl.  If
she had been made captive, she needed their freedom to gain her own.
Besides, the council of both Ahmed and Lal Singh was for patience.

Ahmed had the greatest faith in the world in Kathlyn's ability to take
care of herself.  Think of what she had already gone through unscathed!
Kathlyn Mem-sahib bore a charmed life, and all the wild beasts of the
jungles of Hind could not harm her.  It was written.

And then Bruce discovered her upon the wall.  It took but a moment to
bring the elephant alongside; and Kathlyn dropped down into the howdah.

"A narrow squeak, dad," was all she said.

"Let us get on our way," said the colonel hoarsely.  "And remember,
shoot to kill any man who attempts to stop us.  My Kit!" embracing
Kathlyn.  "Perhaps the escape of the leopards is the luckiest thing
that could have happened.  It will keep them all busy for an hour or
more.  Since Umballa believes you to be dead, he will be concerned
about my disappearance only.  And it will be some time ere they learn
of my escape.  Forward, Ahmed!  This time . . ."

"Don't, father!" interrupted Kathlyn.  "Perhaps we shall escape, but
none of us is sure.  Let us merely hope.  I'm so tired!"

Bruce reached over and pressed her hand reassuringly; and the colonel
eyed him as from a new angle.

"Good!" he murmured under his breath; "nothing better could happen.  He
is a man, and a tried one, I know.  Good!  If once we get clear of this
hell, I shall not stand in their way.  But Winnie, Winnie; what in
God's name will that kitten be doing all these terrible weeks?  Will
she try to find us?  The first telegraph office we reach I must cable
her under no circumstances to stir from home.  Ahmed," he said aloud,
"how far are we from the nearest telegraph station?"

"Three days, Sahib."

"Shall we be obliged to stop at the gate to change our mounts?"

"No, Sahib; only to take supplies enough to last us."

"Lose as little time as you can.  Now drop the curtains, Bruce."

So through the streets they hurried, unmolested.  Those who saw the
curtained howdah took it for granted that some unsuccessful candidate
was returning to her home.

It was well for Kathlyn that she had made up her mind to leap for the
vines at the moment she did.  For the elephants had not left the first
turn in the street when keepers and soldiers came running pell-mell
into the street with ropes and ladders, prepared for the recapture of
the treasury leopards, which, of course, were looked upon as sacred.

At the ancient gate the fugitives paused for the supplies awaiting
them.  Ahmed was not known to the guards there; that was good fortune.
In the dialect he jested with them, winked and nodded toward the
curtained howdah.  The guards laughed; they understood.  Some
disappointed houri was returning whence she had come.  Ahmed took his
time; he had no reason to hurry.  Nothing must pass which would arouse
the suspicions of the guards; and haste always alarmed the Oriental.

To the colonel, however, things appeared to lag unnecessarily.  He
finally lost patience and swept back the curtain despite Bruce's
restraining hand.  A native mahout, who had been loitering in town that
day, recognized at once the royal turban which the colonel still wore.
The colonel's face meant nothing; the turban, everything.  The mahout
stood stock-still for a moment, not quite believing his eyes.  By this
time, however, Ahmed was comfortably straddled back of his elephant's
ears and was jogging along the road.

"The king!" shouted the surprised mahout to the guards, who had not
seen the man or the turban.

"What king, fool?" returned the guards.

"The white king who was betrothed this day!  Ai, ai!  I have seen the
royal turban.  It is he!"

The guards derided him.  So, finding no hope in them, he ran to his
elephant, mounted and rode back into town.  Durga Ram would pay well
for this news.

"Father," said Kathlyn reproachfully, "that mahout recognized you.  I
warned you not to move the curtain."

Bruce shrugged.

"But, Kit," returned her father, "Ahmed was so infernally slow!  He
could spend time in chattering to the guards."

Ahmed heard, but said nothing.

"Never mind," interposed Bruce pacifically.  "At any rate we shall have
the advantage of a couple of hours, and Umballa will not catch us with
the elephants he has at hand.  By the time he starts his expedition we
shall be thirty miles away.  Let us be cheerful!"

"Kit," said her father, "I couldn't help it.  I can't think quickly any
more.  I am like a man in a nightmare.  I've been down to hell, and I
can't just yet realize that I am out of it.  I'm sorry!"

"Poor dad!"  Kathlyn pressed him in her arms, while Bruce nodded
enviously but approvingly.

By and by they drew aside the curtains.  Kathlyn saw here and there
objects which recalled her first journey along this highway.  If only
she had known!

"One thing is forecast," said Bruce.  "When Ramabai returns it will be
to fight.  He will not be able to avoid it now.  I shouldn't mind going
back with him.  Ahmed, what is this strange hold Umballa has over the
actions of the Council of Three?  They always appear to be afraid of
him."

"Ah, Sahib," said Ahmed, resting his ankus or goad on the skull of his
mount, "there is said to be another prisoner in the palace prison.  Lal
Singh knows, I believe."

"What's your idea?"

"Sahib, when I put you all safe over the frontier I am coming back to
Allaha to find out."  And that was all Ahmed would say regarding the
subject.

"I'll wager he knows," whispered Bruce.

"But who can it be?  Another poor devil of a white man?  Yet how could
a white man influence the actions of the council?"  The colonel spoke
irritably.

"Look!"--from Kathlyn; "there is one of those wonderful trees they call
the flame of the jungle."  She called their attention to the tree
merely to cause a diversion.  She wanted to keep her father's thoughts
away from Allaha.

So they journeyed on into the sunset, into twilight, into the bright
starry night.

Back in the city the panic was already being forgot as a thing of the
past.  The leopards were back at their patrolling; the high officials
and dignitaries, together with the unsuccessful candidates, had gone
their several ways.  Umballa alone paced the halls, well satisfied with
the events of the day, barring the disturbance caused by the escape of
the leopards.

His captain entered and saluted.

"Highness, a mahout has news."

"News?  Of what?"

"He claims that he saw the king's turban in a howdah which passed the
ancient gate about an hour gone."

"That is not possible," replied Umballa.

"I told him that the king was in his chamber."

"So he is.  Wait!  I will go myself and see," all at once vaguely
perturbed.  He was back in a very short time, furious.

"It is true!  Woe to those who permitted him to escape!"

"Highness, the escape of the leopards and the confusion which followed
. . ."

"By all the gods of Hind, and 'twas you who left the door open!  You
opened it for me to pass out first.  Summon the council.  Off with you,
and give this handful of silver to the only man who has sense enough to
believe his eyes.  Hare Sahib is mine, and I will follow him into the
very house of the British Raj!  Guards and elephants!  And the bride to
be, what of her?  Look and see.  Nay, I will go with you."

Umballa found an empty chamber; the future queen was gone.  More, he
found one of the women of the zenana--his favorite--bound and gagged
with handkerchiefs.  Quickly he freed her.

"Highness, the bride's face was dark like my own, but her arms were as
light as clotted cream!  And she spake the tongue of the white people."

Kathlyn Hare!  She lived; she had escaped the brigands; she had fooled
him!  And Ramabai had played with him as a cat plays with a wounded
mouse.  Oh, they should see this time!

Suddenly he laughed.  It echoed down the corridor, and one of the
treasury leopards roared back at the sinister sound.

"Highness!" timidly.

"Enough!  I hold you blameless."  He rushed from the palace.

Poor fools!  Let them believe that they had escaped.  There was still
the little sister; in a short time now she would be inside the city
walls.  The Colonel Sahib would return; indeed, yes.  There would be no
further difficulty regarding the filigree basket of gold and gems.
Still, he would pursue them, if only for the mere sport of it.  If he
failed to catch them all he had to do was to sit down and wait for them
to return of their own volition.

Ramabai, however, was a menace; and Umballa wondered how he was going
to lay hold of him.  While waiting for his elephants to be harnessed he
summoned the council.  Ramabai's property must be confiscated and
Ramabai put to death.  Here for the first time the council flatly
refused to fall in with Umballa's plans.  And they gave very good
reasons.  Yes, Ramabai was a menace, but till the soldiery was fully
paid, to touch Ramabai would mean the bursting forth of the hidden fire
and they would all be consumed.

"Open the treasury door for me, then!"

"We dare not.  The keepers understand.  They would loose the leopards,
which we dare not shoot.  The law . . ."

"What is the law to us?" demanded Umballa frankly.  "Let us make laws
to suit our needs.  The white man does.  And we need money; we need one
another," pointing a finger suggestively toward the floor.

"Only when we have the troops," replied the council firmly.  "We have
bent our heads to your will so far in everything, but we refuse to
sacrifice these heads because of a personal spite against Ramabai, whom
we frankly and wisely fear.  We dare not break into the treasury.  The
keepers are unbribable; the priests are with them, and the people are
with the priests.  Bring back the white man and his daughter.  If that
is impossible, marry this second daughter and we will crown her; and
then you may work your will upon Ramabai.  You have failed in all
directions so far.  Succeed but once and we are ready to follow you."

Umballa choked back the hot imperious words that crowded to his lips.
These were plain unvarnished facts, and he must bow to the inevitable,
however distasteful it might be.  For the present then, Ramabai should
be permitted to go unharmed.  But Ramabai might die suddenly and
accidentally in the recapture of the Colonel Sahib.  An accidental
death would certainly extinguish any volcanic fires that smoldered
under Allaha.  So, with this secret determination in mind, Umballa set
forth.

Ahmed, his mind busy with a thousand things, forgot the thousand and
first, at that stage most important of all; and this was the short cut,
a mere pathway through the jungle, but which lessened the journey by
some thirty miles.  And this pathway Umballa chose.  The three hours'
headway was thus pared down to minutes, and at the proper time Umballa
would appear, not behind the pursued, but in the road in front of them.

There was, to be sure, a bare possibility of the colonel and his party
getting beyond the meeting of the path and the road, that is, if he
kept going forward all through the night, which, by the way, was
exactly what the astute Ahmed did.  But Kathlyn's curiosity the next
morning neutralized the advantage gained.

A group of masked dancers, peripatetic, was the cause.  Confident that
they had outstripped pursuit, she saw no reason why she should not
witness the dancing.

How Umballa came upon them suddenly, like a thunderbolt, confiscating
the elephants; how they fled to a near-by temple, bribed the dancers
for masks and garments, fled still farther into the wooded hills, and
hid there with small arms ready, needs but little telling.  Umballa
returned to the city satisfied.  He had at least deprived them of their
means of travel.  Sooner or later they would founder in the jungle,
hear of the arrival of the younger daughter and return.

Ahmed was grave.  Lal Singh had gone.  Now that the expedition had
practically failed, his place was back in the shoe shop in the bazaars.
Yes, Ahmed was grave.  He was also a trifle disheartened.  The fakir
had said that there would be many disappointments, but that in the end
. . .  He might be a liar like all the other Hindus.  Yet one part of
his foretelling was correct: many disappointments.

"Kit," said her father, "Ahmed warned you not to stop."

"I am sorry."

It was on the tip of her tongue to retort that his own carelessness was
the basic cause of the pursuit; but she remembered in time what her
father had been through.

"There is a village not far," reminded Ahmed.  "They are a friendly
people.  It is quite possible, with the money we have, to buy some
horses, small but sturdy.  But there is one thing I do not understand,
Sahib."

"And what is that?" asked the colonel.

"The readiness with which Umballa gave up the pursuit.  It's a long
walk; let us be getting forward."

Late that afternoon they were all mounted once more, on strong
tractable ponies, with water and provisions.  And the spirits of all
rose accordingly.  Even Ahmed became cheerful.

"We'll make it, please God!" said the colonel.  "Give me a telegraph
office.  That's all I need just now."

"Two days, Sahib," said Ahmed, "we will reach the sea."

They rode all through the night, stopping only at dawn for breakfast
and a cat nap after.  Then forward again till they came upon a hunter's
rest house, deserted.  Here they agreed to spend the night.  Beyond the
rest house were half a dozen scattered mud huts, occupied by natives
who pretended friendliness, lulling even the keen Ahmed into a sense of
security.  But at dawn, when they awoke cheerfully to pick up the
trail, they found their horses and provisions gone.

The colonel, Bruce and Ahmed, still armed, never having permitted the
rifles out of their keeping, set out grimly in pursuit of the thieves,
while Kathlyn proceeded to forage on her own initiative.

She came presently upon a magnificent ravine, half a mile in depth.
There was a broad ledge some fifteen feet below.  It was evidently used
as a goat path, for near at hand stood a shepherd's hut.  Stirred by
the spirit of investigation, she made preparations for descent by
attaching the rope she had brought along to a stout boulder.

Panthers!

They were coming up the pathway behind her.  It would be simple enough
to descend; but how to get back to the rest house?  There was no time
to plan; she must act at once.  She must drop down to the ledge and
trust to her star.

She called out loudly as she swung downward.  The shepherd came running
out of his hut, dumfounded at what he saw.




CHAPTER XVI

THE RED WOLF

With the assistance of the shepherd Kathlyn went down the rope agilely
and safely.  Once firmly on her feet, she turned to thank the wild-eyed
hillman.  But her best Hindustani (and she was able to speak and
understand quite a little by now) fell on ears which heard but did not
sense what she said.  The man, mild and harmless enough, for all his
wild eyes, shrank back, for no woman of his kind had ever looked like
this.  Kathlyn, with a deal of foreboding, repeated the phrase, and
asked the way back to the hunter's rest house.  He shook his head; he
understood nothing.

But there is one language which is universal the world over, and this
is sign language.  Kathlyn quickly stooped and drew in the dust the
shape of the rest house.  Then she pointed in the direction from whence
she had come.  He smiled and nodded excitedly.  He understood now.
Next, being unarmed, she felt the need of some sort of weapon.  So she
drew the shape of a rifle in the dust, then produced four rupees, all
she had.  The shepherd gurgled delightedly, ran into the hut, and
returned with a rifle of modern make and a belt of cartridges.  With a
gesture he signified that it was useless to him because he did not know
how to use it.

He took the rupees and Kathlyn took the rifle, vaguely wondering how it
came into the possession of this poverty-stricken hillman.  Of one
thing she was certain; it had become his either through violence of his
own or of others.  She examined the breech and found a dead shell,
which she cast out.  The rifle carried six cartridges, and she loaded
skillfully, much to the astonishment of the hillman.  Then she swung
the butt to her shoulder and fired up at the ledge where the panthers
had last been seen.

The hillman cried out in alarm and scuttled away to his hut.  When he
peered forth again Kathlyn made a friendly gesture, and he approached
timidly.  Once more she pointed to the dust, at the picture of the rest
house; and then, by many stabs of his finger in the air, he succeeded
in making the way back sufficiently clear to Kathlyn, who smiled,
shouldered the rifle and strode confidently down the winding path; but
also she was alert and watchful.

There was not a bit of rust on the rifle, and the fact that one bullet
had sped smoothly convinced her that the weapon was serviceable.  Some
careful hunter had once possessed it, for it was abundantly oiled.  To
whom had it belonged?  It was of German make; but that signified
nothing.  It might have belonged to an Englishman, a Frenchman, or a
Russian; more likely the latter, since this was one of the localities
where they crossed and recrossed with their note-books to be utilized
against that day when the Bear dropped down from the north and tackled
the Lion.

Kathlyn had to go down to the very bottom of the ravine.  She must
follow the goat path, no matter where it wound, for this ultimately
would lead her to the rest house.  As she started up the final incline,
through the cedars and pines, she heard the bark of the wolf, the red
wolf who hunted in packs of twenty or thirty, in reality far more
menacing than a tiger or a panther, since no hunter could kill a whole
pack.

To this wolf, when hunting his kill, the tiger gave wide berth; the
bear took to his cave, and all fleet-footed things of the jungles fled
in panic.

Kathlyn climbed as rapidly as she could.  She dared not mount a tree,
for the red wolf would outwit her.  She must go on.  The bark, or yelp,
had been a signal; but now there came to her ears the long howl.  She
had heard it often in the great forests at home.  It was the call of
the pack that there was to be a kill.  She might shoot half a dozen of
them, and the living rend the dead, but the main pack would follow on
and overtake her.

She swung on upward, catching a sapling here, a limb there, pulling
herself over hard bits of going.  Once she turned and fired a chance
shot in the direction of the howling.  Far away came the roar of one of
the mountain lions; and the pack of red wolves became suddenly and
magically silent.  Kathlyn made good use of this interval.  But
presently the pack raised its howl again, and she knew that the grim
struggle was about to begin.

She reached the door of the rest house just as the pack, a large one,
came into view, heads down, tails streaming.  Pundita, who was at the
fire preparing the noon meal, seized Kathlyn by the arm and hurried her
into the house, barricading the door.  The wolves, arriving, flung
themselves against it savagely.  But the door was stout, and only a
battering-ram in human hands could have made it yield.

Unfortunately, there was no knowing when the men-folk would return from
their chase of the horses, nor how long the wolves would lay siege.
The two women tried shooting, though Pundita was the veriest tyro,
being more frightened at the weapon in her hands than at the howling
animals outside.  They did little or no damage to the wolves, for the
available cracks were not at sufficiently good angles.  An hour went
by, Kathlyn could hear the wolves as they crowded against the door,
sniffing the sill.

The colonel, Bruce, Ramabai and Ahmed had found the horses half a dozen
miles away; and they had thrashed the thieving natives soundly and
instilled the right kind of fear in their breasts.  At rifle point they
had forced the natives back to the rest house.  The crack of their
rifles soon announced to Kathlyn that the dread of wolves was a thing
of the past.  She wisely refrained from recounting her experiences.
The men had worry enough.

After a hasty meal the journey toward the sea-port began in earnest.
Umballa's attack had thrown them far out of the regular track.  They
were now compelled to make a wide detour.  Where the journey might have
been made in three days, they would be lucky now if they reached the
sea under five.  The men took turns in standing watch whenever they
made camp, and Kathlyn nor Pundita had time for idleness.  They had
learned their lessons; no more carelessness, nothing but the sharpest
vigilance from now on.

One day, as the pony caravan made a turn round a ragged promontory,
they suddenly paused.  Perhaps twenty miles to the west lay the emerald
tinted Persian Gulf.  The colonel slipped off his horse, dragged
Kathlyn from hers, and began to execute a hornpipe.  He was like a boy.

"The sea, Kit, the sea!  Home and Winnie; out of this devil's cauldron!
You will come along with us, Bruce?"

"I haven't anything else to do," Bruce smiled back.

Then he gazed at Kathlyn, who found herself suddenly filled with
strange embarrassment.  In times of danger sham and subterfuge have no
place.  Heretofore she had met Bruce as a man, to whom a glance from
her eyes had told her secret.  Now that the door to civilization lay
but a few miles away, the old conventions dropped their obscuring
mantles over her, and she felt ashamed.  And there was not a little
doubt.  Perhaps she had mistaken the look in his eyes, back there in
the desert, back in the first day when they had fled together from the
ordeals.  And yet . . . !

On his part, Bruce did not particularly welcome the sea.  There might
be another man somewhere.  No woman so beautiful as Kathlyn could
possibly be without suitors.  And when the journey down to the sea was
resumed he became taciturn and moody, and Kathlyn's heart
correspondingly heavy.

The colonel was quite oblivious to this change.  He swung his legs free
of the primitive stirrups and whistled the airs which had been popular
in America at the time of his departure.

There was no lightness in the expressions of Ramabai and Pundita.  They
were about to lose these white people forever, and they had grown to
love, nay, worship them.  More, they must return to face they knew not
what.

As for Ahmed, he displayed his orientalism by appearing unconcerned.
He had made up his mind not to return to America with his master.
There was much to do in Allaha, and the spirit of intrigue had laid
firm hold of him.  He wanted to be near at hand when Ramabai struck his
blow.  He would break the news to the Colonel Sahib before they sailed.

It was four o'clock when the caravan entered the little seaport town.
A few tramp steamers lay anchored in the offing.  A British flag
drooped from the stem of one of them.  This meant Bombay; and Bombay,
in turn, meant Suez, the Mediterranean and the broad Atlantic.

The air was still and hot, for the Indian summer was now beginning to
lay its burning hand upon this great peninsula.  The pale dust, the
white stucco of the buildings, blinded the eyes.

They proceeded at once to the single hotel, where they found plenty of
accommodation.  Then the colonel hurried off to the cable office and
wired Winnie.  Next he ascertained that the British ship Simla would
weigh anchor the following evening for Bombay; that there they could
pick up the _Delhi_, bound for England.  There was nothing further to
do but wait for the answer to the colonel's cable to Winnie, which
would arrive somewhere about noon of the next day.

And that answer struck the hearts of all of them with the coldness of
death.  Umballa had beaten them.  Winnie had sailed weeks ago for
Allaha, in search of father and sister!

Ahmed spat out his betel-nut and squared his shoulders.  Somehow he had
rather expected something like this.  The reason for Umballa's
half-hearted pursuit stood forth clearly.

"Sahib, it is fate," he said.  "We must return at once to Allaha.
Truly, the curse of that old guru sticks like the blood leeches of the
Bengal swamps.  But as you have faith in your guru, I have faith in
mine.  Not a hair of our heads shall be harmed."

"I am a very miserable man, Ahmed!  God has forsaken me!"  The colonel
spoke with stoic calm; he was more like the man Ahmed had formerly
known.

"No, Allah has not forsaken; he has forgot us for a time."  And Ahmed
strode out to make the arrangements for the return.

"Bruce," said the colonel, "it is time for you to leave us.  You are a
man.  You have stood by us through thick and thin.  I can not ask you
to share any of the dangers which now confront us, perhaps more
sinister than any we have yet known."

"Don't you want me?" asked Bruce quietly.

Kathlyn had gone to her room to hide her tears.

"Want you!  But no!"  The colonel wrung the young man's hand and turned
to go back to Kathlyn.

"Wait a moment, Colonel.  Supposing I wanted to go, what then?
Supposing I should say to you what I dare not yet say to your daughter,
that I love her better than anything else in all this wide world; that
it will be happiness to follow wherever she goes . . . even unto death?"

The colonel wheeled.  "Bruce, do you mean that?"

"With all my heart, sir.  But please say nothing to Kathlyn till this
affair ends, one way or the other.  She might be stirred by a sense of
gratitude, and later regret it.  When we get out of this--and I rather
believe in the prophecy of Ahmed's guru or fakir--then I'll speak.  I
have always been rather a lonely man.  There's been no real good
reason.  I have always desired to be loved for my own sake, and not for
the money I have."

"Money?" repeated the colonel.  Never had he in any way associated this
healthy young hunter with money.  Did he not make a business of
trapping and selling wild animals as he himself did?  "Money!  I did
not know that you had any, Bruce."

"I am the son of Roger Bruce."

"What! the man who owned nearly all of Peru and half the railroads in
South America?"

"Yes.  You see, Colonel, we are something alike.  We never ask
questions.  It would have been far better if we had.  Because I did not
question Kathlyn when I first met her I feel half to blame for her
misfortunes.  I should have told her all about Allaha and warned her to
keep out of it.  I should have advised her to send native
investigators, she to remain in Peshawur till she learned the truth.
But the name Hare suggested nothing to me, not till after I had left
her at Singapore.  So I shall go back with you.  But please let Kathlyn
continue to think of me as a man who earns his own living."

"God bless you, my boy!  You have put a new backbone in me.  It's hard
not to have a white man to talk to, to plan with.  Ahmed expects that
we shall be ready for the return in the morning.  He, however, intends
to go back on a racing camel, to go straight to my bungalow, if it
isn't destroyed by this time.  Perhaps Winnie has not arrived there
yet.  I trust Ahmed."

"So do I.  I have known him for a long time--that is, I thought I
did--and during the last few weeks he has been a revelation.  Think of
his being your head man all these years, and yet steadily working for
his Raj, the British Raj."

"They can keep secrets."

"Well, we have this satisfaction: when Pundita rules it will be under
the protecting hand of England.  Now let us try to look at the cheerful
side of the business.  Think of what that girl has gone through with
scarcely a scratch!  Can't you read something in that?  See how strong
and self-reliant she has become under such misfortunes as would have
driven mad any ordinary woman!  Can't you see light in all this?  I
tell you, there is good and evil working for and against us, and that
Ahmed's fakir will in the end prove stronger than your bally old guru.
When I am out of the Orient I laugh at such things, but I can't laugh
at them somehow when I'm in India."

"Nor I."

That night Kathlyn signified that she wished to go down to the beach
beyond the harbor basin.  Bruce accompanied her.  Often he caught her
staring out at the twinkling lights on board the Simla.  By and by they
could hear the windlass creaking.  A volume of black smoke suddenly
poured from the boat's slanting funnel.  The ship was putting out to
sea.

"Why do you risk your life for us?" she asked suddenly.

"Adventure is meat and drink to me, Miss Hare."

The prefix sounded strange and unfamiliar in her ears.  Formality.  She
had been wrong, then; only comradeship and the masculine sense of
responsibility.  Her heart was like lead.

"It is very kind and brave of you, Mr. Bruce; but I will not have it."

"Have what?" he asked, knowing full well what she meant.

"This going back with us.  Why should you risk your life for people who
are almost strangers?"

"Strangers?"  He laughed softly.  "Has it never occurred to you that
the people we grow up with are never really our friends; that real
friendship comes only with maturity of the mind?  Why, the best man
friend I have in this world is a young chap I met but three years ago.
It is not the knowing of people that makes friendships.  It is the
sharing of dangers, of bread, in the wilderness; of getting a glimpse
of the soul which lies beneath the conventions of the social pact.
Would you call me a stranger?"

"Oh, no!" she cried swiftly.  "It is merely that I do not want you to
risk your life any further for us.  Is there no way I can dissuade you?"

"None that I can think of.  I am going back with you.  That's settled.
Now let us talk of something else.  Don't you really want me to go?"

"Ah, that isn't fair," looking out to sea again and following the
lights aboard the Simla.

It was mighty hard for him not to sweep her into his arms then and
there.  But he would never be sure of her till she was free of this
country, free of the sense of gratitude, free to weigh her sentiments
carefully and unbiasedly.  He sat down abruptly on the wreck of an
ancient hull embedded in the sand.  She sank down a little way from him.

He began to tell her some of his past exploits: the Amazon, the
Orinoco, the Andes, Tibet and China; of the strange flotsam and jetsam
he had met in his travels.  But she sensed only the sound of his voice
and the desire to reach out her hand and touch his.  Friendship!  Bread
in the wilderness!



Ahmed was lean and deceptive to the eye.  Like many Hindus, he appeared
anemic; and yet the burdens the man could put on his back and carry
almost indefinitely would have killed many a white man who boasted of
his strength.  On half a loaf of black bread and a soldier's canteen of
water he could travel for two days.  He could go without sleep for
forty-eight hours, and when he slept he could sleep anywhere, on the
moment.

Filling his saddle-bags with three days' rations, two canteens of
water, he set off on a hagin, or racing camel, for Allaha, three
hundred miles inland as the crow flies.  It was his intention to ride
straight down to the desert and across this to Colonel Hare's camp, if
such a thing now existed.  A dromedary in good condition can make from
sixty to eighty miles a day; and the beast Ahmed had engaged was of
Arab blood.  In four days he expected to reach the camp.  If Winnie had
not yet arrived, he would take the road, meet her, warn her of the
dangers which she was about to face, and convey her to the sea-port.
If it was too late, he would send the camel back with a trusted
messenger to the colonel, to advise him.

They watched him depart in a cloud of dust, and then played the most
enervating game in existence--that of waiting; for they had decided to
wait till they heard from Ahmed before they moved.

Four nights later, when Ahmed arrived at the bungalow, he found
conditions as usual.  For reasons best known to himself Umballa had not
disturbed anything.  In fact, he had always had the coming of the
younger sister in mind and left the bungalow and camp untouched, so as
not to alarm her.

She had not yet arrived.  So Ahmed flung himself down upon his cotton
rug, telling the keepers not to disturb him; he would be able to wake
himself when the time came.  But Ahmed had overrated his powers; he was
getting along in years; and it was noon of the next day when a hand
shook him by the shoulder and he awoke to witness the arrival of Winnie
and her woman companion.

For the first time in many years Ahmed cursed his prophet.  He that had
had time to warn the child, had slept like the sloth of Ceylon!

He went directly to the point.  He told her briefly what had happened.
He had not the least doubt that Umballa was already aware of her
arrival.  She must remain hidden in the go-down of the bungalow; her
maid also.  That night, if Umballa or his men failed to appear, he
would lead her off to safety.  But there was no hope of stealing away
in the daytime.  In his heart, however, he entertained no hope; and
like the good general he was, he despatched the messenger and camel to
the sea.  The father and daughter were fated to return.

Ahmed had reckoned shrewdly.  Umballa appeared later in the day and
demanded the daughter of Colonel Hare.  Backed as he was by numerous
soldiers, Ahmed resigned himself to the inevitable.  They found Winnie
and her maid (whom later they sent to the frontier and abandoned) and
took them to the palace.

There was no weeping or wailing or struggling.  The dark proud face of
the young girl gave forth no sign of the terror and utter loneliness of
her position.  And Umballa realized that it was in the blood of these
children to be brave and quiet.  There was no mercy in his heart.  He
was power mad and gold mad, and his enemies lived because he could
reach neither of his desires over their dead bodies.

The rigmarole and mummery Winnie went through affected her exactly as
it had affected her sister.  It was all a hideous nightmare, and at any
moment she expected to wake up in her cozy corner at Edendale.

In the bazaars they began to laugh at Umballa and his coronations, or
durbars.  They began to jest at his futile efforts to crown some one
through whom he could put his greedy hand into the treasury.  Still,
they found plenty of amusement and excitement.  And so they filled the
square in front of the platform when Umballa put the crown on Winnie's
head.  How long would this queen last?

And Kathlyn, her father and Bruce were forced to witness the event from
behind the cordon of guards, dressed in native costume, their faces
stained and their hearts swelling with impotent anger and despair.  For
it was in such guise they had returned to Allaha.

During a lull in the ceremonies a resonant voice from out the dense
throne cried, "Give us a queen of our blood and race, thou black,
gutter born dog!"

Ramabai started at the sound of that voice, but caught himself before
he looked in the direction from whence it rose.  It belonged to one Lal
Singh.

Umballa scowled, but gave no other sign that he heard.  But a guard
dove into the crowd; uselessly, however.

Kathlyn touched Ramabai's arm.

"Oh, I must speak to her!"

"Be careful, Mem-sahib!" he warned.

But even as she spoke she stepped past him, toward her beloved sister,
and offered the flowers she held.

Winnie, not dreaming that this dark veiled creature was her sister,
smelled the flowers and beheld a card which had writing on it--English!

"Courage!  Father and I have a plan for your escape.  Kathlyn."




CHAPTER XVII

LORD OF THE WORLD

Umballa began to go about cheerfully.  He no longer doubted his star.
Gutter born, was he?  A rat from the streets?  Very well; there were
rats and rats, and some bit so deep that people died of it.  He
sometimes doubted the advisability of permitting Colonel Hare's head
man Ahmed to roam about; the rascal might in the end prove too sharp.
Still it was not a bad idea to let Ahmed believe that he walked in
security.  All Umballa wanted was the colonel, Kathlyn and the young
hunter, Bruce.  It would be Ahmed, grown careless, who would eventually
lead him or his spies to the hiding-place.

That the trio were in the city Umballa did not doubt in the least, nor
that they were already scheming to liberate the younger sister.  All
his enemies where he could put his hand on them!

Cheerful was the word.

The crust of civilization was thin; the true savage was cracking out
through it.  In the days of the Mutiny Umballa would have been the Nana
Sahib's right hand.  He would have given the tragedy at Cawnpur an
extra touch.

Ten thousand rupees did not go far among soldiers whose arrears called
for ten times that sum.  So he placed it where it promised to do the
most good.  It was a capital idea, this of cutting Ramabai's throat
with his own money.  The lawless element among the troops was his,
Umballa's; at least his long enough for the purpose he had in mind.

When the multitude round the platform dissolved and Winnie was led to
her chamber in the zenana, Umballa treated himself to a beverage known
as the king's peg--a trifle composed of brandy and champagne.  That he
drank to stupefaction was God's method of protecting that night an
innocent child--for Winnie was not much more than that.

Alone, dazed and terrified, she dropped down upon the cushions and
cried herself to sleep--exactly as Kathlyn had done.  In the morning
she awoke to find tea and food.  She had heard no one enter or leave.
Glancing curiously round her prison of marble and jasper and porphyry,
she discovered a slip of white paper protruding through a square in the
latticed window which opened out toward the garden of brides.

Hope roused her into activity.  She ran to the window and snatched the
paper eagerly.  It was from Kathlyn, darling Kit.  The risk with which
it had been placed in the latticed window never occurred to Winnie.

The note informed her that the woman doctor of the zenana had been
sufficiently bribed to permit Kathlyn to make up like her and gain
admittance to the zenana.  Winnie must complain of illness and ask for
the doctor, but not before the morning of the following day.  So far as
she, Kathlyn, could learn, Winnie would be left in peace till the
festival of the car of Juggernaut.  Ill, she would not be forced to
attend the ceremonies, the palace would be practically deserted, and
then Kathlyn would appear.

This news plucked up Winnie's spirits considerably.  Surely her father
and Kit were brave and cunning enough to circumvent Umballa.  What a
frightful country!  What a dreadful people!  She was miserable over the
tortures her father had suffered, but nevertheless she held him
culpable for not telling both her and Kit all and not half a truth.  A
basket of gems!  She and Kit did not wish to be rich, only free and
happy.  And now her own folly in coming would but add to the miseries
of her loved ones.

Ahmed had told her of the two ordeals, the black dungeon, the whipping;
he had done so to convince her that she must be eternally on her guard,
search carefully into any proposition laid before her, and play for
time, time, for every minute she won meant a minute nearer her ultimate
freedom.  She must promise to marry Umballa, but to set her own date.

Unlike Kathlyn, who had Pundita to untangle the intricacies of the
bastard Persian, Winnie had to depend wholly upon sign language; and
the inmates of the zenana did not give her the respect and attention
they had given to Kathlyn.  Kathlyn was a novelty; Winnie was not.
Besides, one of them watched Winnie constantly, because the bearded
scoundrel had attracted her fancy and because she hoped to enchain his.

So the note from Kathlyn did not pass unnoticed, though Winnie believed
that she was without espionage.

Kathlyn, her father, Bruce, Ramabai and Pundita met at the colonel's
bungalow, and with Ahmed's help they thrashed out the plan to rescue
Winnie.  Alone, the little sister would not be able to find her way out
of the garden of brides.  It was Kathlyn's idea to have Winnie pretend
she needed air and sunshine and a walk in the garden after the doctor's
visit.  The rescue would be attempted from the walls.

Juggernaut, or Jagannath in Hindustani (meaning Lord of the World), was
an idol so hideously done in wood that the Prince of Hell would have
taken it to be the personification of a damned soul, could he have
glimpsed it in the temple at Allaha.  The god's face was dark, his lips
and mouth were horribly and significantly red; his eyes were polished
emeralds, his arms were of gilt, his body was like that of a toad.  His
temporal reign in Allaha was somewhere near four hundred years, and no
doubt his emerald eyes had seen a crimson trail behind his car as many
hundred times.

He was married frequently.  Some poor, benighted, fanatical woman would
pledge herself and would be considered with awe till she died.  But in
these times no one flung himself under the car; nothing but the incense
of crushed flowers now followed his wake.  His grin, however, was the
same as of old.  Wood, paint, gilt and emeralds!  Well, we enlightened
Europeans sometimes worship these very things, though we indignantly
deny it.

Outside the temple stood the car, fantastically carved, dull with
rubbed gold leaf.  You could see the sockets where horrid knives had
once glittered in the sunlight.  Xerxes no doubt founded his war
chariots upon this idea.  The wheels, six in number, two in front and
two on each side, were solid, broad and heavy, capable of smoothing out
a corrugated winter road.  The superstructure was an ornate shrine,
which contained the idol on its peregrinations to the river.

About the car were the devotees, some holding the ropes, others
watching the entrance to the temple.  Presently from the temple came
the gurus or priests, bearing the idol.  With much reverence they
placed the idol within the shrine, the pilgrims took hold firmly of the
ropes and the car rattled and thundered on its way to the river.

Of Juggernaut and his car more anon.

The street outside the garden of brides was in reality no thoroughfare,
though natives occasionally made use of it as a short cut into town.
Therefore no one observed the entrance of an elephant, which stopped
close to the wall, seemingly to melt into the drab of it.  On his back,
however, the howdah was conspicuous.  Behind the curtains Kathlyn
patiently waited.  She was about to turn away in despair when through
the wicker gate she saw Winnie, attended by one of the zenana girls,
enter the garden.  It seemed as if her will reached out to bring Winnie
to the wall and to hold the other young woman where she was.

But the two sat in the center of the garden, the thoughts of each far
away.  The attendant felt no worry in bringing Winnie into the garden.
A cry from her lips would bring a dozen guards and eunuchs from the
palace.  And the white girl could not get out alone.  More than this,
she gave Winnie liberty in order to trap her if possible.

By and by the native girl pretended to feel drowsy in the heat of the
sun, and her head fell forward a trifle.  It was then that Winnie heard
a low whistle, an old familiar whistle such as she and Kit had used
once upon a time in playing "I spy."  She sat up rigidly.  It was hard
work not to cry out.  Over the wall the drab trunk of an elephant
protruded, and something white fluttered into the garden.

Winnie rose.  The head of the native girl came up instinctively; but as
Winnie leisurely strolled toward the palace, the head sank again.
Winnie turned and wandered along the walls, apparently examining the
flowers and vines, but all the while moving nearer and nearer to the
bit of white paper which the idle breeze stirred back and forth
tentatively.  When she reached the spot she stooped and plucked some
flowers, gathering up the paper as she did so.  And still in the
stooping posture, she read the note, crumpled it and stuffed it into a
hole in the wall.

Poor child!  Every move had been watched as a cobra watches its prey.

She was to pretend illness at once.  Plans had been changed.  She stood
up, swayed slightly and staggered back to the seat.  In truth, she was
pale enough, and her heart beat so fast that she was horribly dizzy.

"A doctor!" she cried, forgetting that she would not be understood.

The native girl stared at her.  She did not understand the words, but
the signs were enough.  The young white woman looked ill; and Umballa
would deal harshly with those who failed to stem the tide of any
illness which might befall his captive.  There was a commotion behind
the fretwork of the palace.  Three other girls came out, and Winnie was
conducted back to the zenana.

All this Kathlyn observed.  She bade the mahout go to the house of the
zenana's doctor, where she donned the habiliments familiar to the
guards and inmates of the zenana.

Everything went forward without a hitch; so smoothly that had the
object of her visit been other than Winnie, Kathlyn must have sensed
something unusual.  She entered the palace and even led the way to
Winnie's chamber--a fact which appeared natural enough to the women
about, but which truly alarmed Umballa's spy, who immediately set off
in search of the man.

One thing assured her: the hands of the zenana's real physician were
broad and muscular, while the hands she saw were slender and beautiful,
brown though they were.  She had seen those hands before, during the
episode of the leopards of the treasury.

It was very hard for Kathlyn to curb the wild desire to crush Winnie in
her arms, arms that truly ached for the feel of her.  Even as she
fought this desire she could not but admire Winnie's superb acting.
She and her father had misjudged this butterfly.  To have come all this
way alone in search of them, unfamiliar with the customs and the
language of the people!  How she had succeeded in getting here without
mishap was in itself remarkable.

She took Winnie's wrist in her hand and pressed it reassuringly, then
puttered about in her medical bag.  Very softly she whispered:

"I shall remain with you till dusk.  Give no sign whatever that you
know me, for you will be watched.  To-night I will smuggle you out of
the palace.  Take these, and soon pretend to be quieted."

Winnie swallowed the bits of sugar and lay back.  Kathlyn signified
that she wished to be alone with her patient.  Once alone with Winnie,
she cast aside her veil.

"Oh, Kit!"

"Hush, baby!  We are going to get you safely away."

"I am afraid."

"So are we all; but we must not let any one see that we are.  Father
and Ahmed are near by.  But oh, why did you attempt to find us?"

"But you cabled me to come, weeks ago!"

"I?  Never!"  And the mystery was no longer a mystery to Kathlyn.  The
hand of Umballa lay bare.  Could they eventually win out against a man
who seemed to miss no point in the game?  "You were deceived, Winnie.
To think of it!  We had escaped, were ready to sail for home, when we
learned that you had left for India.  It nearly broke our hearts."

"What ever shall we do, Kit?"  Winnie flung her arms round her sister
and drew her down.  "My Kit!"

"We must be brave whatever happens."

"And am I not your sister?" quietly.  "Do you believe in me so little?
Why shouldn't I be brave?  But you've always treated me like a baby;
you never tried to prove me."

Kathlyn's arms wound themselves tightly about the slender form. . . .
And thus Umballa found them.

[Illustration: And thus Umballa found them.]

"Very touching!" he said, standing with his back to the door.  "But
nicely trapped!"  He laughed as Kathlyn sprang to her feet, as her hand
sought the dagger at her side.  "Don't draw it," he said.  "I might
hurt your arm in wrenching it away from you.  Poor little fool!  Back
into the cage, like a homing pigeon!  Had I not known you all would
return, think you I would have given up the chase so easily?  You would
not bend, so then you must break.  The god Juggernaut yearns for a
sacrifice to prove that we still love and worship him.  You spurned my
love; now you shall know my hate.  You shall die, unpleasantly."

Quickly as a cat springs he caught her hands and wrenched them toward
him, dragging her toward the door.  Winnie sprang up from the cushions,
her eyes ablaze with the fighting spirit.  Too soon the door closed in
her face and she heard the bolt outside go slithering home.

Said Umballa from the corridor: "To you, pretty kitten, I shall come
later.  I need you for my wife.  When I return you will be all alone in
the world, truly an orphan.  And do not make your eyes red needlessly."

Winnie screamed, and Kathlyn fought with the fury of a netted tigress.
For a few minutes Umballa had his hands full, but in the end he
conquered.

Outside the garden of brides three men waited in vain for the coming of
Kathlyn and her sister.

The god Juggernaut did not repose in his accustomed niche in the temple
that night.  The car had to be pulled up and down a steep hill, and on
the return, owing to the darkness, it was left at the top of the hill,
safely propped to prevent its rolling down of its own accord.  When the
moon rose Juggernaut's eyes gleamed like the striped cat's.  Long since
he had seen a human sacrifice.  Perhaps the old days would return once
more.  He was weary at heart riding over sickly flowers; he wanted
flesh and bones and the music of the death-rattle.  His cousins, War
and Pestilence, still took their tithes.  Why should he be denied?

The whispering became a murmuring, and the murmuring grew into
excitable chattering; and by ten o'clock that night all the bazaars
knew that the ancient rites of Juggernaut were to be revived that
night.  The bazaars had never heard of Nero, called Ahenobarbus, and
being without companions, they missed the greatness of their august but
hampered regent Umballa.

Always the bazaars heard news before any other part of the city.  The
white Mem-sahib was not dead, but had been recaptured while posing as
the zenana physician in an attempt to rescue her sister, the new queen.
Oh, the chief city of Allaha was in the matter of choice and unexpected
amusements unrivaled in all Asia.

Yes, Umballa was not unlike Nero--to keep the populace amused so they
would temporarily forget their burdens.

But why the sudden appearance of soldiers, who stood guard at every
exit, compelling the inmates of the bazaars not to leave their houses?
Ai, ai!  Why this secrecy, since they knew what was going to take
place?  But the soldiers, ordinarily voluble, maintained grim silence,
and even went so far as to extend the bayonet to all those who tried to
leave the narrow streets.

"An affair of state!" was all the natives could get in answer to their
inquiries.  Men came flocking to the roofs.  But the moonshine made all
things ghostly.  The car of the god Juggernaut was visible, but what
lay in its path could not be seen.

Umballa was not popular that night.  But this was a private affair.
Well he knew the ingenuity and resources of his enemies at large.
There would be no rescue this night.  Kathlyn Mem-sahib should die;
this time he determined to put fear into the hearts of the others.

Having drunk his king's peg, he was well fortified against any personal
qualms.  The passion he had had for Kathlyn was dead, dead as he wanted
her to be.

Whom the gods destroy they first make mad; and Umballa was mad.

The palanquin waited in vain outside the wall of the garden of
brides--waited till a ripple of the news eddied about the conveyance in
the shape of a greatly agitated Lal Singh.

"He is really going to kill her!" he panted.  "He lured her to her
sister's side, then captured her.  She is to be placed beneath the car
of Juggernaut within an hour.  It is to be done secretly.  The people
are guarded and held in the bazaars.  Ahmed, with an elephant and armed
keepers, will be here shortly.  I have warned him.  Umballa runs amuck!"

Suddenly they heard voices in the garden, first Umballa's, then
Kathlyn's.  Sinister portents to the ears of the listeners, father and
lover and loyal friends.  The former were for breaking into the garden
then and there; but a glance through the wicket gate disclosed the fact
that Umballa and Kathlyn were surrounded by fifteen or twenty soldiers.
And they dared not fire at Umballa for fear of hitting Kathlyn.

The palanquin was lastly carried out of sight.

At the end of the passage or street nearest the town was a gate that
was seldom closed.  Through this one had to pass to and from the city.
Going through this gate, one could make the hill (where the car of
Juggernaut stood) within fifteen minutes, while a detour round the
walls of the ancient city would consume three-quarters of an hour.
Umballa ordered the gates to be closed and stationed a guard there.
The gates clanged behind him and Kathlyn.  This time he was guarding
every entrance.  If his enemies were within they would naturally be
weak in numbers; outside, they would find it extremely difficult to
make an entrance.  More than this, he had sent a troop toward the
colonel's camp.

The gates had scarcely been closed when Ahmed, his elephant and his
armed keepers came into view.  The men sent Pundita back to camp, and
the actual warfare began.  They approached the gate, demanding to be
allowed to pass.  The soldiers refused.  Instantly the keepers flung
themselves furiously upon the soldiers.  The trooper who held the key
threw it over the wall just before he was overpowered.  But Ahmed had
come prepared.  From out the howdah he took a heavy leather pad, which
he adjusted over the fore skull of the elephant, and gave a command.

The skull of the elephant is thick.  Hunters will tell you that bullets
glance off it as water from the back of a duck.  Thus, protected by the
leather pad, the elephant becomes a formidable battering-ram, backed by
tons of weight.  Only the solidity of stone may stay him.

Ahmed's elephant shouldered through the gates grandly.  For all the
resistance they offered that skull they might have been constructed of
papier mache.

Through the dust they hurried.  Whenever a curious native got in the
way the butt of a rifle bestirred him out of it.

Umballa had lashed Kathlyn to a sapling which was laid across the path
of the car.  The man was mad, stark mad, this night.  Even the soldiers
and the devotees surrounding the car were terrified.  One did not force
sacrifices to Juggernaut.  One soldier had protested, and he lay at the
bottom of the hill, his skull crushed.  The others, pulled one way by
greed of money and love of life, stirred no hand.

But Kathlyn Mem-sahib did not die under the broad wheels of the car of
Juggernaut.  So interested in Umballa were his men that they forgot the
vigilance required to conduct such a ceremony free of interruption.  A
crackling of shots, a warning cry to drop their arms, the plunging of
an elephant in the path of the car, which was already thundering down
the hill, spoiled Umballa's classic.




CHAPTER XVIII

PATIENCE

While Bruce and two of his men carried Kathlyn out of harm's way to the
shelter of the underbrush, where he liberated her, Ahmed drove Umballa
and his panic-stricken soldiers over the brow of the hill.  Umballa
could be distinguished by his robes and turban, but in the moonlight
Ahmed and his followers were all of a color, like cats in the dark.
With mad joy in his heart Ahmed could not resist propelling the furious
regent down-hill, using the butt of his rifle and pretending he did not
know who it was he was treating with these indignities.  And Umballa
could not tell who his assailant was because he was given no
opportunity to turn.

"Soor!" Ahmed shouted.  "Swine!  Take that, and that, and that!"

Stumbling on, Umballa cried out in pain; but he did not ask for mercy.

"Soor!  Tell your master, Durga Ram, how bites this gun butt as I shall
tell mine the pleasure it gives me to administer it.  Swine!  Ha, you
stumble!  Up with you!"

Batter and bang!  Doubtless Ahmed would have prolonged this delightful
entertainment to the very steps of the palace, but a full troop of
soldiers appeared at the foot of the hill, and Ahmed saw that it was
now his turn to take to his heels.

"Swine!" with a parting blow which sent Umballa to his knees, "tell
your master that if he harms the little Mem-sahib in the palace he
shall die!  Let him remember the warnings that he has received, and let
him not forget what a certain dungeon holds!"

Umballa staggered to his feet, his sight blinded with tears of pain.
He was sober enough now, and Ahmed's final words rang in his ears like
a cluster of bells.  "What a certain dungeon holds!"  Stumbling down
the hill, urged by Ahmed's blows, only one thought occupied his mind:
to wreak his vengeance for these indignities upon an innocent girl.
But now a new fear entered his craven soul, craven as all cruel souls
are.  Some one knew!

He fell into the arms of his troopers and they carried him to a litter,
thence to the palace.  His back was covered with bruises, and but for
the thickness of his cummerbund he must have died under the beating,
which had been thorough and masterly.  "What a certain dungeon holds!"
In his chamber Umballa called for his peg of brandy and champagne,
which for some reason did not take hold as usual.  For the first time
in his life Durga Ram, so-called Umballa, knew what agony was.  But did
it cause him to think with pity of the agonies he had caused them?  Not
in the least.

When Ahmed rejoined his people Kathlyn was leaning against her father's
shoulder, smiling wanly.

"Where is Umballa?" cried Bruce, seizing Ahmed by the arm.

"On the way to the palace!"  Ahmed laughed and told what he had
accomplished.

Bruce raised his hands in anger.

"But, Sahib!" began Ahmed, not comprehending.

"And, having him in your hands, you let him go!"

Ahmed stood dumfounded.  His jaw sagged, his rifle slipped from his
hands and fell with a clank at his feet.

"You are right, Sahib.  I am an unthinking fool.  May Allah forgive me!"

"We could have held him as hostage, and tomorrow morning we all could
have left Allaha free, unhindered!  God forgive you, Ahmed, for not
thinking!"

"In the heat of battle, Sahib, one does not always think of the
morrow."  But Ahmed's head fell and his chin touched his breast.  That
he, Ahmed, of the secret service, should let spite overshadow
forethought and to be called to account for it!  He was disgraced.

"Never mind, Ahmed," said Kathlyn kindly.  "What is done is done.  We
must find safety.  We shall have to hide in the jungle to-night.  And
there is my sister.  You should have thought, Ahmed."

"Umballa will not harm a hair of her head," replied Ahmed, lifting his
head.

"Your work has filled his heart with venom," declared Bruce hotly.

"And my words, Sahib, have filled his veins with water," replied Ahmed,
now smiling.

"What do you mean?" demanded the colonel.

"Ask Ramabai.  Perhaps he will tell you."

"That," returned Ramabai, "is of less importance at this moment than
the method to be used in liberating the daughter of Colonel Sahib.
Listen.  The people are angry because they were not permitted to be
present at the sacrifice to Juggernaut.  To pacify them Umballa will
have to invent some amusement in the arena."

"But how will that aid us?" interrupted the colonel.

"Let us say, an exhibition of wild animals, with their trainers."

"Trainers?"

"Yes.  You, Colonel Sahib, and you, Kathlyn Mem-sahib, and you, Bruce
Sahib, will without difficulty act the parts."

"Good!" said Ahmed bitterly.  "The three of them will rush into the
royal box, seize Winnie Mem-sahib, and carry her off from under the
very noses of Umballa, the council and the soldiers!"

"My friend Ahmed is bitter," replied Ramabai patiently.

"Ai, ai!  I had Umballa in my hands and let him go!  Pardon me,
Ramabai; I am indeed bitter."

"But who will suggest this animal scheme to Umballa?" inquired Bruce.

"I."  Ramabai salaamed.

"You will walk into the lion's den?"

"The jackal's," Ramabai corrected.

"God help me!  If I only had a few men!" groaned the colonel, raising
his hands to heaven.

"You will be throwing away your life uselessly, Ramabai," said Kathlyn.

"No.  Umballa and I will understand each other completely."

"Ramabai," put in Ahmed, with his singular smile, "do you want a crown?"

"For myself?  No, again.  For my wife?  That is a different matter."

"And the man in the dungeon?" ironically.

Ramabai suddenly faced the moon and stared long and silently at the
brilliant planet.  In his mind there was conflict, war between right
and ambition.  He seemed to have forgot those about him, waiting
anxiously for him to speak.

"Ramabai," said Ahmed craftily, "at a word from you a thousand armed
men will spring into existence and within twelve hours set Pundita on
yonder throne.  Why do you hesitate to give the sign?"

Ramabai wheeled quickly.

"Ahmed, silence!  I am yet an honorable man.  You know and I know how
far I may go.  Trifle with me no more."

Ahmed salaamed deeply.

"Think not badly of me, Ramabai; but I am a man of action, and it galls
me to wait."

"Are you wholly unselfish?"

It was Ahmed's turn to address mute inquiries to the moon.

"What is all this palaver about?"  Bruce came in between the two men
impatiently.

"God knows!" murmured the colonel.  "One thing I know, if we stand here
much longer we'll all spend the rest of the night in prison."

There was wisdom in this.  They marched away at once, following the
path of the elephant and the loyal keepers.  There was no pursuit.
Soldiers with purses filled with promises are not overeager to face
skilled marksmen.  The colonel and his followers, not being aware of
this indecision, proposed camping in the first spot which afforded
protection from the chill of night, not daring to make for the
bungalow, certain that it was being watched.  In this they were wise,
for a cordon of soldiers (with something besides promises in their
purses) surrounded the camp on the chance that its owner might hazard a
return.

"Now, Ramabai, what is your plan?" asked the colonel, as he wrapped
Kathlyn in the howdah blanket.  "We are to pose as animal trainers.
Good.  What next?"

"A trap and a tunnel."

"Ah!"

"There used to be one.  A part of it caved in four or five years ago.
It can be reexcavated in a night.  The men who do that shall be my own.
Your animals will be used.  To Kathlyn Mem-sahib your pet leopards will
be as play fellows.  She has the eye, and the voice, and the touch.
She shall be veiled to her eyes, with a bit of ocher on her forehead.
Who will recognize her?"

"The sight of you, Ramabai, will cause him to suspect."

"That remains in the air.  There must be luck in it."

"If Umballa can be lured to drink his pegs."  Then, with an impatient
gesture Ahmed added: "Folly!  What!  Umballa and the council will not
recognize the Colonel Sahib's hair, the Mem-sahib's golden head?"

"In the go-down of Lal Singh, the cobbler, there are many things, even
wigs and false beards," retorted Ramabai slyly.

Ahmed started, then laughed.

"You are right, Ramabai.  So then we have wigs and beards.  Go on."  He
was sitting cross legged and rocking back and forth.

"After the tricks are done Kathlyn Mem-sahib will throw aside her veil
and stand revealed, to Umballa, to the council, to the populace."

Bruce jumped to his feet.

"Be patient, Bruce Sahib," reproved Ramabai.  "I am not yet done."

Bruce sat down again, and Kathlyn stole a glance at his lean unhappy
face.  How she longed to touch it, to smooth away the lines of care!
The old camaraderie was gone; there seemed to be some invisible barrier
between them now.

"She will discover herself, then," proceeded Ramabai.  "Umballa will at
once start to order her capture, when she shall stay him by crying that
she is willing to face the arena lions.  Remember, there will be a trap
and a tunnel."

"And outside?" said Ahmed, still doubting.

"There will be soldiers, my men.  But they will at that moment be
elsewhere."

"If you have soldiers, then, why not slip them into the palace and have
them take the young Mem-sahib by force?"

"My men are not permitted to enter the palace, Ahmed.  Umballa is
afraid of them.  To go on.  Winnie Mem-sahib will stand up and exclaim
that she will join her sister, to prove that she is no less brave."

"But the lions!"--from Bruce.  From his point of view the plan was as
absurd as it was impossible.

Ramabai, however, knew his people and Bruce did not.

"Always remember the trap and the tunnel, Bruce Sahib.  At the entrance
of the lions the trap will fall.  Inside the tunnel will be the Colonel
Sahib and Bruce Sahib.  Outside will be Ahmed and the brave men he had
with him this night.  And all the road free to the gates!"

"Ah, for those thousand men!" sighed Ahmed.  "I can not forget them."

"Nor I the dungeon-keep," replied Ramabai.  "I must go my own way.  Of
the right and wrong of it you are not concerned, Ahmed."

"By the Lord!" exclaimed the colonel, getting up.  "I begin to
understand.  He is alive, and they hold him there in a den, vile like
mine was.  Alive!"

Ramabai nodded, but Ahmed clapped his hands exultantly.

"Umballa did not put him there.  It was the politics of the council;
and this is the sword which Umballa holds over their heads.  And if I
summoned my thousand men their zeal for me . . ."

"Pardon, Ramabai!" cried Ahmed contritely.  "Pardon!"

"Ah! finally you understand?"

"Yes.  You are not only a good man but a great one.  If you gave the
sign to your men there would be no one in yonder dungeon-keep alive!"

"They know, and I could not stay the tempest once I loosed it.  There,
that is all.  That is the battle I have fought and won."

The colonel reached down and offered his hand.

"Ramabai, you're a man."

"Thanks, Sahib.  And I tell you this: I love my people.  I was born
among them.  They are simple and easily led.  I wish to see them happy,
but I can not step over the dead body of one who was kind to me.  And
this I add: When you, my friends, are free, I will make him free also.
Young men are my followers, and in the blood of the young there is much
heat.  My plan may appear to you weak and absurd, but I know my people.
Besides, it is our only chance."

"Well, Ramabai, we will try your plan, though I do so half heartedly.
So many times have we escaped, only to be brought back.  I am tired, in
the heart, in the mind, in the body.  I want to lie down somewhere and
sleep for days."

Kathlyn reached out, touched his hand and patted it.  She knew.  The
pain and terror in his heart were not born of his own miseries but of
theirs, hers and Winnie's.

"Why doesn't my brain snap?" she queried inwardly.  "Why doesn't the
thread break?  Why can't I cry out and laugh and grow hysterical like
other women?"

"I shall take charge of everything," continued Ramabai.  "Your
tribulations affect my own honor.  None of you must be seen, however;
not even you, Ahmed.  I shall keep you informed.  Ahmed will instruct
the keepers to obey me.  No harm will come to them, since no one can
identify them as having been Umballa's assailants.  My wife will not be
molested in any way for remaining at the bungalow."

Without another word Ramabai curled himself up and went to sleep; and
one by one the others followed his example.  Bruce was last to close
his eyes.  He glanced moodily round, noted the guards patrolling the
boundaries of their secluded camp, the mahout sleeping in the shadow of
the elephant; and then he looked down at Kathlyn.  Only a bit of her
forehead was exposed.  One brown shapely hand clutched the howdah
blanket.  A patch of moonshine touched her temple.  Silently he stooped
and laid a kiss upon the hand, then crept over to Ahmed and lay down
with his back to the Mohammedan's.

After a while the hand clutching the howdah blanket slid under and
finally nestled beneath the owner's chin.

But Winnie could not sleep.  Every sound brought her to an upright
position; and to-night the palace seemed charged with mysterious
noises.  The muttering of the cockatoo, the tinkle of the fountain as
the water fell into the basin, the scrape and slither of sandals beyond
the lattice partitions, the rattle of a gun butt somewhere in the outer
corridors--these sounds she heard.  Once she thought she heard the
sputter of rifle shots afar, but she was not sure.

Kit, beautiful Kit!  Oh, they would not, could not let her die!  And
she had come into this land with her mind aglow with fairy stories!

One of the leopards in the treasury corridors roared, and Winnie
crouched into her cushions.  What were they going to do to her?  For
she understood perfectly that she was only a prisoner and that the
crown meant nothing at all so far as authority was concerned.  She was
indeed the veriest puppet.  What with Ahmed's disclosures and Kathlyn's
advice she knew that she was nothing more than a helpless pawn in this
oriental game of chess.  At any moment she might be removed from the
board.

She became tense again.  She heard the slip-slip of sandals In the
corridor, a key turn in the lock.  The door opened, and in the dim
light she saw Umballa.

He stood by the door, silently contemplating her.  "What a certain
dungeon holds!" still eddied through the current of his thoughts.
Money, money!  He needed it; it was the only barrier between him and
the end, which at last he began to see.  Money, baskets and bags of it,
and he dared not go near.  May the fires of hell burn eternally in the
bones of these greedy soldiers, his only hope!

His body ached; liquid fire seemed to have taken the place of blood in
his veins.  His back and shoulders were a mass of bruises.  Beaten with
a gun butt, driven, harried, cursed--he, Durga Ram!  A gun butt in the
hands of a low caste!  He had not only been beaten; he had been
dishonored and defiled.  His eyes flashed and his fingers closed
convulsively, but he was sober.  To take yonder white throat in his
hands!  It was true; he dared not harm a hair of her head!

"Your sister Kathlyn perished under the wheels of the car of
Juggernaut."

Winnie did not stir.  The aspect of the man fascinated her as the
nearness of a cobra would have done.  Vipers not only crawl in this
terrible land; they walk.  One stung with fangs and the other with
words.

"She is dead, and to-morrow your father dies."

The disheveled appearance of the man did not in her eyes confirm this.
Indeed, the longer she gazed at him the more strongly convinced she
became that he was lying.  But wisely she maintained her silence.

"Dead," he repeated.  "Within a week you shall be my wife.  You know.
They have told you.  I want money, and by all the gods of Hind, yours
shall be the hand to give it to me.  Marry me, and one week after I
will give you means of leaving Allaha.  Will you marry me?"

"Yes."  The word slipped over Winnie's lips faintly.  She recalled
Ahmed's advice: to humor the man, to play for time; but she knew that
if he touched her she must scream.

"Keep that word.  Your father and sister are fools."

Winnie trembled.  They were alive.  Kit and her father; this man had
lied.  Alive!  Oh, she would not be afraid of any ordeal now.  They
were alive, and more than that they were free.

"I will keep my word when the time comes," she replied clearly.

"They are calling me Durga Ram the Mad.  Beware, then, for madmen do
mad things."

The door opened and shut behind him, and she heard the key turn and the
outside bolt click into its socket.

They were alive and free, her loved ones!  She knelt upon the cushions,
her eyes uplifted.

Alone, with a torch in his shaking hand, Umballa went down into the
prison, to the row of dungeons.  In the door of one was a sliding
panel.  He pulled this back and peered within.  Something lay huddled
in a corner.  He drew the panel back into its place, climbed the worn
steps, extinguished the torch and proceeded to his own home, a gift of
his former master, standing just outside the royal confines.  Once
there, he had slaves anoint his bruised back and shoulders with
unguents, ordered his peg, drank it and lay down to sleep.

On the morrow he was somewhat daunted upon meeting Ramabai in the
corridor leading to the throne room, where Winnie and the council were
gathered.  He started to summon the guards, but the impassive face of
his enemy and the menacing hand stayed the call.

"You are a brave man, Ramabai, to enter the lion's den in this fashion.
You shall never leave here alive."

"Yes, Durga Ram.  I shall depart as I came, a free man."

"You talk like that to me?" furiously.

"Even so.  Shall I go out on the balcony and declare that I know what a
certain dungeon holds?"

Umballa's fury vanished, and sweat oozed from his palms.

"You?"

"Yes, I know.  A truce!  The people are muttering and murmuring against
you because they were forbidden to attend your especial juggernaut.
Best for both of us that they be quieted and amused."

"Ramabai, you shall never wear the crown."

"I do not want it."

"Nor shall your wife."

Ramabai did not speak.

"You shall die first!"

"War or peace?" asked Ramabai.

"War."

"So be it.  I shall proceed to strike the first blow."

Ramabai turned and began to walk toward the window opening out upon the
balcony; but Umballa bounded after him, realizing that Ramabai would do
as he threatened, declare from the balcony what he knew.

"Wait!  A truce for forty-eight hours."

"Agreed.  I have a proposition to make before you and the council.  Let
us go in."

Before the council (startled as had Umballa been at Ramabai's
appearance) he explained his plans for the pacification and amusement
of the people.  Umballa tried to find flaws in it; but his brain,
befuddled by numerous pegs and disappointments, saw nothing.  And when
Ramabai produced his troupe of wild animal trainers not even Winnie
recognized them.  But during the argument between Umballa and the
council as to the date of the festivities Kathlyn raised the corner of
her veil.  It was enough for Winnie.  In the last few days she had
learned self-control; and there was scarcely a sign that she saw Kit
and her father, and they had the courage to come here in their efforts
to rescue her!

It was finally arranged to give the exhibition the next day, and
messengers were despatched forthwith to notify the city and the
bazaars.  A dozen times Umballa eyed Ramabai's back, murder in his mind
and fear in his heart.  Blind fool that he had been not to have seen
this man in his true light and killed him!  Now, if he hired assassins,
he could not trust them; his purse was again empty.

Ramabai must have felt the gaze, for once he turned and caught the eye
of Umballa, approached and whispered: "Durga Ram, wherever I go I am
followed by watchers who would die for me.  Do not waste your money on
hired assassins."

As the so-called animal trainers were departing Kathlyn managed to drop
at Winnie's feet a little ball of paper which the young sister
maneuvered to secure without being observed.  She was advised to have
no fear of the lions in the arena, to be ready to join Kathlyn in the
arena when she signified the moment.  Winnie would have entered a den
of tigers had Kathlyn so advised her.

Matters came to pass as Ramabai had planned: the night work in the
arena, the clearing of the tunnel, the making of the trap, the
perfecting of all the details of escape.  Ahmed would be given charge
of the exit, Lal Singh of the road, and Ali (Bruce's man) would arrange
that outside the city there should be no barriers.  All because Ramabai
thought more of his conscience than of his ambitions for Pundita.

And when, late in the afternoon, the exhibition was over, Kathlyn
stepped upon the trap, threw aside her veil and revealed herself to the
spectators.  For all her darkened skin they recognized her, and a deep
murmur ran round the arena.  Kathlyn, knowing how volatile the people
were, extended her hands toward the royal box.  When the murmurs died
away she spoke in Hindustani:

"I will face the arena lions!"

The murmurs rose again, gaining such volume that they became roars,
which the disturbed beasts took up and augmented.

Again Kathlyn made a sign for silence, and added: "Provided my sister
stands at my side!"

To this Umballa said no.  The multitude shouted defiance.  In the arena
they were masters, even as the populace in the old days of Rome were
masters of their emperors.

Winnie, comprehending that this was her cue, stepped forward in the box
and signified by gestures that she would join her sister.

The roaring began again, but this time it had the quality of cheers.  A
real spectacle!  To face the savage African lions unarmed!  A fine
spectacle!

Winnie was lowered from the box, and as her feet touched the ground she
ran quickly to Kathlyn's side.

"Winnie, I am standing on a trap.  When it sinks be not alarmed."

"My Kit!" cried Winnie, squeezing her adored sister's hand.

The arena was cleared, and the doors to the lions' dens were opened.
The great maned African lions stood for a moment blinking in the
sunshine.  One of them roared out his displeasure, and saw the two
women.  Then all of them loped toward what they supposed were to be
their victims.

That night in the bazaars they said that Umballa was warring in the
face of the gods.  The erstwhile white queen of the yellow hair was
truly a great magician.  For did she not cause the earth to open up and
swallow her sister and herself?




CHAPTER XIX

MAGIC

Through the tunnel, into the street, into the care of Ahmed and Lal
Singh, then hurriedly to the house of Ramabai.  The fact that they had
to proceed to Ramabai's was a severe blow to Bruce and the colonel.
They had expected all to be mounted the instant they came from the
tunnel, a swift unobstructed flight to the gate and freedom.  But Ahmed
could not find his elephants.  Too late he learned that the mahouts he
had secretly engaged had misunderstood his instructions and had
stationed themselves near the main entrance to the arena!

The cursing and railing against fate is a futile thing, never bearing
fruit: so Ramabai suggested his house till transportation could be
secured.  They perfectly understood that they could not remain in the
house more than a few hours; for Umballa would surely send his men
everywhere, and quite possibly first of all to Ramabai's.

Still, Ramabai did not appear very much alarmed.  There were secret
stairways in his house that not even Pundita knew; and at a pinch he
had a plan by which he could turn away investigation.  Only in the
direst need, though, did he intend to execute this plan.  He wanted his
friends out of Allaha without the shedding of any blood.

"Well," said Ahmed, angrily casting aside his disguise; "well, Ramabai,
this is the crisis.  Will you strike?"

Lal Singh's wrinkled face lighted up with eagerness.

"We are ready, Ramabai," he said.

"We?"  Ramabai paused in his pacing to gaze keenly into the eyes of
this old conspirator.

"Yes, we.  For I, Lal Singh, propose to take my stand at your right
hand.  I have not been idle.  Everywhere your friends are evincing
impatience.  Ah, I know.  You wish for a bloodless rebellion; but that
can not be, not among our people.  You have said that in their zeal
your followers, if they knew, would sweep the poor old king out of your
path.  Listen.  Shall we put him back on the throne, to perform some
other mad thing like this gift of his throne to the Colonel Sahib?"

Ramabai, watched intently by the two conspirators for the British Raj
and his white friends, paced back and forth, his hands behind his back,
his head bent.  He was a Christian; he was not only a Christian, he was
a Hindu, and the shedding of blood was doubly abhorrent to his mind.

"I am being pulled by two horses," he said.

"Act quickly," advised Ahmed; "one way or the other.  Umballa will
throw his men round the whole city and there will not be a space large
enough for a rat to crawl through.  And he will fight like a rat this
time; mark me."

Ramabai paused suddenly in front of his wife and smiled down at her.

"Pundita, you are my legal queen.  It is for you to say what shall be
done.  I had in mind a republic."

Lal Singh cackled ironically.

"Do not dream," said Ahmed.  "Common sense should tell you that there
can be no republic in Allaha.  There must be an absolute ruler, nothing
less.  Your Majesty, speak," he added, salaaming before Pundita.

She looked wildly about the room, vainly striving to read the faces of
her white friends; but their expressions were like stone images.  No
help there, no guidance.

"Is the life of a decrepit old man," asked Lal Singh, "worth the lives
of these white people who love and respect you?"

Pundita rose and placed her hands upon her husband's shoulders.

"We owe them our lives.  Strike, Ramabai; but only if our need demands
it."

"Good!" said Lal Singh.  "I'm off for the bazaars for the night.  I
will buy chupatties and pass them about, as they did in my father's
time at Delhi, in the Great Mutiny."

And he vanished.

Have you ever witnessed the swarming of bees?  Have you ever heard the
hum and buzz of them?  So looked and sounded the bazaars that night.
At every intersection of streets and passages there were groups,
buzzing and gesticulating.  In the gutters the cocoanut oil lamps
flickered, throwing weird shadows upon the walls; and squatting about
these lamps the fruit sellers and candy sellers and cobblers and
tailors jabbered and droned.  Light women, with their painted faces,
went abroad boldly.

And there was but one word on all these tongues: Magic!

Could any human being pass through what this white woman had?  No!  She
was the reincarnation of some forgotten goddess.  They knew that, and
Umballa would soon bring famine and plague and death among them.
Whenever they uttered his name they spat to cleanse their mouths of the
defilement.

For the present the soldiers were his; and groups of them swaggered
through the bazaars, chanting drunkenly and making speech with the
light women and jostling honest men into the gutters.

All these things Lal Singh saw and heard and made note of as he went
from house to house among the chosen and told them to hold themselves
in readiness, as the hour was near at hand.  Followed the clinking of
gunlocks and the rattle of cartridges.  A thousand fierce youths, ready
for anything, death or loot or the beauties of the zenanas.  For
patriotism in Southern Asia depends largely upon what treasures one may
wring from it.

But how would they know the hour for the uprising?  A servant would
call and ask for chupatties.  Good.  And the meeting-place?  Ramabai's
garden.  It was well.  They would be ready.

Flicker-flicker danced the lights; flicker-flicker went the tongues.
And the peaceful oriental stars looked down serenely.

Umballa remained in the palace, burning with the fires of murder.
Messenger after messenger came to report that the fugitives were still
at large.  Contrary to Ahmed's expectations, Umballa did not believe
that his enemies would be foolhardy enough to seek refuge in the house
of Ramabai.  The four roads leading out of the city were watched, the
colonel's bungalow and even the ruins of Bruce's camp.  They were still
in the city; but where?

A king's peg, and another; and Umballa stormed, his heart filled with
Dutch courage.

Ramabai made his preparations in case the hunters entered the house.
He opened a secret door which led into a large gallery, dim and dusty
but still beautiful.  Ancient armor covered the walls; armor of the
days when there existed in Delhi a peacock throne; armor inlaid with
gold and silver and turquoise, and there were jewel-incrusted swords
and daggers, a blazing helmet which one of Pundita's ancestors had worn
when the Great Khan came thundering down from China.

"Here," said Ramabai to the colonel, "you will be safe.  They might
search for days without learning this room existed.  There will be no
need to remain here now.  Time enough when my servant gives warning."

They filed out of the gallery solemnly.  Kathlyn went into the garden,
followed by Bruce.

"Do you know," said Kathlyn, "the sight of all that armor, old and
still magnificent, seemed to awaken the recollection of another age to
me?"

He wanted to take her in his arms, but he waited for her to continue
the thought.

"I wonder if, in the dim past, I was not an Amazon?"

She stretched out her arms and suddenly he caught them and drew them
down.

"I love you, Kathlyn!"

"No, no!"  She struggled back from him.  "Let us return to father and
Winnie," she said.

During this talk in the garden Umballa had not been inactive.  He
ordered his captain of the guard to proceed at once to the house of
Ramabai and learn if they were there, or had been.

The captain salaamed and departed with his men.

As Bruce and Kathlyn reached the door leading into the house they were
met by Ramabai, whose face was grave.

"Ah, Mem-sahib, you ought not to have come out here.  You might be
seen."  The servant who had been watching the street burst in with the
cry: "Soldiers!"

The colonel, Winnie and Pundita appeared.  For a moment they believed
that Ramabai was going to guide them to the secret gallery.  But
suddenly he raised his head and stared boldly at the gate.  And by that
sign Bruce and the colonel understood: Ramabai had taken up the dice to
make his throw.  The two men put their hands on their revolvers and
waited.

Soon the captain and his men came rushing in, only to stop short at a
sign from Ramabai.

"Be with me on the morrow, and I promise out of my own chest will I pay
you your arrears and earnest money for the future.  On the other hand,
what will you gain by taking us prisoners to Umballa?"

"My lord's word is known.  I myself will take charge of the affairs at
the palace; and Umballa shall go to the burning ghats.  I will announce
to him that I found you not."

The captain and his men departed, while Ramabai and his friends
reentered the house, to find the imperturbable Lal Singh decked out in
his lawful finery.

"All is ready," he announced.

"Dawn," replied Ramabai.

"The servant goes forth for the chupatties."



Dawn.  The garden was filling with silent armed men.  With Ramabai, in
the secret gallery, were the chiefs.  Ramabai indicated the blazing
swords.

"My friends, choose among these weapons.  The gems are nothing, but the
steel is tried and true."

Lal Singh selected the simplest, salaamed and slid the scabbard through
his cummerbund.

As for Kathlyn, she could not keep her eyes off the beautiful chain
cuirass which had once upon a time been worn by one of Pundita's
forebears, a warrior queen.

"Beautiful, beautiful!" she exclaimed.  "Pundita, may I put it on?  And
tell me the story of the warrior queen.  To be brave like that, to
fight side by side with the man she loved!"  She put the cuirass on.

The sky was yellow when the little army started off upon its desperate
enterprise.  A guard was left behind for the women.

Pundita solemnly gave each of the girls a dagger.  War!  Rebellion!
Great clamor and shouting before the palace stairs!

"Give us Umballa and the council!"

Umballa heard the shouting, and at first did not understand; but soon
the truth came to him.  The city was in revolt.  He summoned what
servants he could trust and armed them.  And when the captain of the
guard entered to seize Umballa he was himself overpowered.  The
despatch with which this was accomplished stunned the soldiers, who
knew not what to do without their leader.



When Lal Singh staggered into the house of Ramabai holding his side in
mortal agony, dying, Kathlyn felt the recurrence of that strange
duality which she had first known in the Temple of the Lion.

"We have failed," whispered Lal Singh.  "The palace soldiers betrayed
us!  All are prisoners, shortly to be shot. . . .  The secret
gallery . . .  Food and water there! . . .  Fly!"  And thus Lal Singh
gave up his cobbler's booth.

As in a dream Kathlyn ran from the house into the street.

With the sun breaking in lances of light against the ancient chain
armor, her golden hair flying behind her like a cloud, on, on, Kathlyn
ran, never stumbling, never faltering, till she came out into the
square before the palace.  Like an Amazon of old, she called to the
scattering revolutionists, called, harangued, smothered them under her
scorn and contempt, and finally roused them to frenzy.

In her madness Kathlyn turned the tide; and when her father's arms
closed round her she sank insensible upon his breast.

[Illustration: Kathlyn turned the tide.]




CHAPTER XX

BATTLE, BATTLE, BATTLE

"Kit, Kit!" cried Kathlyn's father when she came to her senses.  "My
girl, my girl!"

They left the palace immediately.

The overthrow of Umballa seemed to be complete.  Everywhere the
soldiers surrendered, for it was better to have food in the stomach
than lead.

When Kathlyn left the palace a thunder of cheers greeted her.  Kathlyn
was forced to mount the durbar throne, much as she longed to be off.
But Bruce anticipated her thought and despatched one of the
revolutionists to the house of Ramabai.  Kathlyn held out her hands
toward the excited populace, then turned to Ramabai expressively.
Ramabai, calm and unruffled as ever, stepped forward and was about to
address the people, when the disheveled captain of the guard, whom
Umballa had sent to the arena lions, pushed his way to the foot of the
platform.

"The arena lions have escaped!"

And there were a dozen lions in all, strong, cruel, and no doubt hungry!

Panic.  Men who had been at one another's throat, bravely and hardily,
turned and fled.  It was a foolish panic, senseless, but, like all
panics, uncontrollable.  Those on the platform ran down the steps and
at once were swallowed up by the pressing trampling crowd.

Bruce and the colonel, believing that Kathlyn was behind them, fought
their way to a clearing, determined to secure nets and take the lions
alive.  When they turned Kathlyn was gone.  For a moment the two men
stood as if paralyzed.  Then Bruce relieved the tension by smiling.  He
laid his hand on the colonel's shoulder.

"She has lost us; but that will not matter.  Ordinarily I should be
wild with anxiety; but to-day Kathlyn may go where she will, and
nothing but awe and reverence will follow her.  Besides, she has her
revolver."

At the same time Kathlyn was fighting vigorously to get free of the
mob, Winnie was struggling with Pundita, striving to wrench the dagger
from the grief-stricken wife's hand.

"No, no, Pundita!"

"Let me go!  My lord is dead, and I wish to follow!"

As the latter's eyes opened wildly Winnie heard a pounding at the door.
She flung open the door.

"Pundita?" cried the man.

Winnie caught him by the sleeve and dragged him into the chamber.

"Highness," he cried, "he lives!"  And he recounted the startling
events of the morning.

"They live!" cried Pundita, and covered her face.

To return to Kathlyn: by and by she was able to slip into a doorway,
and the bawling rabble passed on down the narrow street.  The house was
deserted, and the hallway and what had been a booth was filled with
rubbish.  Kathlyn, as she leaned breathlessly against the door, felt it
give.  And very glad she was of this knowledge a moment later, when two
lions galloped into the street, their manes stiff, their tails arched.
Doubtless, they were badly frightened.

Kathlyn reached for the revolver she carried and fired at the animals,
not expecting to hit one of them, but hoping that the noise of the
firearm would swerve them into the passage across the way.  Instead,
they came straight to where she stood.

She stepped inside and slammed the door, holding it and feeling about
in vain for lock or bolt.

She then espied a ladder which gave to the roof top, and up this she
climbed.  They could not possibly follow her up the ladder, and as she
reached the top and it turned back at her pressure, she knew that for
the present she had nothing to fear from the lions.

Then, round the passage she saw a palanquin, carried by slaves.  She
leaned far over.

"Help!" she cried.  "Help!"

The bearers paused abruptly, and the curtain of the palanquin was swept
back.  The dark sinister visage of Umballa was revealed.

Umballa left the palanquin, opened the door of the house, espied the
rubbish in the hall; was in the act of mounting the first steps when
one of the lions roared again.  Drunk as he was, filled with a
drunkard's courage, Umballa started back.  The lions!  Out into the
street he went.  He turned to the bearers and ordered them to fire the
inflammables in the hall.  But they refused, for they recognized the
chain armor.  Mad with rage Umballa struck at them, entered the hall
again, and threw a lighted match into the rubbish.




CHAPTER XXI

THE WHITE GODDESS

The painted dancing girl in the house where Umballa had taken temporary
refuge began to gather her trinkets, her amber and turquoise necklaces,
bracelets and anklets.  These she placed in a brass enameled box and
tucked it under her arm.  Next she shook the sodden Umballa by the
sleeve.

"Come!" she cried.

"I would sleep," he muttered.

She seized a bowl containing some flowers and cast the contents into
his face.  "Fire, fire and death!" she shrilled at him.

The douche brought the man out of his stupor.

"Fire?" he repeated.

"Come!"

This time he followed her docilely, wiping his face on his sleeve.

They heard a great shouting in the street, but did not tarry to learn
what had caused it.

One of Umballa's bearers, upon realizing what his master had done, had
run down the street for aid.  He had had two objects in view--to save
the white goddess and to buy his freedom.

A few hundred yards away, in another street, the colonel, Bruce and
Ahmed were dragging a net for the purpose of laying it for a lion at
bay in a blind alley.  Into their presence rushed the wild-eyed bearer.

"Save the white goddess!" he cried.

Bruce seized him by the shoulder.  "What is that?"

"The white goddess, Sahib!  She is on the roof of a burning house.
Durga Ram, my master, set fire to it.  He is drunk and hiding in a
house near by."

"The man is mad," declared the colonel.  "Kit would not have lost her
way this far.  He is lying.  He wants money."

Ahmed spoke.  The bearer fell upon his knees.

Three shots, at intervals!

The colonel and Bruce stared into each other's eyes.

"God in Heaven!" gasped the colonel; "those are revolver shots!"

"Bring the net!" shouted Ahmed.  To the trembling bearer he said: "Lead
us; we follow.  And if you have spoken the truth you shall not only
have your freedom, but rupees for your old age."

A lion's net is a heavy affair, but with the aid of the keepers the men
ran as quickly and lightly as if burdenless.  Smoke.  There was a fire.
The hearts of the white men beat painfully.  And the same thought
occurred to both of them; they should have gone to Ramabai's house
first, then turned their attention to the lions.  And Umballa was
hiding in a house near by!

Well for them that they entered the doomed quarter as they did.
Kathlyn saw them, and the muzzle of the revolver which she was pressing
to her heart lowered, the weapon itself slipping from her hand to the
roof.  God was not going to let her die like this.

"Spread out the net!" commanded Bruce.  "Kathlyn, can you hear me?" he
shouted, cupping his hands before his mouth.  Faintly he heard her
reply.  "When I give the word, jump.  Do not be afraid."

Kathlyn stepped upon the parapet.  A great volume of smoke obscured her
for a moment.  Out of the windows the vivid tongues of flame darted,
flashing upward.  She summoned all her courage and waited for the call
of the man she loved.  Inside a floor gave way with a crash and the
collateral walls of the building swayed ominously.  A despairing roar
accompanied the thunder of falling beams.  The lions had gone to their
death.

"Jump!"

Without hesitation Kathlyn flung herself into space.  A murmur ran
through the crowd which had, for the moment, forgot its own danger in
the wonder of this spectacle.  The men holding the net threw themselves
backward as Kathlyn struck the mesh.  Even then her body touched the
street cobbles and she was bruised and shaken severely, but, oh, alive,
alive!  There rose the great shouting which Umballa and the dancing
girl had heard.

Shortly after the house collapsed.  The fire spread to the houses on
each side.

Bruce seized the bearer by the arm.  "Now, the house which Umballa
entered?"

Eagerly enough the slave directed him.  For all the abuse and beatings
the slave was to have his hour.  But they found the house empty, except
for a chattering monkey and a screaming parrakeet, both attached to
pedestal perches.  Bruce liberated them and returned to the colonel.

"Gone!  Well, let him hide in the jungle, a prey to fear and hunger.
At least we are rid of him.  But I shall die unhappy if in this life we
two fail to meet again.  Kit!"

"John!"  She withdrew from her father's arms and sought those of the
man who loved her and whom she loved, as youth will and must.  "Let him
go.  Why should we care?  Take me to my sister."

Ahmed smiled as he and his men rolled the net.  This was as it should
be.  For what man was a better mate for his golden-haired Mem-sahib?
And then he thought of Lal Singh, and he choked a little.  For Lal
Singh and he had spent many pleasant hours together.  They had worked
together in play and in war, shared danger and bread and glory, all of
which was written in the books of the British Raj in Calcutta.

It was the will of Allah; there was but one God, and Mahomet was His
prophet.  Then Ahmed dismissed Lal Singh and the past from his
thoughts, after the philosophical manner of the Asiatic, and turned to
the more vital affairs under hand.

At Ramabai's house there was a happy reunion; and on her knees Pundita
confessed to her lord how near she had been to Christian damnation.
She had fallen from grace; she had reverted to the old customs of her
race, to whom suicide was no sin, Ramabai took her in his arms and
touched the forehead with his lips.

"And now," said the colonel, "the king!"

Ramabai's head sank.

"What is the matter?  Is he dead?"

"If I knew that," answered Ramabai, "I would rest content."

"But you searched the royal prison?"

"And found nothing, nothing!"

"What do you believe?"

"I believe that either the council or Umballa has forestalled us.  We
shall visit the council at once, They are prisoners.  If they have had
no hand in the disappearance of the king then we are facing a stone
wall over which we can not leap.  For Umballa has fled, whither no one
knows, and with him has gone the secret.  Come; we shall go at once to
the palace prison."

The council which had ruled so long in Allaha was very humble indeed.
They had imprisoned the king because he had given many evidences of
mental unbalance.  Perhaps unwisely they had proclaimed his death.
Durga Ram had discovered what they had done and had held it over their
heads like a sword blade.  That the king was not in his dungeon, why
and wherefor, was beyond their knowledge.  They were in the power of
Ramabai; let him work his will upon them.  They had told the truth.
And Ramabai, much as he detested them, believed them.  But for the
present it was required that they remain incarcerated till the king was
found, dead or alive.

In the palace soldiers and servants alike had already forgot Umballa.
To them it was as if he had not existed.  All in a few hours.  There
was, however, one man who did not forget.  Upon a certain day Umballa
had carelessly saved his life, and to his benefactor he was now
determined to devote that life.  This man was the majordomo, the chief
servant in the king's household.  It was not that he loved Umballa;
rather that he owed Umballa a debt and resolved to pay it.

Two days later, when the fires were extinguished and the populace had
settled back into its former habits, this majordomo betook himself to
Umballa's house.  It was well guarded, and by men who had never been
close to Umballa, but had always belonged to the dissatisfied section,
the frankly and openly mutinous section.  No bribery was possible here;
at least, nothing short of a fabulous sum of money would dislodge their
loyalty to Ramabai, now the constitutional regent.  No one could leave
the house or enter it without scrutiny and question.

The servants and the women of the zenana remained undisturbed.  Ramabai
would have it so.  Things had been put in order.  There had not been
much damage done by the looters on the day of the revolt.  They had
looked for treasure merely, and only an occasional bit of vandalism had
marked their pathway.

On the pain of death no soldier might enter the house.

The majordomo was permitted to enter without question.  He passed the
guards humbly.  But once inside, beyond observation, he became a
different man.  For in Umballa's house, as in Ramabai's, there were
secret chambers, and to-day the majordomo entered one of them--through
a panel concealed behind a hanging Ispahan rug.

On the night after the revolt, Umballa, sober and desperate, had slunk
back disguised as a candy seller.  The house was not guarded then; so
he had no difficulty in gaining admittance.  But he had to gain
entrance through a window in the zenana.  He would not trust either his
servants, his slaves, or his chief eunuch.  To the women of his own
zenana he had always been carelessly kind, and women are least bribable
of the two sexes.

Umballa entered at once his secret chamber and food and water were
brought, one of the women acting as bearer.  On the morning after the
guards arrived, and Umballa knew not how long he might have to wait.
Through one of the women he sent a verbal message to the majordomo with
the result that each day he learned what was taking place in the
palace.  So they hunted for the king.

He was very well satisfied.  He had had his revenge; and more than
this, he was confident when the time came he would also gain his
liberty.  He had a ransom to pay: the king himself!

Now then, Ramabai felt it incumbent on him to hold a banquet in the
palace, there to state to his friends, native and white, just what he
intended to do.  And on the night of this sober occasion he sat in the
throne room before a desk littered with documents.  As he finished
writing a note he summoned the majordomo.

"Have this delivered at once to Hare Sahib, whom you will find at his
bungalow outside the city.  Tell him also that he must be present
to-night, he, his friend and his daughters.  It is of vital importance."

Pundita, who was staring out of the window, turned and asked her lord
what he was sending the Colonel Sahib that he could not give him at the
banquet.

"A surprise, an agreeable surprise."

The majordomo cocked his ears; but Ramabai said nothing more.

At the colonel's bungalow there was rejoicing.  Ramabai had written
that, since the king could not be found he would head the provisional
government as regent, search for and arrest Umballa, and at any time
the Colonel Sahib signified would furnish him with a trusty escort to
the railway, three days' journey away.  He added, however, that he
hoped the Colonel Sahib would be good enough to remain till order was
established.

The majordomo contrived to tarry long enough to overhear as much of the
conversation as needed for he understood English--and then returned to
the city to carry the news to Umballa.  To him Umballa gave a white
powder.

"To-night, you say, Ramabai gives a banquet?"

"Yes, Huzoor."

"Well, put this in his cup and your obligation to me is paid."

The majordomo stared a long time at that little packet of powder.  A
cold sweat formed upon his brow under his turban.

"Well?" said Umballa ironically.

"Huzoor, it is murder!"

Umballa shrugged and held out his hand for the packet.

The majordomo swallowed a few times, and bowed his head.  "It shall be
done, Huzoor.  My life is yours to do with as you please.  I have said
it."

"Begone, then, and bring me the news on the morrow that Ramabai is
dead.  You alone know where the king is.  Should they near the hut in
which I have hidden him, see that he is killed.  He is also useless."

The majordomo departed with heavy heart.  Ramabai was an honest man;
but Durga Ram had spoken.

At the banquet, with its quail and pheasant, its fruits and flowers,
its rare plates and its rarer goblets for the light wines high castes
permitted themselves occasionally to drink, Ramabai toyed idly with his
goblet and thoughtlessly pushed it toward Kathlyn, who sat at his right.

Imbued with a sense of gratitude for Ramabai's patience and kindness
and assistance through all her dreadful ordeals, Kathlyn sprang up
suddenly, and without looking reached for what she supposed to be her
own goblet, but inadvertently her hand came into contact with
Ramabai's.  What she had in mind to say was never spoken.

The majordomo stood appalled.  This wonderful white woman over whom the
gods watched as they watched the winds and the rains, of whom he had
not dared speak to Umballa.  She?  No!  He saw that he himself must
die.  He seized the goblet ere it reached her lips, drank and flung it
aside, empty.  He was as good as dead, for there were no antidotes for
poisons Umballa gave.  Those seated about the table were too astonished
to stir.  The majordomo put his hands to his eyes, reeled, steadied
himself, and then Ramabai understood.

"Poison!" he gasped, springing up and catching the majordomo by the
shoulders.  "Poison, and it was meant for me!  Speak!"

"Lord, I will tell all.  I am dying!"

It was a strange tale of misplaced loyalty and gratitude, but it was
peculiarly oriental.  And when they learned that Umballa was hidden in
his own house and the king in a hut outside the city, they knew that
God was just, whatever His prophet's name might be.  Before he died the
majordomo explained the method of entering the secret chamber.

The quail and pheasant, the fruits and wine remained untouched.  The
hall became deserted almost immediately.  To the king, first; to the
king!  Then Umballa should pay his debt.

They found the poor king in the hut, in a pitiable condition.  He
laughed and babbled and smiled and wept as they led him away.  But in
the secret chamber which was to have held Umballa there was no living
thing.

For Umballa had, at the departure of the majordomo, conceived a plan
for rehabilitation so wide in its ramifications, so powerful and
whelming, that nothing could stay it; once it was set in motion.  The
priests, the real rulers of Asia; the wise and patient gurus, who held
the most compelling of all scepters, superstition!  Double fool that he
had been, not to have thought of this before!  He knew that they hated
Ramabai, who in religion was an outcast and a pariah, who worshiped but
a single God whom none had ever seen, of whom no idol had been carved
and set up in a temple.

Superstition!

Umballa threw off his robes and donned his candy seller's tatters, left
the house without being questioned by the careless guard, and sought
the chief temple.

Superstition!

To cow the populace, to bring the troops to the mark, with threats of
curses, famine, plague, eternal damnation!  Superstition!  And this is
why Ramabai and his followers found an empty chamber.




CHAPTER XXII

BEHIND THE CURTAINS

In the rear of the temple Umballa sought was a small chamber that was
used by the priests, when they desired to rest or converse privately,
which was often.  The burning temple lamps of brass emphasized the
darkness of the room rather than dispelled it.  A shadow occasionally
flickered through the amber haze--an exploring bat.  A dozen or more
priests stood in one of the dim corners, from which their own especial
idol winked at them with eyes like coals blown upon.  The Krishna of
the Ruby Eyes, an idol known far and wide but seen by few.

In the temple itself there was a handful of tardy worshipers.  The heat
of the candles, the smell of the eternal lotus flower and smoking
incense sticks made even the huge vault stifling.  Many of the idols
were bejeweled or patched with beaten gold leaf, and many had been
coveted by wandering white men, who, when their endeavor became known,
disappeared mysteriously and were never more known in the haunts of men.

A man in tatters appeared suddenly in the great arched doorway.  His
turban came down almost to his eyes and a neckcloth covered his mouth.
All that could be seen of him in the matter of countenance was a pair
of brilliant eyes and a predatory nose.  He threw a quick piercing
glance about, assured himself that such devotees as he saw were
harmless, then strode boldly, if hurriedly, toward the rear chamber,
which he entered without ado.  Instantly the indignant priests rushed
toward him to expel him and give him a tongue-lashing for his
impudence, when a hand was thrust out, and they beheld upon a finger a
great green stone.  They stopped as suddenly as though they had met an
invisible electric current.

The curtain fell behind the man in tatters, and he remained motionless
for a space.  A low murmuring among the priests ensued, and presently
one of their number--the youngest--passed out and stationed himself
before the curtain.  Not even a privileged dancing girl might enter now.

The man in tatters stepped forward.  He became the center of the group;
his gestures were quick, tense, authoritative.   At length priest
turned to priest, and the wrinkled faces became more wrinkled still:
smiles.

"Highness," said the eldest, "we had thought of this, but you did not
make us your confidant."

"Till an hour gone it had not occurred to me.  Shall Ramabai, then,
become your master, to set forth the propaganda of the infidel?"

"No!"  The word was not spoken loudly, but sibilantly, with something
resembling a hiss.  "No!"

"And shall a king who has no mind, no will, no strength, resume his
authority?  Perhaps to bring more white people into Allaha, perhaps to
give Allaha eventually to the British Raj?"

Again the negative.

"But the method?"

Umballa smiled.  "What brings the worshiper here with candles and
flowers and incense?  Is it love or reverence or superstition?"

The bald yellow heads nodded like porcelain mandarins.

"Superstition," went on Umballa, "the sword which bends the knees of
the layman, has and always will through the ages!"

In the vault outside a bell tinkled, a gong boomed melodiously.

"When I give the sign," continued the schemer, "declare the curse upon
all those who do not bend.  A word from your lips, and Ramabai's troops
vanish, reform and become yours and mine!"

"While the king lives?" asked the chief priest curiously.

"Ah!"  And Umballa smiled again.

"But you, Durga Ram?"

"There is Ramabai, a senile king, and I.  Which for your purposes will
you choose?"

There was a conference.  The priests drifted away from Umballa.  He did
not stir.  His mien was proud and haughty, but for all that his knees
shook and his heart thundered.  He understood that it was to be all or
nothing, no middle course, no half methods.  He waited, wetting his
cracked and swollen lips.  When the priests returned to him, their
heads bent before him a little.  It represented a salaam, as much as
they had ever given to the king himself.  A glow ran over Umballa.

"Highness, we agree.  There will be terms."

"I will agree to them without question."

Life and power again; real power!  These doddering fools should serve
him, thinking the while that they served themselves.

"Half the treasury must be paid to the temple."

"Agreed!"  Half for the temple and half for himself; and the
abolishment of the seven leopards.  "With this stipulation: Ramabai is
yours, but the white people are to be mine."

The priests signified assent.

And Umballa smiled in secret.  Ramabai would be dead on the morrow.

"There remains the king," said the chief priest.

Umballa shrugged.

The chief priest stared soberly at the lamp above his head.  The king
would be, then, Umballa's affair.

"He is ill?"

"He is moribund . . .  Silence!" warned Umballa.

The curtains became violently agitated.  They heard the voice of the
young priest outside raised in protest, to be answered by the shrill
tones of a woman.

"You are mad!"

"And thou art a stupid fool!"

Umballa's hand fell away from his dagger.

"It is a woman," he said.  "Admit her."

The curtains were thrust aside, and the painted dancing girl, who had
saved Umballa from death or capture in the fire of his own contriving,
rushed in.  Her black hair was studded with turquoise, a necklace of
amber gleamed like gold around her neck, and on her arms and ankles a
plentitude of silver bracelets and anklets.  With her back to the
curtains, the young priest staring curiously over her shoulder, she
presented a picturesque tableau.

"Well!" said Umballa, who understood that she was here from no idle
whim.

"Highness, you must hide with me this night."

"Indeed?"

"Or die," coolly.

Umballa sprang forward and seized her roughly.

"What has happened?"

"I was in the zenana, Highness, visiting my sister, whom you had
transferred from the palace.  All at once we heard shouting and
trampling of feet, and a moment later your house was overrun with men.
They had found the king in the hut and had taken him to the palace.
That they did not find you is because you came here."

"Tell me all."

"It seems that the majordomo gave the poison to Ramabai, but the white
goddess . . ."

"The white goddess!" cried Umballa, as if stung by a cobra's fang.

"Ay, Highness.  She did not die on that roof.  Nothing can harm her.
It is written."

"And I was never told!"

She lived, lived, and all the terrors he had evoked for her were as
naught!  Umballa was not above superstition himself for all his
European training.  Surely this girl of the white people was imbued
with something more than mortal.  She lived!

"Go on!" he said, his voice subdued as was his soul.

"The white goddess by mistake took Ramabai's goblet and was about to
drink when the majordomo seized the goblet and drained the poison
himself.  He confessed everything, where the king was, where you were.
They are again hunting through the city for you.  For the present you
must hide with me."

"The white woman must die," said Umballa in a voice like one being
strangled.

To this the priests agreed without hesitation.  This white woman whom
the people were calling a goddess was a deadly menace to that scepter
of theirs, superstition.

"What has gone is a pact?"

"A pact, Durga Ram," said the chief priest.  With Ramabai spreading
Christianity, the abhorred creed which gave people liberty of person
and thought, the future of his own religion stood in imminent danger.
"A pact," he reflected.  "To you, Durga Ram, the throne; to us half the
treasury and all the ancient rites of our creed restored."

"I have said it."

Umballa followed the dancing girl into the square before the temple.
He turned and smiled ironically.  The bald fools!

"Lead on, thou flower of the jasmine!" lightly.

And the two of them disappeared into the night.

But the priests smiled, too, for Durga Ram should always be more in
their power than they in his.

There was tremendous excitement in the city the next morning.  It
seemed that the city would never be permitted to resume its old
careless indolence.  Swift as the wind the news flew that the old king
was alive, that he had been held prisoner all these months by Durga Ram
and the now deposed council of three.  No more the old rut of dulness.
Never had they known such fetes.  Since the arrival of the white
goddess not a day had passed without some thrilling excitement, which
had cost them nothing but shouts.

So they deserted the bazaars and markets that morning to witness the
most surprising spectacle of all: the king who was dead was not dead,
but alive!

He appeared before them in his rags.  For Ramabai, no mean politician,
wished to impress upon the volatile populace the villainy of Umballa
and the council, to gain wholly, without reservation, the sympathy of
the people, the strongest staff a politician may lean upon.  Like a
brave and honest man he had cast from his thoughts all hope of power.
The king might be old, senile, decrepit, but he was none the less the
king.  If he had moments of blankness of thought, there were other
moments when the old man was keen enough; and keen enough he was to
realize in these lucid intervals that Ramabai, among all his people,
was loyalest.

So, in the throne room, later, he gave the power to Ramabai to act in
his stead till he had fully recovered from his terrible hardships.
More than this, he declared that Pundita, the wife of Ramabai, should
ultimately rule; for of a truth the principality was lawfully hers.  He
would make his will at once, but in order that this should be legal he
would have to destroy the previous will he had given to Colonel Hare,
his friend.

"Forgive me, my friend," he said.  "I acted unwisely in your case.  But
I was angry with my people for their cowardice."

"Your Majesty," replied the colonel, "the fault lay primarily with me.
I should not have accepted it or returned.  I will tell you the truth.
It was the filigree basket of gold and precious stones that brought me
back."

"So?  And all for nothing, since the hiding-place I gave you is not the
true one.  But of that, more anon.  I want this wretch Durga Ram spread
out on an ant hill . . ."

And then, without apparent reason, he began to call for Lakshmi, the
beautiful Lakshmi, the wife of his youth.  He ordered preparations for
an elephant fight; rambled, talked as though he were but twenty; his
eyes dim, his lips loose and pendulent.  And in this condition he might
live ten or twenty years.  Ramabai was sore at heart.

They had to wait two days till his mind cleared again.  His first
question upon his return to his mental balance was directed to Kathlyn.
Where was the document he had given to his friend Hare?  Kathlyn
explained that Umballa had taken it from her.

"But, Your Majesty," exclaimed the colonel rather impatiently, "what
difference does it make?  Your return has nullified that document."

"Not in case of my death.  And in Allaha the elder document is always
the legal document, unless it is legally destroyed.  It is not well to
antagonize the priests, who hold us firmly to this law.  I might make a
will in favor of Pundita, but it would not legally hold in justice if
all previous wills were not legally destroyed.  You must find this
document."

"Did you ever hear of a law to equal that?" asked Bruce of the colonel.

"No, my boy, I never did.  It would mean a good deal of red tape for a
man who changed his mind frequently.  He could not fool his relations;
they would know.  The laws of the dark peoples have always amazed me,
because if you dig deep enough into them you are likely to find common
sense at the bottom.  We must search Umballa's house thoroughly.  I
wish to see Ramabai and Pundita in the shadow of their rights.  Can't
destroy a document offhand and make a new one without legally
destroying the first.  Well, let us be getting back to the bungalow.
We'll talk it over there."

At the bungalow everything was systematically being prepared for the
homeward journey.  The laughter and chatter of the two girls was music
to their father's ears.  And sometimes he intercepted secret glances
between Bruce and Kathlyn.  Youth, youth; youth and love!  Well, so it
was.  He himself had been a youth, had loved and been beloved.  But he
grew very lonely at the thought of Kathlyn eventually going into
another home; and some young chap would soon come and claim Winnie, and
he would have no one but Ahmed.  If only he had had a boy, to bring his
bride to his father's roof!

Pictures were taken down from the walls, the various wild animal heads,
and were packed away in strong boxes.  And Ahmed went thither and yon,
a hundred cares upon his shoulders.  He was busy because then he had no
time to mourn Lal Singh.

Bruce's camp was, of course, in utter ruin.  Not even the cooking
utensils remained: and of his men there was left but Ali, whose leg
still caused him to limp a little.  So Bruce was commanded by no less
person than Kathlyn to be her father's guest till they departed for
America.  Daily Winnie rode Rajah.  He was such a funny old pachyderm,
a kind of clown among his brethren, but as gentle as a kitten.  Running
away had not paid.  He was like the country boy who had gone to the big
city; he never more could be satisfied with the farm.

The baboon hung about the colonel's heels as a dog might have done;
while Kathlyn had found a tiger cub for a plaything.  So for a while
peace reigned at the camp.

They found the much sought document in the secret chamber in Umballa's
house (just as he intended they should); and the king had it legally
destroyed and wrote a new will, wherein Pundita should have back that
which the king's ancestors had taken from her--a throne.

After that there was nothing for Colonel Hare to do but proceed to ship
his animals to the railroad, thence to the ports where he could dispose
of them.  Never should he enter this part of India again.  Life was too
short.

High and low they hunted Umballa, but without success.  He was hidden
well.  They were, however, assured that he lingered in the city and was
sinisterly alive.

Day after day the king grew stronger mentally and physically.  Many of
the reforms suggested by Ramabai were put into force.  Quiet at length
really settled down upon the city.  They began to believe that Umballa
had fled the city, and vigilance correspondingly relaxed.

The king had a private chamber, the window of which overlooked the
garden of brides.  There, with his sherbets and water pipe he resumed
his old habit of inditing verse in pure Persian, for he was a scholar.
He never entered the zenana or harem; but occasionally he sent for some
of the women to play and dance before him.  And the woman who loved
Umballa was among these.  One day she asked to take a journey into the
bazaars to visit her sister.  Ordinarily such a request would have been
denied.  But the king no longer cared what the women did, and the chief
eunuch slept afternoons and nights, being only partly alive in the
mornings.

An hour later a palanquin was lowered directly beneath the king's
window.  To his eye it looked exactly like the one which had departed.
He went on writing, absorbed.  Had he looked closely, had he been the
least suspicious . . . !

This palanquin was the gift of Durga Ram, so-called Umballa.  It had
been built especially for this long waited for occasion.  It was
nothing more nor less than a cunning cage in which a tiger was huddled,
in a vile temper.  The palanquin bearers, friends of the dancing girl,
had overpowered the royal bearers and donned their costumes.  At this
moment one of the bearers (Umballa himself, trusting no one!) crawled
stealthily under the palanquin and touched the spring which liberated
the tiger and opened the blind.  The furious beast sprang to the
window.  The king was too astonished to move, to appreciate his danger.
From yon harmless palanquin this striped fury!

The tiger in his leap struck the lacquered desk, broke it and scattered
the papers about the floor.

Ramabai and his officers were just entering the corridor which led to
the chamber when the tragedy occurred.  They heard the noise, the
king's cries.  When they reached the door silence greeted them.

The room was wrecked.  There was evidence of a short but terrific
struggle.  The king lay dead upon the floor, the side of his head
crushed in.  His turban and garments were in tatters.  But he had died
like a king; for in the corner by the window lay the striped one, a
jeweled dagger in his throat.

Ramabai was first to discover the deserted palanquin, and proceeded to
investigate.  It did not take him more than a minute to understand what
had happened.  It was not an accident; it was cold-blooded murder, and
back of it stood the infernal ingenuity of one man.

Thus fate took Allaha by the hair again and shook her out of the
pastoral quiet.  What would happen now?

This!

On the morning after the tragic death of the old king, those who went
early to worship, to propitiate the gods to deal kindly with them
during the day, were astounded to find the doors and gates of all the
temples closed!  Nor was any priest visible in his usual haunts.  The
people were stunned.  For there could be but one interpretation to this
act on the part of the gurus: the gods had denied the people.  Why?
Wherefore?  Twenty-four hours passed without their learning the cause;
the priests desired to fill them with terror before they struck.

Then came the distribution of pamphlets wherein it was decreed that the
populace, the soldiery, all Allaha in fact, must bow to the will of the
gods or go henceforth accursed.  The gods demanded the reinstatement as
regent of Durga Ram; the deposing of Ramabai, the infidel; the fealty
of the troops to Durga Ram.  Twenty-four hours were given the people to
make their choice.

Before the doors of all the temples the people gathered, wailing and
pouring dust upon their heads, from Brahmin to pariah, from high caste
matrons to light dancing girls.  And when the troops, company by
company, began to kneel at the outer rim of these gatherings, Ramabai
despatched a note to Colonel Hare, warning him to fly at once.  But the
messenger tore up the note and flew to his favorite temple.
Superstition thus won what honor, truth and generosity could not hold.

Strange, how we Occidentals have stolen out from under the shadow of
anathema.  Curse us, and we smile and shrug our shoulders; for a curse
is but the mouthing of an angry man.  But to these brown and yellow and
black people, from the steps of Lhassa to the tangled jungles of
mid-Africa, the curse of fake gods is effective.  They are really a
kindly people, generous, and often loyal unto death, simple and patient
and hard-working; but let a priest raise his hand in anathema and at
once they become mad, cruel and remorseless as the tiger.

Allaha surrendered; and Umballa came forth.  All this happened so
quickly that not even a rumor of it reached the colonel's bungalow till
it was too late.  They were to have left on the morrow.  The king dead,
only a few minor technicalities stood an the way of Ramabai and Pundita.

Bruce and Kathlyn were fencing one with the other, after the manner of
lovers, when Winnie, her eyes wide with fright, burst in upon them with
the news that Umballa, at the head of many soldiers, was approaching.
The lovers rushed to the front of the bungalow in time to witness the
colonel trying to prevent the intrusion of a priest.

"Patience, Sahib!" warned the priest.

The colonel, upon seeing Umballa, made an attempt to draw his revolver,
but the soldiers prevented him from carrying into execution his wild
impulse.

The priest explained what had happened.  The Colonel Sahib, his friend
Bruce Sahib, and his youngest daughter would be permitted to depart in
peace; but Kathlyn Mem-sahib must wed Durga Ram.

When the dazed colonel produced the document which had been legally
canceled, Umballa laughed and declared that he himself had forged that
particular document, that the true one, which he held, was not legally
destroyed.

Burning with the thought of revenge, of reprisal, how could Durga Ram
know that he thus dug his own pit?  Had he let them go he would have
eventually been crowned, as surely as now his path led straight to the
treadmill.

Ahmed alone escaped, because Umballa had in his triumph forgot him!




CHAPTER XXIII

REMORSE

There is an old saying in Rajput that woman and the four winds were
born at the same time, of the same mother: blew hot, blew cold,
balmily, or tempestuously, from all points at once.  Perhaps.

In the zenana of the royal palace there was a woman, tall, lithe, with
a skin of ivory and roses and eyes as brown as the husk of a water
chestnut.  On her bare ankles were gem-incrusted anklets, on her arms
bracelets of hammered gold, round her neck a rope of pearls and
emeralds and rubies and sapphires.  And still she was not happy.

From time to time her fingers strained at the roots of her glossy black
hair and the whites of her great eyes glistened.  She bit her lips to
keep back the sobs crowding in her throat.  She pressed her hands
together so tightly that the little knuckles cracked.

"Ai, ai!" she wailed softly.

She paced the confines of her chamber with slow step, with fast step;
or leaned against the wall, her face hidden in her arms; or pressed her
hot cheeks against the cool marble of the lattice.

Human nature is made up of contraries.  Why, when we have had the
courage coolly to plan murder, or to aid or suggest it, why must we be
troubled with remorse?  More than this, why must we battle against the
silly impulse to tell the first we meet what we have done?  Remorse:
what is it?

Now, this woman of the zenana believed not in the God of your fathers
and mine.  She was a pagan; her Heaven and hell were ruled by a
thousand gods, and her temples were filled with their images.  Yet this
thing, remorse, was stabbing her with its hot needles, till no torture
devised by man could equal it.

She was the poor foolish woman who loved Durga Ram; loved him as these
wild Asiatic women love, from murder to the poisoned cup.  Loved him,
and knew that he loved her not, but used her for his own selfish ends.
There you have it.  Had he loved her, remorse never would have lifted
its head or raised its voice.  And again, had not Umballa sought the
white woman, this butterfly of the harem might have died of old age
without unburdening her soul.  Remorse is the result of a crime
committed uselessly.  Humanity is unchangeable, for all its variety of
skins.

And here was this woman, wanting to tell some one!

Umballa had done a peculiar thing: he had not laid hand upon either
Ramabai or Pundita.  When asked the reason for this generosity toward a
man who but recently put a price on his head, Umballa smiled and
explained that Ramabai was not only broken politically, but was a
religious outcast.  It was happiness for such a person to die, so he
preferred that Ramabai should live.

Secretly, however, Ramabai's revolutionary friends were still back of
him, though they pretended to bow to the yoke of the priests.

So upon this day matters stood thus: the colonel, Kathlyn, Bruce and
Winnie were prisoners again; Ahmed was in hiding, and Ramabai and his
wife mocked by those who once had cheered them.  The ingratitude of
kings is as nothing when compared to the ingratitude of a people.

A most ridiculous country: to crown Kathlyn again (for the third time!)
and then to lock her up!  Next to superstition as a barrier to progress
there stands custom.  Everything one did must be done as some one else
had done it; the initiative was still chained up in the temples, it
belonged to the bald priests only.

But Umballa had made two mistakes: he should have permitted the white
people to leave the country and given a silken cord to the chief
eunuch, to apply as directed.  There are no written laws among the dark
peoples that forbid the disposal of that chattel known as a woman of
the harem, or zenana.  There are certain customs that even the all
powerful British Raj must ignore.

The catafalque of the dead king rested upon the royal platform.  Two
troopers stood below; otherwise the platform was deserted.  When
Ramabai and Pundita arrived and mounted the platform to pay their last
respects to a kindly man, the soldiers saluted gravely, even
sorrowfully.  Ramabai, for his courage, his honesty and justice, was
their man; but they no longer dared serve him, since it would be at the
expense of their own lives.

"My Lord!" whispered Pundita, pressing Ramabai's hand.  "Courage!"  For
Pundita understood the man at her side.  Had he been honorless, she
would this day be wearing a crown.

"Pundita, they hissed us as we passed."

"Not the soldiers, my Lord."

"And this poor man!  Pundita, he was murdered, and I am powerless to
avenge him.  It was Umballa; but what proof have I?  None, none!  Well,
for me there is left but one thing; to leave Allaha for good.  We two
shall go to some country where honor and kindness are not crimes but
virtues."

"My Lord, it is our new religion."

"And shall we hold to it and go, or repudiate it and stay?"

"I am my Lord's chattel; but I would despise him if he took the base
course."

"And so should I, flower of my heart!" Ramabai folded his arms and
stared down moodily at the man who, had he lived, could have made
Pundita his successor.  "Pundita, I have not yet dared tell you all;
but here, in the presence of death, truth will out.  We can not leave.
Confiscation of property and death face us at every gate.  No!  Umballa
proposes to crush me gradually and make my life a hell.  No man who was
my friend now dares receive me in his house.  Worship is denied us,
unless we worship in secret.  There is one pathway open."  He paused.

"And what is that, my Lord?"

"To kneel in the temple and renounce our religion.  Do we that, and we
are free to leave Allaha."

Pundita smiled.  "My Lord is not capable of so vile an act."

"No."

And hand in hand they stood before the catafalque forgetting everything
but the perfect understanding between them.

"Ai, ai!"

It was but a murmur; and the two turned to witness the approach of the
woman of the zenana.  She flung herself down before the catafalque,
passionately kissing the shroud.  She leaned back and beat her breast
and wailed.  Ramabai was vastly puzzled over this demonstration.  That
a handsome young woman should wail over the corpse of an old man who
had never been anything to her might have an interpretation far removed
from sorrow.  Always in sympathy, however, with those bowed with grief,
Ramabai stooped and attempted to raise her.

She shrank from his touch, looked up and for the first time seemed to
be aware of his presence.  Like a bubble under water, that which had
been striving for utterance came to the surface.  She snatched one of
Ramabai's hands.

"Ai, ai!  I am wretched.  Lord, wretched!  There is hot lead in my
heart and poison in my brain!  I will confess, confess!"

Ramabai and Pundita gazed at each other, astonished.

"What is it?  What do you wish to confess?" cried Ramabai quickly.
"Perhaps . . ."

She clung to his hand.  "They will order my death by the silken cord.
I am afraid.  Krishna fend for me!"

"What do you know?"

"His majesty was murdered!" she whispered.

"I know that," replied Ramabai.  "But who murdered him?  Who built that
cage in the palanquin?  Who put the tiger there?  Who beat and
overpowered the real bearers and confiscated their turbans?  Speak,
girl; and if you can prove these things, there will be no silken cord."

"But who will believe a poor woman of the zenana?"

"I will."

"But you can not save men from the cord.  They have taken away your
power."

"And you shall give it back to me!"

"I?"

"Even so.  Come with me now, to the temple."

"The temple?"

"Aye; where all the soldiers are, the priests . . . and Durga Ram!"

"Ai, ai!  Durga Ram; it was he!  And I helped him, thus: I secured
permission to go into the bazaars.  There an assault took place under
the command of Durga Ram, and my bearers were made prisoners.  Durga
Ram, disguised as a bearer, himself freed the tiger which killed the
king.  Yes!  To the temple!  She who confesses in the temple, her
person is sacred.  It is the law, the law!  I had forgot!  To the
temple, my Lord!"

Before the high tribunal of priests, before the unhappy Kathlyn, before
the astonished Umballa, appeared Ramabai and Pundita, between them the
young woman of the zenana, now almost dead with terror.

"Hold!" cried Ramabai when the soldiers started toward him to eject him
from the temple.

"What!" said Umballa; "will you recant?"

"No, Durga Ram.  I stand here before you all, an accuser!  I know the
law.  Will you, wise and venerable priests, you men of Allaha, you
soldiers, serve a murderer?  Will you," with a wave of his hand toward
the priests, "stand sponsor to the man who deliberately planned and
executed the miserable death of our king?  Shall it fly to Benares,
this news that Allaha permits itself to be ruled and bullied by a
common murderer; a man without family, a liar and a cheat?  Durga Ram,
who slew the king; you turned upon the hand that had fed and clothed
you and raised you to power. . . .  Wait!  Let this woman speak!"

A dramatic moment followed; a silence so tense that the fluttering
wings of the doves in the high arches could be heard distinctly.
Ramabai was a great politician.  He had struck not only wisely but
swiftly before his public.  Had he come before the priests and Umballa
alone, he would have died on the spot.  But there was no way of
covering up this accusation, so bold, direct; it would have to be
investigated.

Upon her knees, her arms outstretched toward the scowling priests, the
woman of the zenana tremblingly told her tale: how she had saved
Umballa during the revolt; how she had secured him shelter with her
sister, who was a dancer; how she had visited Umballa in his secret
chamber; how he had confided to her his plans; how she had seen him
with her own eyes become one of the fake bearers of the palanquin.

"The woman lies because I spurned her!" roared Umballa.

"Away with her!" cried the chief priest, inwardly cursing Umballa for
having permitted this woman to live when she knew so much.  "Away with
her!"

"The law!" the woman wailed.  "The sanctity of the temple is mine!"

"Hold!" said Kathlyn, standing up.  In her halting Hindustani she
spoke: "I have something to say to you all.  This woman tells the
truth.  Let her go unafraid.  You, grave priests, have thrown your lot
with Umballa.  Listen.  Have you not learned by this time that I am not
a weak woman, but a strong one?  You have harried me and injured me and
wronged me and set tortures for me, but here I stand, unharmed.  This
day I will have my revenge.  My servant Ahmed has departed for the
walled city of Bala Khan.  He will return with Bala Khan and an army
such as will flatten the city of Allaha to the ground, and crows and
vultures and tigers and jackals shall make these temples their
abiding-places, and men will forget Allaha as they now forget the
mighty Chitor."  She swung round toward the priests.  "You have
yourselves to thank.  At a word from me, Bala Khan enters or stops at
the outer walls.  I have tried to escape you by what means I had at my
command.  Now it shall be war!  War, famine, plague!"

Her young voice rang out sharp and clear, sending terror to all
cowardly hearts, not least among these being those beating in the
breasts of the priests.

"Now," speaking to the soldiers, "go liberate my father, my sister and
my husband-to-be; and woe to any who disobey me!  For while I stand
here I shall be a queen indeed!  Peace; or war, famine and the plague.
Summon the executioner.  Arrest Durga Ram.  Strip him before my eyes of
his every insignia of rank.  He is a murderer.  He shall go to the
tread-mill, there to slave till death.  I have said it!"

Far in the rear of the cowed assemblage, near the doors, stood Ahmed,
in his old guise of bheestee, or water carrier.  When he heard that
beloved voice he felt the blood rush into his throat.  Aye, they were
right.  Who but a goddess would have had at such a time an inspiration
so great?  But it gave him an idea, and he slipped away to complete it.
Bala Khan should come in fact.

So he did not see Umballa upon his knees, whining for mercy, making
futile promises, begging for liberty.  The soldiers spat contemptuously
as they seized him and dragged him off.

The priests conferred hastily.  Bala Khan was a fierce Mohammedan, a
ruthless soldier; his followers were without fear.  The men of Allaha
might put up a good defense, but in the end they would be whelmed; and
the gods of Hind would be cast out to make way for the prophet of
Allah.  This young woman with the white skin had for the nonce beaten
them.  Durga Ram had played the fool: between the two women, he had
fallen.  They had given him power, and he had let it slip through his
fingers for the sake of reprisal where it was not needed.  Let him go,
then, to the treadmill; they were through with him.  He had played his
game like a tyro.  They must placate this young woman whom the people
believed was their queen, but who they knew was the plaything of
politics and expediencies.

The chief or high priest salaamed, and Kathlyn eyed him calmly, though
her knees threatened to refuse support.

"Majesty, we bow to your will.  Allaha can not hope to cope with Bala
Khan's fierce hillmen.  All we ask is that you abide with us till you
have legally selected your successor."

"Who shall be Pundita," said Kathlyn resolutely.

The chief priest salaamed again.  The movement cost him nothing.  Once
Bala Khan was back in his city and this white woman out of the country,
he would undertake to deal with Ramabai and Pundita.  He doubted Bala
Khan would stir from his impregnable city on behalf of Ramabai.

The frail woman who loved Umballa raised her hands in supplication.

Kathlyn understood.  She shook her head.  Umballa should end his days
in the treadmill; he should grind the people's corn.  Nothing should
stir her from this determination.

"Majesty, and what of me?" cried the unhappy woman, now filled with
another kind of remorse.

"You shall return to the zenana for the present."

"Then I am not to die, Majesty?"

"No."

"And Bala Khan?" inquired the priest.

"He shall stand prepared; that is all."

The people, crowding in the temple and in the square before it,
salaamed deeply as Kathlyn left and returned to the palace.  She was
rather dizzy over the success of her inspiration.  A few days might
pass without harm; but sooner or later they would discover that she had
tricked them; and then, the end.  But before that hour arrived they
would doubtless find some way of leaving the city secretly.

That it would be many days ere Pundita wore the crown--trust the
priests to spread the meshes of red tape!--Kathlyn was reasonably
certain.

"My girl," said the colonel, "you are a queen, if ever there was one.
And that you should think of such a simple thing when we had all given
up!  They would not have touched Umballa.  Kit, Kit, whatever will you
do when you return to the humdrum life at home?"

"Thank God on my knees, dad!" she said fervently.  "But we are not safe
yet, by any means.  We must form our plans quickly.  We have perhaps
three days' grace.  After that, woe to all of us who are found here.
Ah, I am tired, tired!"

"Kit," whispered Bruce, "I intend this night to seek Bala Khan!"

"John!"

"Yes.  What the deuce is Allaha to me?  Ramabai must fight it out
alone.  But don't worry about me; I can take care of myself."

"But I don't want you to go.  I need you."

"It is your life, Kit, I am certain.  Everything depends upon their
finding out that Bala Khan will strike if you call upon him.  At most,
all he'll do will be to levy a tribute which Ramabai, once Pundita is
on the throne, can very well pay.  Those priests are devils incarnate.
They will leave no stone unturned to do you injury, after to-day's
work.  You have humiliated and outplayed them."

"It is best he should go, Kit," her father declared.  "We'll not tell
Ramabai.  He has been a man all the way through; but we mustn't
sacrifice our chances for the sake of a bit of sentiment.  John must
seek Bala Khan's aid."

Kathlyn became resigned to the inevitable.

Umballa.  He tried to bribe the soldiers.  They laughed and taunted
him.  He took his rings from his fingers and offered them.  The
soldiers snatched them out of his palm and thrust him along the path
which led to the mill.  In Allaha political malefactors and murderers
were made to serve the state; not a bad law if it had always been a
just one.  But many a poor devil had died at the wrist bar for no other
reason than that he had offended some high official, disturbed the
serenity of some priest.

When the prisoners saw Umballa a shout went up.  There were some there
who had Umballa to thank for their miseries.  They hailed him and
jeered him and mocked him.

"Here is the gutter rat!"

"May his feet be tender!"

"Robber of the poor, where is my home, my wife and children?"

"May he rot in the grave with a pig!"

"Hast ever been thirsty, Highness?"

"Drink thy sweat, then!"

"Give the 'heaven born' irons that are rusted!"

The keepers enjoyed this raillery.  Umballa was going to afford them
much amusement.  They forced him to the wrist bar, snapped the irons on
his wrist, and shouted to the men to tread.  Ah, well they knew the
game!  They trotted with gusto, forcing Umballa to keep pace with them,
a frightful ordeal for a beginner.  Presently he slipped and fell, and
hung by his wrists while his legs and thighs bumped cruelly.  The lash
fell upon his shoulders, and he shrieked and grew limp.  He had fainted.



Among the late king's papers they found an envelope addressed to
Kathlyn.  It was in grandiloquent English.  Brevity of speech is
unknown to the East Indian.  Kathlyn read it with frowning eyes.  She
gave it to her father to read; and it hurt her to note the way his eyes
took fire at the contents of that letter.  The filigree basket of gold
and gems; the trinkets for which he had risked his own life, Kathlyn's,
then Winnie's.  In turn Bruce and Ramabai perused the letter; and to
Ramabai came the inspiration.

They would seek this treasure, but only he, Ramabai, and Pundita would
return.  Here lay their way to freedom without calling upon Bala Khan
for aid.  The matter, however, had to be submitted to the priests, and
those wily men in yellow robes agreed.  They could very well promise
Durga Ram his freedom again, pursue these treasure seekers and destroy
them; that would be Durga Ram's ransom.

The return to the palace was joyous this time; but in her heart of
hearts Kathlyn was skeptical.  Till she trod the deck of a ship
homeward bound she would always be doubting.

Bruce did not have to seek Bala Khan.  The night of Kathlyn's defiance
Ahmed had acquainted them with his errand.  He was now on his way to
Bala Khan.  They need trouble themselves no longer regarding the future.

"All goes well," said Ramabai; "for, to reach the hiding-place, we must
pass the city of Balakhan.  I know where this cape is.  It is not
large.  It juts off into the sea, the Persian Gulf, perhaps half a
dozen miles.  At high tide it becomes an island.  None lives about
except the simple fishermen.  Still, the journey is hazardous.  The
truth is, it is a spot where there is much gun running; in fact, where
we found our guns and ammunition.  I understand that there are great
secret stores of explosives hidden there."

"Any seaport near?" asked the colonel.

"Perhaps seventy miles north is the very town we stopped at a few weeks
ago."

The colonel seized Kathlyn in his arms.  She played at gaiety for his
sake, but her heart was heavy with foreboding.

"And the filigree basket shall be divided between you and Pundita, Kit."

"Give it all to her, father.  I have begun to hate what men call
precious stones."

"It shall be as you say; but we may all take a handful as a keepsake."

Two days later the expedition was ready to start.  They intended to
pick up Ahmed on the way.  There was nothing but the bungalow itself at
the camp.

Umballa was thereupon secretly taken from the treadmill.  He was given
a camel and told what to do.  He flung a curse at the minarets and
towers and domes looming mistily in the moonlight.  Ransom?  He would
destroy them; aye, and take the treasure himself, since he knew where
it now lay, this information having been obtained for him.  He would
seek the world, choosing his habitation where he would.

Day after day he followed, tireless, indomitable, as steadfast upon the
trail as a jackal after a wounded antelope, never coming within range,
skulking about the camp at night, dropping behind in the morning, not
above picking up bits of food left by the treasure seekers.  Money and
revenge; these would have kept him to the chase had he been dying.

As for Bala Khan, he was at once glad and sorry to see his friends.
Nothing would have pleased him more than to fall upon Allaha like the
thunderbolt he was.  But he made Ramabai promise that if ever he had
need of him to send.  And Ramabai promised, hoping that he could adjust
and regulate his affairs without foreign assistance.  They went on,
this time with Ahmed.

Toward the end of the journey they would be compelled to cross a chasm
on a rope and vine bridge.  Umballa, knowing this, circled and reached
this bridge before they did.  He set about weakening the support, so
that the weight of passengers could cause the structure to break and
fall into the torrent below.  He could not otherwise reach the spot
where the treasure lay waiting.

The elephants would be forced to ford the rapids below the bridge.

Kathlyn, who had by this time regained much of her old confidence and
buoyancy, declared that she must be first to cross the bridge.  She
gained the middle, when she felt a sickening sag.  She turned and
shouted to the others to go back.  She made a desperate effort to reach
the far end, but the bridge gave way, and she was hurled into the
swirling rapids.  She was stunned for a moment; but the instinct to
live was strong.  As she swung to and fro, whirled here, flung there,
she managed to catch hold of a rock which projected above the flying
foam.

A mahout, seeing her danger, urged his elephant toward her and reached
her just as she was about to let go.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE INVINCIBLE WILL

"Those ropes were cut," declared Ahmed.

"But who in the world could have cut them?" demanded the colonel.

Ahmed shrugged.  "We may have been followed by thieves.  They could
have got here before us, as we were forced to use the elephant trails.
Let us keep our eyes about us, Sahib.  When one speaks of gold, the
wind carries the word far.  And then . . ."  He paused, scowling.

"And then what?"

"I do not want the Mem-sahib to hear," Ahmed whispered.  "But who shall
say that this is not the work of the gurus, who never forget, who never
forgive, Sahib."

"But they would not follow!"

"Nay, but their servant would, on the fear of death.  I will watch at
night hereafter."

Ahmed searched thoroughly about the ledge from which the east side of
the bridge had swung, but the barren rocks told him nothing.  Armed
with his rifle, he plunged boldly back along the elephant trail, but
returned without success.  Whoever was following them was an adept, as
secret as a Thuggee.  All this worried Ahmed not a little.  He readily
understood that the murderous attempt had not been directed against
Kathlyn alone, but against all of them.  But for her eagerness and
subsequent warning some of them would have been dead at this moment.

"Sahib, it would be better to make camp on the other side of the ford.
The Mem-sahib is weak from the shock and might collapse if we
proceeded."

"I leave everything to you, Ahmed.  But is there not some place farther
below where the water does not run so fast?"

"Ramabai will know."

But Ramabai knew only the bridge.  They would have to investigate and
explore the bank.  Half an hour's journey--rather a difficult
one--brought them to still and shallow water.  Here they crossed and
made camp beyond in a natural clearing.  They erected the small tent
for Kathlyn, inside of which she changed her clothes, drank her tea and
lay down to sleep.

"What does Ahmed think?" asked Bruce anxiously.

"That we are being followed by some assassins hired by our friends, the
priests."

"Colonel, let us make straight for the seaport and let this damnable
bushel of trinkets stay where it is," urged Bruce, the lover.

"That is not possible now," replied Ramabai.  "We can now reach there
only by the seacoast itself, or return to the desert and journey over
the old trail.  We must go on."

The colonel smoked his pipe moodily.  He was pulled between necessity
and desire.  He had come to Asia for this filigree basket, and he
wanted it, with a passion which was almost miserly.  At one moment he
silently vowed to cast the whole thing into the sea, and at the next
his fingers would twitch and he would sigh.

Sometimes it seemed to him that there was some invisible force working
in him, drawing and drawing him against the dictates of his heart.  He
had experienced this feeling back in California, and had fought against
it for weeks, without avail.  And frequently now, when alone and
undisturbed, he could see the old guru, shaking with the venom of his
wrath, the blood dripping from his lacerated fingers, which he shook in
the colonel's face flecking it with blood.  A curse.  It was so.  He
must obey that invincible will; he must go on and on.

His pipe slipped from his fingers and his head fell upon his knees; and
thus Kathlyn found him.

"Let him sleep, Mem-sahib," warned Ahmed from across the fire.  "He has
been fighting the old guru."

"What?" Kathlyn whispered back.  "Where?"

Ahmed smiled grimly and pointed toward his forehead.

"Is there really such evil, Ahmed?"

"Evil begets evil, heaven born, just as good begets good.  The Colonel
Sahib did wrong.  And who shall deny some of these gurus a supernatural
power?  I have seen; I know."

"But once you said that we should eventually escape, all of us."

"And I still say it, Mem-sahib.  What is written is written,"
phlegmatically.

Wearily she turned toward her tent, but paused to touch the head of her
sleeping father as she passed.  Her occidental mind would not and could
not accept as possibilities these mysterious attributes of the oriental
mind.  That a will could reach out and prearrange a man's misfortunes
was to her mind incredible, for there were no precedents.  She never
had witnessed a genuine case of hypnotism; those examples she had seen
were miserable buffooneries, travesties, hoodwinking not even the
newsboys in the upper gallery.  True, she had sometimes read of such
things, but from the same angle with which she had read the Arabian
Nights--fairy stories.

Yet, here was her father, thoroughly convinced of the efficacy of the
guru's curse; and here was Ahmed, complacently watching the effects,
and not doubting in the least that his guru would in the end prove the
stronger of the two.

One of the elephants clanked his chains restlessly.  He may have heard
the prowling of a cat.  Far beyond the fire, beyond the sentinel, she
thought she saw a naked form flash out and back of a tree.  She stared
intently at the tree for a time; but as she saw nothing more, she was
convinced that her eyes had deceived her.  Besides her body seemed dead
and her mind too heavy for thought.

Umballa, having satisfied himself that the camp would not break till
morning, slunk away into the shadows.  He had failed again; but his
hate had made him strong.  He was naked except for a loin clout.  His
beard and hair were matted, the latter hanging over his eyes.  His body
was smeared with ashes.  Not even Ahmed would have recognized him a
yard off.  He had something less than nine hours to reach the cape
before they did; and it was necessary that he should have accomplices.
The fishermen he knew to be of predatory habits, and the promise of
gold would enmesh them.

The half island which constituted the cape had the shape of a miniature
volcano.  There was verdure at the base of its slope and trees lifted
their heads here and there hardily.  It was a mile long and half a mile
wide; and in the early morning it stood out like a huge sapphire
against the rosy sea.  Between the land and the promontory there lay a
stretch of glistening sand; there was half a mile of it.  Over this a
flock of gulls were busy, as scavengers always are.  At high tide,
yonder was an island in truth.

Sometimes a British gunboat would drop down here suddenly; but it
always wasted its time.  The fishermen knew nothing; nothing in the way
of guns and powder ever was found; and yet the British Raj knew that
somewhere about lay the things for which it so diligently and
vigorously sought.

On the beach fishermen were disembarking.  A sloop with a lateen sail
lay at anchor in the rude harbor.  Some of the fishermen were repairing
nets, and some were tinkering about their fishing boats.  Beyond the
beach nestled a few huts.  Toward these other fishermen were making
progress.

The chief of the village--the head man--disembarked from this sloop.
He was met by his wife and child, and the little one clambered about
his legs in ecstasy.  Among the huts stood one more imposing than the
others, and toward this the chief and his family wended their way.  In
front of the hut stood an empty bullock cart.  Attached to one of the
wheels was a frisking kid.  The little child paused to play with her
pet.

Absorbed in her pastime, she did not observe the approach of a gaunt
being with matted hair and beard and ash-besmirched body.  Children are
gifted with an instinct which leaves us as we grow older; the sensing
of evil without seeing or understanding it.  The child suddenly gazed
up, to meet a pair of eyes black and fierce as a kite's.  She rose
screaming and fled toward the house.

The holy man shrugged and waited.

When the parents rushed out to learn what had frightened their little
one they were solemnly confronted by Umballa.

"I am hungry."

The chief salaamed and ordered his wife to bring the holy man rice and
milk.

"Thou art an honest man?" said Umballa.

"It is said," replied the chief gravely.

"Thou art poor?"

"That is with the gods I serve."

"But thou art not without ambition?"

"Who is?"  The chief's wonder grew.  What meant these peculiar
sentences?

"Wouldst put thy hand into gold as far as the wrist and take what thou
couldst hold?"

"Yee, holy one; for I am human.  Whither leads these questions?  What
is it you would of me?"

"There are some who need to be far away to see things.  Well, good man,
there is a treasure under your feet," falling into the vernacular.

The chief could not resist looking down at the ground, startled.

"Nay," smiled Umballa, "not there.  Think; did not something unusual
happen here five years ago?"

The chief smoothed the tip of his nose.  "My father died and I became
head man of the village."

"Would you call that unusual?" ironically.

"No.  Ha!" suddenly.  "Five years ago; yes, yes, I remember now.
Soldiers, who made us lock ourselves in our huts, not to stir forth on
the pain of death till ordered.  My father alone was permitted outside.
He was compelled to row out to the island.  There he was blindfolded.
Only two men accompanied him.  They carried something that was very
heavy.  My father never knew what the strange shining basket held.
Then the soldiers went away and we came out.  No one was allowed on the
island till my father died."

"Did he tell you what it was he helped bury yonder?"

"No, holy one.  He was an honorable man.  Whatever the secret was, it
passed with him.  We were not curious."

"It was the private treasure of the king of Allaha, and the man was the
king himself."

The fisherman salaamed.

"And I am sent, because I am holy, to recover this treasure, which was
willed to the temple of Juggernaut."

"And, holy one, I know not where it is hidden!"

"I do.  What I want is the use of your sloop and men I can trust.  To
you, as much gold as your hands can hold."

"I will furnish you with men as honest as myself."

"That will be sufficient; and you shall have your gold."

The word of a holy man is never subjected to scrutiny in India.

Umballa was in good humor.  Here he was, several hours ahead of his
enemies.  He would have the filigree basket dug up and transferred to
the sloop before the Colonel Sahib could reach the village.  And
Umballa would have succeeded but for the fact that the wind fell
unaccountably and they lost more than an hour in handling the sloop
with oars.

When the sloop left the primitive landing the chief returned to his hut
and told his wife what had taken place, like the good husband he was.
They would be rich.

Suddenly the child set up a wailing.  Through the window she had seen a
bold leopard trot over to the bullock cart and carry away the kid.  The
chief at once summoned his remaining men, and they proceeded to set a
trap for the prowler.  The cat had already killed one bullock and
injured another.  They knew that the beast would not return for some
hours, having gorged itself upon the kid.  But it was well to be
prepared.

Toward noon the other treasure seekers drew up within a quarter of a
mile behind the village.  The men-folk thought it advisable to
reconnoiter before entering the village.  One never could tell.  Winnie
declared her intention of snoozing while they waited, and curled up in
her rugs.  Kathlyn, however, could not resist the longing to look upon
the sea again.  She could see the lovely blue water through the spaces
between the trees.  Soon she would be flying over that water, flying
for home, home!

She went farther from the camp than she really intended, and came
unexpectedly upon the leopard which stood guarding its cubs while they
growled and tore at the dead kid.  Kathlyn realized that she was
unarmed, and that the leopard was between her and the camp.  She could
see the roofs of the village below her; so toward the huts she ran.
The leopard stood still for a while, eying her doubtfully, then made up
its mind to give chase.  She had tasted blood, but had not eaten.

Meantime the little child had forgot her loss in her interest in the
bullock cart with its grotesque lure; and she climbed into the cart
just as Kathlyn appeared, followed by the excited leopard.  She saw the
child and snatched her instinctively from the cart.  The leopard leaped
into the cart at the rear, while Kathlyn ran toward the chief's hut,
into which she staggered without the formality of announcing her advent.

The father of the child had no need to question, though he marveled at
the white skin and dress of this visitor, who had doubtless saved his
child from death.  He flung the door shut and dropped the bar.  Next he
sought his gun and fired through a crack in the door.  He missed; but
the noise and smoke frightened the leopard away.

And later, Bruce, wild with the anxiety over the disappearance of
Kathlyn, came across the chief battling for his life.  He had gone
forth to hunt the leopard, and the leopard had hunted him.  Bruce dared
not fire, for fear of killing the man; so without hesitance or fear he
caught the leopard by the back of the neck and by a hind leg and swung
her into the sea.

The chief was severely mauled, but he was able to get to his feet and
walk.  The white woman had saved his child and the white man had saved
him.  He would remember.

Thus the leopard quite innocently served a purpose, for all her deadly
intentions; the chief was filled with gratitude.

When the colonel and the others came into view the former seized
Kathlyn by the shoulders and shook her hysterically.

"In God's name, Kit, don't you know any better than to wander off
alone?  Do you want to drive me mad?"

"Why, father, I wasn't afraid!"

"Afraid?  Who said anything about your being afraid?  Didn't you know
that we were being followed?  It is Umballa!  Ah! that gives you a
start!"

"Colonel!" said Bruce gently.

"I know, Bruce, I sound harsh.  But you were tearing your hair, too."

"Forgive me," cried Kathlyn, penitent, for she knew she had done wrong.
"I did not think.  But Umballa?"

"Yes, Umballa.  One of the keepers found a knife by that bridge, and
Ramabai identified it as belonging to Umballa.  Whether he is alone or
with many, I do not know; but this I do know: we must under no
circumstances become separated again.  Now, I'm going to quiz the
chief."

But the chief said that no person described had passed or been seen.
No one but a holy man had come that morning, and he had gone to the
island in the sloop.

"For what?"

The chief smiled, but shook his head.

"Was it not a basket of gold and precious stones?" demanded the colonel.

The chief's eyes widened.  There were others who knew, then?  Bruce
noticed his surprise.

"Colonel, show the good chief the royal seal on your document."

The colonel did so, and the chief salaamed when he saw the royal
signature.  He was mightily bewildered, and gradually he was made to
understand that he had been vilely tricked.

"To the boats!" he shouted, as if suddenly awakening.  "We may be too
late, Lords!  He said he was a holy man, and I believed."

They all ran hastily down to the beach to seize what boats they could.
Here they met a heartrending obstacle in the refusal of the owners.
The chief, however, signified that it was his will; and, moreover, he
commanded that the fishermen should handle the oars.  They would be
paid.  That was different.  Why did not the white people say so at
once?  They would go anywhere for money.  Not the most auspicious sign,
thought Ramabai.  They got into the boats and pushed off.

On the way to the island the colonel consulted the map, or diagram, he
held in his hand.  It was not possible that Umballa knew the exact spot.

A filigree basket of silver, filled with gold and gems!  The man became
as eager and excited as a boy.  The instinct to hunt for treasure
begins just outside the cradle and ends just inside the grave.

To return to Umballa.  Upon landing, he asked at once if any knew where
the cave was.  One man did know the way, but he refused to show it.
There were spirits there, ruled by an evil god.

"Take me there, you, and I will enter without harm.  Am I not holy?"

That put rather a new face upon the situation.  If the holy man was
willing to risk an encounter with the god, far be it that they should
prevent him.  An ordinary seeker would not have found the entrance in a
lifetime.  Umballa had not known exactly where the cave was, but he
knew all that the cave contained.  When they came to it Umballa
sniffed; the tang of sulphur became evident both in his nose and on his
tongue.  He understood.  It was simply a small spring, a mineral, in
which sulphur predominated.  He came out with some cupped in his hands.
He drank and showed them that it was harmless.  Besides, he was a holy
man, and his presence made ineffectual all evil spirits which might
roam within the cave.

Umballa, impatient as he was, had to depend upon patience.  By dint of
inquiries he learned that wild Mohammedans had cast the spell upon the
cave, set a curse upon its threshold.  Umballa tottered and destroyed
this by reasoning that the curse of a Mohammedan could not affect a
Hindu.  Finally, he offered each and all of them a fortune--and won.

Torches were lighted and the cave entered.  There were many side
passages; and within these the astute Umballa saw the true reason for
the curse of the Mohammedans: guns and powder, hundreds and hundreds of
pounds of black destruction!  A lower gallery--the mouth of which lay
under a slab of rock--led to the pit wherein rested the filigree
basket. . . .  For a time Umballa acted like a madman.  He sang,
chanted, dug his hands into the gold and stones; choked, sobbed.  Here
was true kingship; the private treasures of a dozen decades, all his
for the taking.  He forgot his enemies and their nearness as the
fortune revealed itself to him.

As his men at length staggered out of the lower gallery with the basket
slung upon an improvised litter he espied his enemies marching up the
hill!  Back into the cave again.  Umballa cursed and bit his nails.  He
was unarmed, as were his men, and he had not time to search among the
smuggled arms to find his need.

"Heaven born," spoke up the man who had known where the cave was,
"there is an exit on the other side.  We can go through that without
yonder people noticing us."

"A fortune for each of you when you put this on the sloop!"

Back through the cave they rushed, torches flaring.  Once a bearer
stumbled over a powder can, and the torch holder all but sprawled over
him.  Umballa's hair stood on end.  Fear impelled the men toward the
exit.

"There is powder enough here to blow up all of Hind!  Hasten!"

At the mouth of the exit the men with the torches, finding no further
need of them, carelessly flung them aside.

"Fools!" roared Umballa; "you have destroyed us!"

He fled.  The bearers followed with the burden.  Down the side of the
promontory they slid.  Under a projecting ledge they paused, sweating
with terror.  Suddenly the whole island rocked.  An explosion followed
that was heard half a hundred miles away, where the gunboat of the
British Raj patrolled the shores.  Rocks, trees, sand filled the air,
and small fires broke out here and there.  The bulk of the damage,
however, was done to the far side of the promontory, not where the
frightened Umballa stood.  A twisted rifle barrel fell at his feet.

"To the sloop!" he yelled.  "It is all over!"

On the far side the other treasure seekers stood huddled together,
scarce knowing which way to turn.  The miracle of it was that none of
them was hurt.  Perhaps a quarter of an hour passed before their
faculties awoke.

"Look!" cried Kathlyn, pointing seaward.

What she saw was Umballa, setting adrift the boats which had brought
them from the mainland.

Came a second explosion, far more furious than the first.  In the
downward rush Kathlyn stumbled and fell, the debris falling all about
her.




CHAPTER XXV

ON THE SLOOP

Blinded by the dust, tripped by the rolling stones, Bruce turned to
where he had seen Kathlyn fall.  The explosion--the last one--had
opened up veins of strange gases, for the whole promontory appeared to
be on fire.  He bent and caught up in his arms the precious burden,
staggered down to the beach, and plunged into the water.  A small
trickle of blood flowing down her forehead explained everything; a
falling stone had struck her.

"Kit, Kit!  I hope to God the treasure went up also."  He dashed the
cold water into her face.

The others were unhurt, though dazed, and for the nonce incapable of
coherent thought or action.

"The boats!"  Bruce laid Kathlyn down on the sand and signed to Winnie.
"Tend to her.  I must take a chance at the boats.  We could cross the
neck of sand at ebb, but Umballa will be far away before that time.
Kit, Kit; my poor girl!"  He patted her wrists and called to her, and
when finally her lips stirred he rose and waded out into the sea,
followed by four hardy fishermen.  The freshening breeze, being from
the southwest, aided the swimmers, for the boats did not drift out to
sea, but in a northeasterly direction.  The sloop was squaring away for
the mainland.

Did Umballa have the treasure?  Bruce wondered, as at length his hand
reached up and took hold of the gunwale of the boat he had picked out
to bring down.  Would Umballa have possessed tenacity enough to hang on
to it in face of all the devastation?  Bruce sighed as he drew himself
up and crawled into the boat.  He knew that treasure had often made a
hero out of a coward; and treasure at that moment meant life and
liberty to Umballa.  On his return to the island he greeted the colonel
somewhat roughly.  But for this accursed basket they would have been
well out of Asia by this time.

"Umballa has your basket, Colonel.  If he hasn't, then say good-by to
it, for it can never be dug from under those tons and tons of
rock. . . .  Here! where are those fishermen going?" he demanded.

The men were in the act of pushing off with the boats, which they had
only just brought back.

Ramabai picked up his discarded rifle.

"Stop!"

"They are frightened," explained the chief.

"Well, they can contain their fright till we are in safety," Ramabai
declared.  "Warn them."

"Hurry, everybody!  I feel it in my bones that that black devil has the
treasure.  Get those men into the boats.  Here, pick up those oars.
Get in, Kit; you, Winnie; come, everybody!"

Kathlyn gazed sadly at her father.  Treasure, treasure; that first.
She was beginning to hate the very sound of the word.  The colonel had
been nervous, impatient and irritable ever since the document had been
discovered.  Till recently Kathlyn had always believed her father to be
perfect, but now she saw that he was human, he had his flawed spot.
Treasure!  Before her or Winnie!  So be it.

"Colonel," said Bruce, taking a chance throw, "we are less than a
hundred miles from the seaport.  Suppose we let Umballa clear out and
we ourselves head straight up the coast?  It is not fair to the women
to put them to any further hardship."

"Bruce, I have sworn to God that Umballa shall not have that treasure.
Ramabai, do you understand what it will mean to you if he succeeds in
reaching Allaha with that treasure, probably millions?  He will be able
to buy every priest and soldier in Allaha and still have enough left
for any extravagance that he may wish to plunge in."

"Sahib," suggested Ramabai, "let us send the women to the seaport in
care of Ahmed, while we men seek Umballa."

"Good!"  Bruce struck his hands together.  "The very thing."

"I refuse to be separated from father," declared Kathlyn.  "If he is
determined to pursue Umballa back to Allaha, I must accompany him."

"And I!" added Winnie.

"Nothing more to be said," and Bruce signed to the boatmen to start.
"If only this breeze had not come up!  We could have caught him before
he made shore."

Umballa paced the deck of the sloop, thinking and planning.  He saw his
enemies leaving in the rescued boats.  Had he delayed them long enough?
As matters stood, he could not carry away the treasure.  He must have
help, an armed force of men he could trust.  On the mainland were Ahmed
and the loyal keepers; behind were three men who wanted his life as he
wanted theirs.  The only hope he had lay in the cupidity of the men on
the sloop.  If they could be made to stand by him, there was a fair
chance.  Once he was of a mind to heave the basket over the rail and
trust to luck in finding it again.  But the thought tore at his heart.
He simply could not do it.

Perhaps he could start a revolt, or win over the chief of the village.
He had known honest men to fall at the sight of much gold, to fight for
it, to commit any crime for it--and, if need be, to die for it.  But
the chief was with his enemies.  Finally he came to the conclusion that
the only thing to be done was to carry the treasure directly to the
chief's hut and there await him.  He would bribe the men with him
sufficiently to close their mouths.  If Ahmed was on the shore, the
game was up.  But he swept the mainland with his gaze and discovered no
sign of him.

As a matter of fact, Ahmed had arranged his elephants so that they
could start at once up the coast to the seaport.  He was waiting on the
native highway for the return of his master, quite confident that he
would bring the bothersome trinkets with him.  He knew nothing of
Umballa's exploit.  The appalling thunder of the explosions worried
him.  He would wait for just so long; then he would go and see.

Every village chief has his successor in hope.  This individual was one
of those who had helped Umballa to carry the treasure from the cave; in
fact, the man who had guided him to the cave itself.  He spoke to
Umballa.  He said that he understood the holy one's plight; for to
these yet simple minded village folk Umballa was still the holy one.
Their religion was the same.

"Holy one," he said, "we can best your enemies who follow."

"How?" eagerly.

"Yonder is the chief's bullock cart.  I myself will find the bullocks!"

"What then?"

"We shall be on the way south before the others land."

"An extra handful of gold for you!  Get the oars out!  Let us hurry!"

"More, holy one; these men will obey me."

"They shall be well paid."

Umballa had reached the point where he could not plan without
treachery.  He proposed to carry the basket into the jungle somewhere,
bury it and make way with every man who knew the secret; then, at the
proper time, he would return for it with a brave caravan, his own men
or those whose loyalty he could repurchase.

The landing was made, the basket conveyed to the bullock cart, which
was emptied of its bait and leopard trap; the bullocks were brought out
and harnessed--all this activity before the fishing boats had covered
half the distance.

"I see light," murmured Umballa.

He tried to act coolly, but when he spoke his voice cracked and the
blood in his throat nigh suffocated him.

"Sand, holy one!"

"Well, what of sand?"

"You can dig and cover up things in sand and no one can possibly tell.
The sand tells nothing."

They drove the bullocks forward mercilessly till they came to what
Umballa considered a suitable spot.  A pit was dug, but not before
Umballa had taken from the basket enough gold to set the men wild.
They were his.  He smiled inwardly to think how easily they could have
had all of it!  They were still honest.

The sand was smoothed down over the basket.  It would not have been
possible for the human eye to discover the spot within a perfect range.
Umballa drove down a broken stick directly over where the basket lay.
He had beaten them; they would find nothing.  Now to rid himself of
these simple fools who trusted him.

The man who longed to become the chief's successor was then played upon
by Umballa; to set the two factions at each other's throats; a perfect
elimination.  Umballa advised him to rouse his friends, declare that
the white people had taken the gold away from the holy man, to whom it
belonged as agent.

Thus, in this peaceful fishermen's village began the old game of gold
and politics, for the two are inseparable.  Umballa, in hiding, watched
the contest gleefully.  He witnessed the rival approach his chief, saw
the angry gestures exchanged, and knew that dissension had begun.  The
men of the village clustered about.

"Where have you hidden it?" demanded the chief.  "It belongs to the
Sahib."

"Hidden what?"

"The treasure you and the false holy one took from the forbidden cave!"

"False holy one?"

"Ay, wretch!  He is Durga Ram, the man who murdered the king of Allaha."

The mutineer laughed and waved his hand toward the smoking ruins of the
promontory.

"Look for it there," he said, "under mountains of rock and dirt and
sand.  Look for it there!  And who is this white man who says the holy
one is false?"

"I say it, you scoundrel!" cried the colonel, advancing; but Bruce
restrained him, seeing that the situation had taken an unpleasant and
sinister trend.

"Patience, Colonel; just a little diplomacy," he urged.

"But the man lies!"

"That may be, but just at present there seem to be more men standing
back of him than back of our chief here.  We have no way of getting a
warning to Ahmed.  Wait!"

"Jackal," spoke the chief wrathfully, "thou liest!"

"Ah! thou hast grown too fat with rule."

"Ay!" cried the men back of the mutinous one.

"Sahib," said the chief, without losing any of his natural dignity,
"the man has betrayed me.  I see the lust of gold in their eyes.  Evil
presage.  But you have saved the life of my child and mine, and I will
throw my strength with you."

"Father, can't you see?" asked Kathlyn.

"See what?"

"The inevitable.  It was in my heart all the way here that we should
meet with disaster.  There is yet time to leave here peacefully."

But her pleading fell upon the ears of a man who was treasure mad.  He
would not listen to reason.  Ahmed could have told Kathlyn that the old
guru stood back of her father, pushing, pushing.

"He is mad," whispered Bruce, "but we can not leave him."

"What would I do without you, John!"

From down the beach the chief's little girl came toddling to the group
of excited men.  She was clutching something in her hand.  Her father
took her by the arm and pulled her back of him.  Kathlyn put her hand
upon the child's head, protectingly.  The child gazed up shyly, opened
her little hand . . . and disclosed a yellow sovereign!

The argument between the chief and his mutinous followers went on.

"John," said Kathlyn, "you speak the dialect.  I can understand only a
word here and there.  But listen.  Tell the chief that all we desire is
to be permitted to depart in peace later," she added significantly.

"What's up?"

"The child has a coin--a British sovereign--in her hand.  She knows
where Umballa has secreted the treasure.  Since father can not be
budged from his purpose, let us try deceit.  You speak to the chief
while I explain to father."

To the chief Bruce said: "The treasure is evidently lost.  So, after a
short rest, we shall return to our caravan and depart.  We do not wish
to be the cause of trouble between you and your people."

"But, Sahib, they have the gold!"

"The false holy one doubtless gave them that before the explosion."
Bruce laid hold of his arm in a friendly fashion apparently, but in
reality as a warning.  "All we want is a slight rest in your house.
After that we shall proceed upon our journey."

The mutineers could offer no reasonable objections to this and
signified that it was all one to them so long as the white people
departed.  They had caused enough damage by their appearance and it
might be that it was through their agency that the promontory was all
but destroyed.  The fish would be driven away for weeks.  And what
would the fierce gun-runners say when they found out that their stores
had gone up in flame and smoke?  Ai, ai!  What would they do but beat
them and torture them for permitting any one to enter the cave?

"When these men come," answered the chief, with a dry smile, "I will
deal with them.  None of us has entered the cave.  They know me for a
man of truth.  Perhaps you are right," he added to the mutineer.
"There could not have been a treasure there and escape the sharp eyes
of those Arabs.  Go back to your homes.  These white people shall be my
guests till they have rested and are ready to depart."

Reluctantly the men dispersed, and from his hiding-place Umballa saw
another of his schemes fall into pieces.  There would be no fight, at
least for the present.  The men, indeed, had hoped to come to actual
warfare, but they could not force war on their chief without some good
cause.  After all, the sooner the white people were out of the way the
better for all concerned.

Did the leader of this open mutiny have ulterior designs upon the
treasure, upon the life of Umballa?  Perhaps.  At any rate, events so
shaped themselves as to nullify whatever plans he had formed in his
gold-dazzled brain.

The colonel was tractable and fell in with Kathlyn's idea.  It would
have been nothing short of foolhardiness openly to have antagonized the
rebellious men.

"You have a plan, Kit, but what is it?"

"I dare not tell you here.  You are too excited.  But I believe I can
lead you to where Umballa has buried the basket.  I feel that Umballa
is watching every move we make.  And I dare say he hoped--and even
instigated--this mutiny to end in disaster for us.  He is alone.  So
much we can rely upon.  But if we try to meet him openly we shall lose.
Patience for a little while.  There, they are leaving us.  They are
grumbling, but I do not believe that means anything serious."

"Now, then, white people," said the chief, "come to my house.  You are
welcome there, now and always.  You have this day saved my life and
that of my child.  I am grateful."

Inside the hut Kathlyn drew the child toward her and gently pressed
open the tightly clutched fingers.  She plucked the sovereign from the
little pink palm and held it up.  The child's father seized it,
wonderingly.

"Gold!  They lied to me!  I knew it."

"Yes," said Bruce.  "They did find the treasure.  They brought it here
and buried it quickly.  And we believe your little girl knows where.
Question her."

It was not an easy matter.  The child was naturally shy, and the
presence of all these white skinned people struck her usually babbling
tongue with a species of paralysis.  But her father was patient, and
word by word the secret was dragged out of her.  She told of the stolen
bullock cart, of the digging in the sand, of the holy one.

In some manner they must lure Umballa from his retreat.  It was finally
agreed upon that they all return to the camp and steal back at once in
a roundabout way.  They would come sufficiently armed.  Later, the
chief could pretend to be walking with his child.

So while Umballa stole forth from his hiding-place, reasonably certain
that his enemies had gone, got together his mutineers and made
arrangements with them to help him carry away the treasure that night,
the rightful owners were directed to the broken stick in the damp sand.

That night, when Umballa and his men arrived, a hole in the sand
greeted them.  It was shaped like a mouth, opened in laughter.




CHAPTER XXVI

THE THIRD BAR

It was Ahmed's suggestion that they in turn should bury the filigree
basket.  He reasoned that if they attempted to proceed with it they
would be followed and sooner or later set upon by Umballa and the men
he had won away from the village chief.  The poor fishermen were gold
mad and at present not accountable for what they did or planned to do.
He advanced that Umballa would have no difficulty in rousing them to
the pitch of murder.  Umballa would have at his beck and call no less
than twenty men, armed and ruthless.  Some seventy miles beyond was
British territory and wherever there was British territory there were
British soldiers.  With them they would return, leaving the women in
safety behind.

"The commissioner there will object," said the colonel.

"No, Sahib," replied Ahmed.  "The Mem-sahib has every right in the
world to this treasure.  You possess the documents to prove it, and
nothing more would be necessary to the commissioner."

"But, Ahmed," interposed Bruce, "we are none of us British subjects."

"What difference will that make, Sahib?"

"Quite enough.  England is not in the habit of protecting anybody but
her own subjects.  We should probably be held up till everything was
verified at Allaha; and the priests there would not hesitate to charge
us with forgery and heaven knows what else.  Let us bury the basket, by
all means, return for it and carry it away piecemeal.  To carry it away
as it is, in bulk, would be courting suicide."

Ahmed scratched his chin.  Trust a white man for logic.

"And, besides," went on Bruce, "the news would go all over the Orient
and the thugs would come like flies scenting honey.  No; this must be
kept secret if we care to get away with it.  It can not be worth less
than a million.  And I've known white men who would cut our throats for
a handful of rupees."

For the first time since the expedition started out the colonel became
normal, a man of action, cool in the head, and foresighted.

"Ahmed, spread out the men around the camp," he ordered briskly.
"Instruct them to shoot over the head of any one who approaches; this
the first time.  The second time, to kill.  Bruce has the right idea;
so let us get busy.  Over there, where that boulder is.  The ground
will be damp and soft under it, and when we roll it back there will be
no sign of its having been disturbed.  I used to cache ammunition that
way.  Give me that spade."

It was good to Kathlyn's ears to hear her father talk like this.

At a depth of three feet the basket was lowered, covered and the
boulder rolled into place.  After that the colonel stooped and combed
the turf where the boulder had temporarily rested.  He showed his
woodcraft there.  It would take a keener eye than Umballa possessed to
note any disturbance.  The safety of the treasure ultimately, however,
depended upon the loyalty of the keepers under Ahmed.  They had been
with the colonel for years; yet . . .  The colonel shrugged.  He had to
trust them; that was all there was to the matter.

A sentinel came rushing up--one of the keepers.

"Something is stampeding the elephants!" he cried.

Ahmed and the men with him rushed off.  In Ahmed's opinion, considering
what lay before them, elephants were more important than colored stones
and yellow metal.  Without the elephants they would indeed find
themselves in sore straits.

"Let us move away from here," advised Bruce, picking up the implements
and shouldering them.  He walked several yards away, tossed shovel and
pick into the bushes, tore at the turf and stamped on it, giving it
every appearance of having been disturbed.  The colonel nodded
approvingly.  It was a good point and he had overlooked it.

They returned hastily to camp, which was about two hundred yards beyond
the boulder.  Kathlyn entered her tent to change her clothes, ragged,
soiled and burned.  The odor of wet burned cloth is never agreeable.
And she needed dry shoes, even if there was but an hour or two before
bedtime.

Only one elephant had succeeded in bolting.  In some manner he had
loosed his peg; but what had started him on the run they never learned.
The other elephants were swaying uneasily; but their pegs were deep and
their chains stout.  Ahmed and the keepers went after the truant on
foot.

The noise of the chase died away.  Bruce was lighting his pipe.  The
colonel was examining by the firelight a few emeralds which he had
taken from the basket.  Ramabai was pleasantly gazing at his wife.
Kathlyn and Winnie were emerging from the tent, when a yell greeted
their astonished ears.  The camp was surrounded.  From one side came
Umballa, from the other came the mutineers.  Kathlyn and Winnie flew to
their father's side.  In between came Umballa, with Bruce and Ramabai
and Pundita effectually separated.  Umballa and his men closed in upon
the colonel and his daughters.  Treasure and revenge!

Bruce made a furious effort to join Kathlyn, but the numbers against
him were too many.  It was all done so suddenly and effectually, and
all due to their own carelessness.

"Kit," said her father, "our only chance is to refuse to discover to
Umballa where we have hidden the basket.  Winnie, if you open your lips
it will be death--yours, Kit's, mine.  To have been careless like this!
Oh, Kit, on my honor, if Umballa would undertake to convoy us to the
seaport I'd gladly give him all the treasure and all the money I have
of my own.  But we know him too well.  He will torture us all."

"I have gone through much; I can go through more," calmly replied
Kathlyn.  "But I shall never wear a precious stone again, if I live.  I
abhor them!"

"I am my father's daughter," said Winnie.

"Put the howdahs on the two elephants," Umballa ordered.

The men obeyed clumsily, being fishermen by occupation and mahouts by
compulsion.

Kathlyn tried in vain to see where they were taking Bruce and the
others.  Some day, if she lived, she was going to devote a whole day to
weeping, for she never had time to in this land.  The thought caused
her to smile, despite her despair.

When the elephants were properly saddled with the howdahs Umballa gave
his attention to the prisoners.  He hailed them jovially.  They were
old friends.  What could he do for them?

"Conduct us to the seaport," said the colonel, "and on my word of honor
I will tell you where we have hidden the treasure."

"Ho!" jeered Umballa, arms akimbo, "I'd be a fool to put my head into
such a trap.  I love you too well.  Yet I am not wholly without heart.
Tell me where it lies and I will let you go."

"Cut our throats at once, you beast, for none of us will tell you under
any conditions save those I have named.  Men," the colonel continued,
"this man is an ingrate, a thief and a murderer.  He has promised you
much gold for your part in this.  But in the end he will cheat you and
destroy you."

Umballa laughed.  "They have already had their earnest.  Soon they will
have more.  But talk with them--plead, urge, promise.  No more
questions?  Well, then, listen.  Reveal to me the treasure and you may
go free.  If you refuse I shall take you back to Allaha--not publicly,
but secretly--there to inflict what punishments I see fit."

"I have nothing more to say," replied the colonel.

"No?  And thou, white goddess?"

Kathlyn stared over his head, her face expressionless.  It stirred him
more than outspoken contempt would have done.

"And you, pretty one?" Umballa eyed Winnie speculatively.

Winnie drew closer to her sister, that was all.

"So be it.  Allaha it shall be, without a meddling Ramabai; back to the
gurus who love you so!"  He dropped his banter.  "You call me a
murderer.  I admit it.  I have killed the man who was always throwing
his benefits into my face, who brought me up not as a companion but as
a plaything.  He is dead.  I slew him.  After the first, what are two
or three more crimes of this order?"  He snapped his fingers.  "I want
that treasure, and you will tell me where it is before I am done with
you.  You will tell me on your knees, gladly, gladly!  Now, men!  There
is a long journey before us."

The colonel, Kathlyn and Winnie were forced into one howdah, while
Umballa mounted the other.  As for the quasi-mahouts, they were not
particularly happy behind the ears of the elephants, who, with that
keen appreciation of their herd, understood instinctively that they had
to do with novices.  But for the promise of gold that dangled before
their eyes, threats of violent death could not have forced them upon
the elephants.

They started east, and the jungle closed in behind them.

As for Umballa, he cared not what became of the other prisoners.

They were being held captive in one of the village huts.  The chief had
pleaded in vain.  He was dishonored, for they had made him break his
word to the white people.  So be it.  Sooner or later the glitter of
gold would leave their eyes and they would come to him and beg for
pardon.

Moonlight.  The village slept.  Two fishermen sat before the hut
confining the prisoners, on guard.  An elephant squealed in the
distance.  Out of the shadow a sleek leopard, then another.  The guards
jumped to their feet and scrambled away for dear life to the nearest
hut, crying the alarm.  Bruce opened the door, which had no lock, and
peered forth.  It was natural that the leopards should give their
immediate attention to the two men in flight.  Bruce, realizing what
had happened, called softly to Ramabai and Pundita; and the three of
them stole out into the night, toward the camp.  Bruce did not expect
to find any one there.  What he wanted was to arm himself and to
examine the boulder.

Meantime, Ahmed returned with the truant elephant to find nothing but
disorder and evidence of a struggle.  A tent was overturned, the long
grass trampled, and the colonel's sola-topee hat lay crumpled near
Kathlyn's tent.

"Ai, ai!" he wailed.  But, being a philosopher, his wailing was of
short duration.  He ran to the boulder and examined it carefully.  It
had not been touched.  That was well.  At least that meant that his
Sahib and Mem-sahib lived.  Treasure!  He spat out a curse . . . and
threw his rifle to his shoulder.  But his rage turned to joy as he
discovered who the arrivals were.

"Bruce Sahib!"

"Yes, Ahmed.  Umballa got the best of us.  We were tricked by the
truant elephant.  He has taken Kathlyn back toward Allaha."

"And so shall we return!"

Ahmed called his weary men.  His idea was to fill the elephant
saddle-bags with gold and stones, leave it in trust with Bala Khan, who
should in truth this time take his tulwar down from the wall.  He
divided his men, one company to guard and the other to labor.  It took
half an hour to push back the boulder and dig up the basket.  After
this was done Bruce and Ramabai and Ahmed the indefatigable carried the
gold and precious stones to the especially made saddle-bags.  All told,
it took fully an hour to complete the work.

With water and food, and well armed, they began the journey back to
Allaha, a formidable cortege and in no tender mood.  They proceeded in
forced marches, snatching what sleep they could during the preparation
of the meals.

Many a time the impulse came to Bruce to pluck the shining metal and
sparkling stones from the saddle-bags and toss them out into the
jungle, to be lost till the crack of doom.  There were also moments
when he felt nothing but hatred toward the father of the girl he loved.
For these trinkets Kathlyn had gone through tortures as frightful
almost as those in the days of the Inquisition.  Upon one thing he and
Ahmed had agreed, despite Ramabai's wild protest; they would leave the
treasure with Bala Khan and follow his army to the walls of Allaha.  If
harm befell any of their loved ones not one stone should remain upon
another.  And Bruce declared that he would seek Umballa to the ends of
the earth for the infinite pleasure of taking his black throat in his
two hands and squeezing the life out of it.

Eventually and without mishap they came to the walled city of the
desert, Bala Khan's stronghold.  Bala Khan of necessity was always
ready, always prepared.  Before night of the day of their arrival an
army was gathered within the city.

Ramabai sat in his howdah, sad and dispirited.

"Bala Khan, we have been friends, and my father was your good friend."

"It is true."

"Will you do a favor for the son?"

"Yes.  If the Colonel Sahib and his daughter live, ask what you will."

Ramabai bowed.

"I will set my camp five miles beyond your walls and wait.  When I see
the Mem-sahib I will salaam, turn right about face, and go home.  Now,
to you, Bruce Sahib: Leave not your treasure within my walls when I
shall be absent, for I can not guarantee protection.  Leave it where it
is and bring it with you.  Save myself, no one of my men knows what
your saddle-bags contain.  Let us proceed upon our junket--or our war!"



Umballa reached the ancient gate of Allaha at the same time Bruce
stopped before the walls of Bala Khan's city.  He determined to wring
the secret from either the colonel or his daughter, return for the
treasure and depart for Egypt down the Persian Gulf.

He made a wide detour and came out at the rear of his house.  No one
was in sight.  He dismounted and entered, found three or four of his
whilom slaves, who, when he revealed his identity, felt the old terror
and fear of the man.  His prisoners were brought in.  A slave took the
elephants to the stables.  He wanted to run away and declare Umballa's
presence, but fear was too strong.

Ironically Umballa bade the fishermen to enter to eat and drink what
they liked.  Later he found them in a drunken stupor in the kitchen.
That was where they belonged.

He ordered his prisoners to be brought into the Court of Death and left
there.

"You see?" said Umballa.  "Now, where have you hidden the treasure?"

Kathlyn walked over to one of the cages and peered into it.  A sleek
tiger trotted up to the bar; and purred and invited her to scratch his
head.

"I am not answered," said Umballa.

A click resounded from the four sides, and a bar disappeared from each
of the cages.

"That will be all for the present," said Umballa.  "Food and water you
will not require.  To-morrow morning another bar will be removed."

And he left them.

Early the next morning the town began to seethe in the squares.  Bala
Khan's army lay encamped outside the city!

When Bruce, Ramabai, Pundita and Ahmed halted their elephants before
the temple they were greeted by the now terrified priests who begged to
be informed what Bala Khan proposed to do.

"Deliver to us the Mem-sahib."

The priests swore by all their gods that they knew nothing of her.

"Let us enter the temple," said Ramabai.  "Ahmed, bring the treasure
and leave it in the care of the priests."  A few moments later Ramabai
addressed the assemblage.  "Bala Khan is hostile, but only for the sake
of his friends.  He lays down this law, however--obey it or disobey it.
The Colonel Sahib and his daughters are to go free, to do what they
please with the treasure.  Pundita, according to the will of the late
king, shall be crowned."

The high priest held up his hand for silence.  "We obey, on one
condition--that the new queen shall in no manner interfere with her old
religion nor attempt to force her new religion into the temple."

To this Pundita agreed.

"Ramabai, soldiers!  To the house of Umballa!  We shall find him
there," cried Ahmed.

Umballa squatted upon his cushions on the terrace.  The second bar had
been removed.  The beasts were pressing their wet nozzles to the
openings and growling deep challenges.

"Once more, and for the last time, will you reveal the hiding-place of
the treasure?"

Not a word from the prisoners.

"The third bar!"

But it did not stir.

"The third bar; remove it!"

The slave who had charge of the mechanism which operated the bars
refused to act.

The events which followed were of breathless rapidity.  Ramabai and
Umballa met upon the parapet in a struggle which promised death or the
treadmill to the weaker.  At the same time Bruce opened the door to the
Court of Death as the final bar dropped in the cage.  At the sight of
him the colonel and his daughters rushed to the door.  Roughly he
hurled them outside, slamming the iron door, upon which the infuriated
tigers flung themselves.



The young newspaper man to whom Winnie was engaged and the grizzled
Ahmed sat on the steps of the bungalow in California one pleasant
afternoon.  The pipe was cold in the hand of the reporter and Ahmed's
cigar was dead, which always happens when one recounts an exciting tale
and another listens.  Among the flower beds beyond two young women
wandered, followed by a young man in pongee, a Panama set carelessly
upon his handsome head, his face brown, his build slender but round and
muscular.

"And that, Sahib, is the story," sighed Ahmed.

"And Kathlyn gave the treasures to the poor of Allaha?  That was fine."

"You have said."

"They should have hanged this Umballa."

"No, Sahib.  Death is grateful.  It is not a punishment; it is peace.
But Durga Ram, called Umballa, will spend the remainder of his days in
the treadmill, which is a concrete hell, not abstract."

"Do you think England will ever step in?"

"Perhaps.  But so long as Pundita rules justly, so long as her consort
abets her, England will not move.  Perhaps, if one of them dies. . . .
There! the maids are calling you.  And I will go and brew the Colonel
Sahib's tea."