_III: A Warning_

From the shock of that gruesome discovery, Simon Varr reeled back both
mentally and physically.  Involuntarily, he threw up a hand to shield
his eyes, then got the best of his terror and fell to rubbing them,
pretending to himself that this had been the intention behind the
gesture; doubtless their vision was blurred and had deceived him into
thinking the unthinkable--

He dropped his hand presently, blinked once or twice and prepared to
make a more careful scrutiny of the monk's appearance.  He was balked
in this courageous essay.  The apparition, if such it were, had acted
in accordance with tradition and had vanished.  While his eyes were
covered it had departed, whether to left or right or merely into thin
air he could not tell.  He did not debate the question, either--he
simply thanked his stars it was gone!

It was with considerable reluctance that he resumed his way up the
path, but the daylight at the end of the trail looked inviting and
reassuring compared to the twilight in the woods and he covered the
distance to the spot where the monk had stood in a sort of a dogtrot.

It was here that he made a fresh discovery as he collided rather
heavily with some obstruction in the path, an obstruction that gave way
as his body impinged upon it, but that nearly tripped him as it fell
between his legs.

He picked it up, but did not pause to examine it.  The light ahead
still lured and he continued his flight toward it, bearing his find
with him.

He drew a deep breath of thankfulness as he finally emerged from the
woods into the comforting aura of the kitchen garden; his eyes rested
upon and were wonderfully soothed by a row of peaceful cabbages.  Never
before had he noticed how beautiful a cabbage can be, but to a man
fresh from dalliance with a ghost there is something very steadying and
sustaining in a glimpse of that most stolid and solid of vegetables.

There was a granite bowlder near-by on which he dropped gratefully for
a minute's rest.  It was while reaching for a handkerchief to pat his
moist forehead that he was reminded of the object he had picked up and
still carried.  He looked at it now, and found that it was a heavy
stick which must have been thrust firmly into the center of the path in
the woods; one end of it was split, and into the cleft had been thrust
a bit of folded paper--brown paper, he noted, of cheap quality, but
what really took his eye as he drew it free was his own name in
typewritten letters on the outside.

Evidently this was intended for him, and he was about to open it to see
what message it might contain when the sound of hurrying steps from the
direction of the path diverted him from his purpose.  Whatever the
contents of the paper might be, they were for him alone.  Prompted by
an instinct for secrecy which was part of his psychological cosmos, he
thrust the missive into the breast-pocket of his coat and turned--with
a little tremor from his nerves--to see who was coming.

It was a woman who burst from the shelter of the trees--a woman in some
haste and quite obviously in some alarm.  She was panting from her
exertions, for she ceased running only when she reached the open, as
Varr had done before her.  A close-fitting felt hat was slightly askew
on her head, and a once jaunty red feather that thrust up from it was
now hanging limp and dejected, broken perhaps by some low-hanging
branch she had failed to duck.  She was dressed in a two-piece outing
costume of knitted wool, and she looked just now as if those garments
were too warm for comfort.

Her face brightened as she observed Varr seated on the rock, and she
came toward him promptly.  He brightened, too, welcoming any human
being of tangible flesh and blood at that moment, although there was no
living person whom he habitually detested more than he did his wife's
sister, Miss October Copley.  Her evident perturbation, however, gave
him an uneasy premonition that he was about to hear more of his monk.
But he left it to her to introduce the subject.

"Well, Ocky--reducing?"

"Not much!" answered the lady briefly.  "_Scared_!"

She did not seat herself beside him on the bowlder, but chose instead
to drop at full length on a patch of green turf at his feet.  With such
breath as remained to her she expelled a sigh of relief.

"Scared, eh?  I didn't suppose there was anything on earth that could
scare you!"

She pounced instantly on his phraseology.  "Perhaps not--on earth!"  In
a smaller voice than she was wont to employ, she added timidly, "Simon,
d-do you believe in ghosts?"

"_Ghosts_!"  He fortified himself by a glance at the cabbages.  "Talk
sense, Ocky!"

"Who says it isn't sense?" snapped Miss Copley.  "Anyway, I just got
the shock of my long and exciting life.  See here, Simon--didn't you
come up that path a few minutes ago?"

"I did.  What of it?"

"I was sure it was you ahead of me as we crossed the meadow.  Tell me,
did you meet anything--I mean, any one?"

"What do you mean?  Did _you_?"

"Y-yes.  A figure in black--dressed something like a monk.  I didn't
meet him, exactly--he dodged into the woods as I came along.  That is,
I suppose he did--he just seemed to vanish!"

"Oh--he seemed to vanish, did he?"  Varr shifted nervously on his
granite throne.  "You say he was dressed like a monk?  Did--did you see
his _face_?"

"No, I couldn't see that--"

"Ah!  You couldn't, eh?"  He rubbed the palms of his hands on his
handkerchief as he probed a little deeper.  "Too far away, I suppose."

"No.  He had on a mask."

"A _mask_!" Comprehension came to him at once, and he inwardly cursed
himself for an imaginative fool before continuing.  "Well, Ocky, to
tell you the truth, I did see him--right here at the head of the trail.
He had his back to the light so I couldn't make out any mask.  Er--what
made you think of ghosts?"

"Because I had such a creepy feeling when I saw him.  Didn't you?"

"Humph.  For a moment, perhaps."

"Did you pass each other after you met?"

"Why--why--  Confound it--_no_!  He just _disappeared_!"

"Gosh!" said Miss Copley fervently.  "Simon, it _was_ a spook!  I know
it was!  Have you ever seen or heard of a monk around here before?"

"N-no.  But that doesn't mean anything.  There's no law that says they
can't travel if they want to."

"But what would a monk be doing on a private path through this
property?  Why should he disappear from people?  Why should he wear a
mask?  Monks don't wear masks."  She reflected a moment.  "Come to
think of it, he wasn't dressed exactly like a monk--Simon!  did you
ever see a picture of those creatures of the Spanish Inquisition?
'Familiars' I think they used to call them.  They dressed that way and
wore masks!"

"Humph."  Despite that skeptic snort, Varr was conscious of a nervous
chill.  "You've been drinking too much coffee, Ocky!  Indigestion!"

"_Oh_!" cried Miss Copley suddenly.  She raised herself on an elbow and
looked all about her on the ground.  "Oh--_pshaw_!"

"Eh?  What is it?"

"Coffee!  Your mentioning it just reminded me!  I was coming back from
a walk and I stopped at Wimpelheimer's to get a pound of it--I knew it
was needed at the house.  Now it's gone!  I must have dropped it when
that creature frightened me."  She looked woebegone.  "It's not very
far back, but I'm so tired!"

"Are you?" repeated Varr restlessly.

"You'll get it for me, won't you, Simon?"  She regarded him
appealingly.  "Oh--please!"

He got up from the rock and glanced at her with marked distaste.  His
gaze traveled to the dark entrance of the trail, came back to rest
briefly on the consoling cabbages, went again to the trail.  He took an
irresolute, halting step--and then was struck by an inspiration that
cleared his brow as if by magic.

"What do I keep a houseful of idle servants for?" he demanded crisply.
"Let Bates hunt it up--he'd better take a torch."

"Simon--you're _scared_!"

"Don't be ridiculous.  Anyway, it's going to storm.  I felt a drop of
rain a moment ago.  Come along to the house and stop your nonsense
about monks and familiars and--and ghosts!"

Perhaps the last word came out a little uncertainly, but as he strode
through the kitchen garden and around to the front door, followed
closely by Miss Copley, he decided with pardonable pride that he had
extricated himself from an embarrassing position with his accustomed
masterful dexterity.  The thought comforted him, for he vaguely
realized that he had come close to experiencing a nervous panic during
those minutes in the woods.

A white-haired man, still lithe, erect and agile despite his years,
opened the door for them as their steps sounded on the planking of the
veranda.  This was Bates, the butler, a faithful retainer who had
served the father of Lucy Varr and her sister a full decade before
passing with the house and land into the keeping of the younger
daughter and her husband.  At the time of Mr. Copley's death, Varr had
tentatively suggested letting the man go, but his wife had protested
against that idea and had gained her point by shrewdly convincing her
husband that good servants were becoming increasingly difficult to find
and that Bates could never be replaced for less than twice his wages.
It was one of the very rare occasions when Simon had credited the
gentle, self-effacing lady with showing sound sense.

The butler had just lighted the big lamp in the hall--electricity had
not yet found its way into the old house--and the warm cheerfulness of
the homely scene went far to rehabilitating Simon's convalescent nerve.
Ghosts did not fit into this atmosphere.  Bates did--Bates was almost
as satisfying as a cabbage.  Of course, Ocky would promptly do her best
to spoil it--!  He could have dispensed willingly with the examination
to which she immediately subjected the servant.

"Bates, has any one called?"

"No, Miss Ocky."

"No one at all?"

"No, Miss Ocky."  His wrinkled face showed his surprise at the
repetition.

"How about the back door?  Any one come there?"

"No one, Miss Ocky."

"Well, have you seen any one around the grounds?  A man dressed like a
monk?  Wearing a mask?"

"A monk?  In a mask?"  The old man smiled indulgently at this quaint
whimsy, which might have come more suitably from the little girl with
flying pigtails whom he used to chase out of his pantry than from this
sensible, middle-aged woman who was waiting with apparent seriousness
for his answer.  "A monk in a mask?  Good gracious, no, Miss Ocky!"

"All right."  Miss Copley sent a significant glance at Varr, which he
acknowledged by wrinkling his nose disdainfully.  "By the way, Bates--I
left a pound of coffee a little ways down the short-cut, you might step
out and get it before dinner."

"Yes, Miss Ocky."

"You ought to find it right in the middle of the path."

"Yes, Miss Ocky."

Bates waited, and when nothing further appeared to be forthcoming he
betook himself wonderingly to his usual habitat in the rear quarter of
the house.  Monks in masks, indeed!  And why did any one want to leave
a pound of coffee down a trail with rain commencing to fall?  He shook
his head despondently over a Miss Ocky returned from foreign parts so
changed from the Miss Ocky of the old days.

She seemed inclined to renew the ghostly topic of conversation when
left alone with her brother-in-law, but Simon gave her no chance.  He
stalked off down the hall and entered his study, a small room that
opened off the comfortable, old-fashioned parlor.  He closed the door
from the hall behind him, and also, for the sake of greater privacy,
the door that communicated with the living-room.  Then he seated
himself at a roll-top desk and turned up the wick of the lamp that was
burning dimly in a wall bracket, close at hand.

He had remembered, as he left Miss Ocky to her eerie fancies, the note
which he had retrieved from the cleft stick.  She had driven the
recollection of it from his mind by her idle chatter about ghosts!  He
took the slip of paper from his pocket and unfolded it.

A few typewritten lines jumped to his eye, and he nodded as if that
were as he had expected.  Before reading the text, however, he leaned
back in his chair and strove to recall the exact circumstances under
which he had discovered the missive.  He had been hurrying--no, blast
it, he had been scuttling like a scared rabbit!--along the trail and
had run into the stick, which had been jabbed into the ground where he
could not fail to notice it--and at the very spot where the figure in
black had been standing!  Apparition--pooh!  If there was one thing
certain about the whole silly business it was that the note had been
put there by that--that creature.  Simon did not profess to be versed
in the lore of spooks, but he could not vision an ambassador from
another world leaving behind him a tangible message composed on an
earthly typewriter--!  Pooh, and again, _pooh_!

He paused at this stage of his reflections to grin at the thought of
Ocky, denied the knowledge of this consolatory bit of evidence.  He
hadn't mentioned it to her, and he wouldn't.  Let her go on believing
in ghosts!  He was hugely pleased to think that there really existed
one thing that could get under the skin of that hard-boiled human!

He was still smiling grimly as he finally began to read the
message--but the smile had faded away before he finished.


"_Woe unto thee, stiff-necked son of Belial!  Woe unto thee, oppresor
of the defensless!  Woe unto thee, who hast ground the faces of the
poor, who hast turned the hopes of thy neighbers to ashes!  Woe!  Woe!
Woe!  Take heed to thy ways and mend them, lest thou be destroyed by
the thunderbolts of wrath!_"


A hand-written signature in a sprawling fist concluded the
communication; heavy, labored characters, inscribed in a crimson fluid
by a blunt pen, formed two words: "The Monk."

Simon Varr read the thing through twice.  He laid it on the desk before
him and stared at it as though it had some power to hypnotize him.  A
pulse of anger beat in his temple, but it was a more subdued anger than
his quick temper usually produced.  His mental processes had ceased to
function normally as they sank beneath a wave of bewilderment such as
had submerged them in the woods.  Feebly, they came again to the
surface.

This message was an event entirely outside the range of his previous
experience.  He had heard of anonymous letters, naturally, and he knew
that the correct and courageous thing to do was to ignore them as if
they did not exist.  But anonymous letters, as he understood them, were
brought by the postman and placed on the breakfast table with the
morning mail; they weren't planted in the middle of a lonely copse by
gentlemen attired as Spanish Inquisitioners!

The letter on his desk seemed to leer at its recipient and challenge
him to ignore it.

What did it mean?  Who had sent it?  Was it a genuine warning and
threat, or was it merely an elaborate hoax?  He pondered the latter
possibility quite at length--and thanked his stars that he had not told
Ocky about it.  Simon Varr was not the man to relish a jest against
himself, and if Ocky ever heard about it and it subsequently proved to
be the work of a practical joker--well, she would never let him forget
that he hadn't gone after the pound of coffee!

But the theory that it might be a hoax grew more and more implausible
as he contemplated it.  He was positive he knew no one capable of such
a prank, and to suppose that any stranger had gone to so much trouble
to play a trick on him was absurd.

He had no lack of enemies--he knew that.  Had one of them chosen this
fantastic method of declaring war on him?  In that case he could
certainly afford to ignore the letter as coming from a source unworthy
of serious consideration.  A worth-while enemy does not give a warning;
he strikes.  The cheapest thing about a rattlesnake is its rattle.
Varr started to run over a list of recognized foemen who might have
done this ill-natured deed, but presently desisted; their name was
legion.

He did not overlook a third, quite reasonable theory.  The whole
business might have sprung from the unbalanced mind of a lunatic--some
person who believed himself appointed to right the wrongs of the
world--the victim of religious mania.  That would account for the
choice of a monastic costume in which to masquerade--and it would also
account for the queer language of the letter, savoring as it did of the
Bible.  Again, the type of person most likely to suffer from that form
of mental affliction would be a poorly educated person--and Simon
entertained grave doubts as to the orthography of some of the words in
the letter.

He reached into a pigeonhole of the desk and took out a small
dictionary that he always kept at hand.  He selected the dubious
spellings that had caught his attention and ran them down one by one.
"Oppresor" was wrong.  "Defensless" was fearful.  "Neighbor" started
out brilliantly but came a cropper at the end.  And that curious
phrase, "Who hast"; what about that?  Simon was a trifle hazy over
this, so he gave the writer the benefit of the doubt.  It sounded
queer, though.  Anyway, he had established to his satisfaction that the
fellow was illiterate--naïvely passing by the fact that he had himself
resorted to a dictionary to confirm his belief.

He congratulated himself frankly on one score--he had laid the ghost!
He could admit now--though with a blush of shame--that he had been
badly shaken for just a few minutes, what with his own nerves and
Ocky's confounded chattering!  A man without a face!  A "familiar" from
the Spanish Inquisition!  What rot a man's imagination can trick him
into crediting.  But that was over and done with now; he was back on
solid ground, self-confident, secure--

He jumped quite half a foot in his chair at a muffled tap on the
door--and swore at Bates for announcing dinner.




_IV: The Legend of the Monk_

Four people sat down to dinner that evening in the big dining-room
across the hall from the parlor and Varr's study.  The walls of the
dining-room were plentifully equipped with sconces bearing lamps, but
Simon, in some moment of petty economy, had once decreed that these
should be lighted only on formal occasions.  The only illumination this
evening came from the candles on the table, which stood in the center
of the room, and beyond the area reached by their rays the shadows
deepened into impenetrability.  At one end of the room a narrow slit of
light at top and bottom marked the position of the swinging door which
gave access to the pantry.

From this point to the sideboard, and thence to the table, and back
again, moved Bates on noiseless feet as he busied himself with the
service of the meal.  In his black clothes, the instant he slipped out
of the magic lighted circle he was swallowed completely by the shadows,
to reappear presently with spectral abruptness in another segment of
activity.  Several times he startled Simon by silently materializing
from the void at his elbow, and on each occasion the tanner found some
excuse to vent his anger in a curt rebuke to the servant.

The four who dined were of diametrically opposed temperaments.  Across
the table from Varr sat his wife, Lucy, a pale, gentle soul who under
happier circumstances might have retained more of her youthful
freshness and beauty than she had.  She appeared washed-out and
bloodless, so that her sister had remarked to herself that living with
Simon Varr must be not unlike associating permanently with a vampire.
His own abundant vitality sapped the life-juice from those about him,
leaving the desiccated bodies an easy prey to his appetite for
dominance.

At Varr's left was his son, Copley, a young man who had come of age
that summer.  He was tall and straight, aquiline of feature, brown-eyed
and with dark chestnut hair that persisted, to his annoyance, in a
tendency to curl.  He was a likable chap, popular with young and old of
both sexes.  His good looks came from his mother, together with the
equable disposition that promised to be his as he grew older and
learned better to control his emotions.  When a youngster he had been
willful at times and prone to flashes of fiery temper, a heritage,
beyond doubt, from his father's chronic irascibility, but the
discipline of boarding-school and college had taught him to restrain at
least its outward manifestations.  From Simon, too, he had inherited a
flair for business--an invaluable asset, thought Miss Ocky, for a man
sentenced for life to this twentieth century America.

She was studying him now as she sat across the table from him, just as
she studied the other two when opportunity served.  They were all three
practically strangers to her.  The boy had not even been expected when
she went to China with the Oriental Languages committee from her
college, and in the twenty-three years that had elapsed before her
return two months ago, time had worked changes.  She would never have
recognized her bright, joyous sister in this tired woman of the
listless air.  As for her brother-in-law--well, perhaps it was not
quite accurate to say that he was a stranger to her; she had known
Simon Varr at the period of his courtship and marriage and he was still
Simon Varr, only a little more so!  Detestable creature.  She held him
accountable, quite justly, for the blight that lay upon Lucy.

And upon Bates, too, for that matter.  Miss Ocky had always had a warm
place in her heart for the faithful old man, reposing in him the trust
and confidence that her father had shown in the same quarter.  Bates
was something more than the ordinary servant, he came close to being a
throw-back to the feudal retainer type of other days in his loyalty and
devotion to his house, just as his former master, Sylvester Copley, had
approximated in his time the character of a country gentleman.  Bates
was getting on in years, of course, which would account for much of his
increased graveness and passivity, but not all.  Unless Miss Ocky's
suspicions were wide of the mark, he, too, had come under the deadening
influence of Varr's dominance--ah! but _had_ he _entirely_?  At the
very moment she was thinking about it, Simon had uttered a terse
comment, as biting as acid, upon some negligible feature of the
dinner-service.  No faintest flicker of his facial muscles gave any
hint that Bates had heard the remark, but his eyes revealed that he
had, and for the fraction of a second they glinted oddly red in the
candlelight.  Was there a spark of manhood in his breast that still
glowed when breathed upon?

They dined in silence for the most part.  Simon was never a brilliant
conversationalist, and to-night his thoughts were busy with matters far
afield.  Young Copley was taciturn and moody, preoccupied by
reflections of no very agreeable nature, to judge by his glum manner.
Lucy Varr, helping herself but scantily from the dishes passed,
preserved her customary pose of nervous diffidence.  Only Miss Ocky
tried to dispel the settled atmosphere of depression by occasionally
shooting point-blank questions at one or another of her companions--and
toward the end of the meal she did manage to stir up a little
excitement.

"Copley," she addressed the quiet young man across the table.  "You've
been out in the great world for several days, what's going on in New
York?  Haven't you brought back any news to us country folk?"

"New York?"  He roused himself by a palpable effort.  "No, Aunt Ocky, I
didn't pick up anything in New York that would interest you.  Nothing
much good at the theaters just now.  But if you want a piece of local
news I may have one for you.  It would be more interesting to you three
than to me.  When I got off the train this afternoon there was another
chap who swung off just ahead of me, and I noticed him particularly
because he was so different from anything you'd expect to drop off the
four-sixteen.  Tall and well-set-up, dressed like the mirror of
fashion, smooth and polished--and followed by a valet, if you please,
carrying his grips and a bag of golf clubs!  Imagine a sight like that
in Hambleton!  I thought he'd made a mistake in his station, until I
saw him walk right across the platform to where Adams, the
baggage-master, was standing.  He said something and held out his hand,
and old Adams grabbed it and shook it as if he was greeting a prodigal
son.  I thought the valet looked a bit shocked!  Then this chap tucked
himself and his man and his baggage into one of Brown's jitneys and
drove off like a lord!"

"Who in the world could it have been?" wondered his mother, awakened to
a mild interest at the account of such grandeur in Hambleton.  "Did you
ask, Copley?"

"I have my share of vulgar curiosity, mother; I did.  As soon as he
disappeared I pounced on old Adams and asked him the name of his swell
friend.  He told me that it was Leslie Sherwood, the son of the man who
died last winter--_hullo_!"

He broke off short and looked into the darkness behind him, whence had
come the crash of china as Bates dropped a tray of coffee cups.
Silence succeeded the tragedy, during which they could hear the
butler's muttered ejaculations of horror and distress as he bent to
retrieve the debris.

"Confound you, Bates!  You get clumsier every day you live!"

Varr's outburst was swift, but not swift enough to deceive his
sister-in-law.  Her quick eye had detected several little items of
interest, although they had occurred simultaneously and in opposite
directions.

At the mention of Leslie Sherwood's name, Lucy Varr had straightened in
her chair and turned to her son with parted lips as if eager for more
news, while a delicate flush--the first touch of color Ocky had seen
there in two months--sprang into her pale cheeks.  This was fair
enough.  In the old days, Leslie Sherwood had been attentive to Lucy
Copley in such degree that their circle confidently stood by for a
formal announcement.  Then he had rather abruptly departed toward a
"business career in New York," making it plain that Hambleton would see
him no more for some while to come.  His departure left clear the way
to the lady's hand for a colder, less attractive, but more determined
suitor.  Lucy married Simon Varr.

She was entitled, then, to display some faint emotion at the mention of
a recreant knight, and Simon, with propriety, might have shown a
husbandly twinge of jealousy or contempt or dislike--any of a dozen
different sentiments other than the one he did reveal.  At the bit of
news so casually dropped by his son, his head had jerked up sharply and
a look of fear had flashed into his eyes and out again.  He had
cleverly seized upon the butler's mishap to cover his confusion, but
the ruse was too late to be effective as far as Miss Ocky was concerned.

So Simon was afraid of Leslie Sherwood, or else he had something to
fear from the sudden reappearance of that gentleman.  Which was it? and
why?  Miss Ocky determined to find out eventually.  In the meantime she
would accept the curious circumstance and store it in that corner of
her brain where she was collecting odds and ends of data relating to
her brother-in-law.

"When did old Mr. Sherwood die?" she asked promptly.

"Last February," answered her sister.  "He had been very ill for
several months--a general breakdown."

"Leslie was here at the time, I suppose."

"N-no; he wasn't.  You're not posted on local topics, Ocky!  This is
the first time Leslie has been back in Hambleton since he left to go
into business in New York.  No one ever knew anything definite, but we
have always assumed that father and son quarreled over something so
bitterly that reconcilement was impossible.  Still, when the old man
died he left everything to Leslie--and he has turned up, now.  I wonder
if he will sell the place or--or live here?"

That was an unusually long speech for Lucy Varr, and it betrayed her
lively interest in the subject under discussion.  Simon must have noted
that and perhaps resented it, for his face darkened.  He made no
comment, however, but celebrated the end of dinner in his usual manner
by pushing back his chair a little, crossing his legs comfortably, and
beginning a series of excavating operations with a quill toothpick
which he drew from his vest pocket.  Miss Ocky winced.  This was the
postprandial habit of his that annoyed her excessively.

She had not changed for dinner.  Now she took a cigarette case from a
side pocket of her coat, extracted a cigarette and lighted it from one
of the candles.  Simon did not smoke himself, and he disliked intensely
the sight of a woman using tobacco.  He glanced at Ocky, and to her
deep satisfaction made a wry face at the cloud of smoke she contentedly
exhaled.  Winces were easy.

The little circle broke up after dinner.  Varr went off to his study
and shut himself in, his wife pleaded a headache, and with a word of
apology to her sister departed for her bedroom.  Ocky, amiably anxious
to distract her nephew's thoughts from whatever he was glooming over,
suggested a game of chess.  Finding this had not been included in his
college curriculum, she announced that she would settle herself in the
living-room with some new books that had come.

She went upstairs for one of these, and returned bearing it and a small
sheathed dagger with a highly ornamented handle.  She found Copley in
the living-room, attired in a raincoat, standing and looking at the
closed door leading to Simon's study.  Miss Ocky settled herself in a
chair by the lamp on the center table, drew the dagger from its worn
leather sheath and proceeded to cut the pages of Henner's "Through
Asia."  She glanced up whimsically at her nephew.

"Well, Copley, are you posing for a statue of indecision?"

"Something like that, Aunt Ocky."  He smiled ruefully.  "I was going
for a tramp, then I thought I'd drop in for a chat with father--and now
I think I won't have a chat with him, but will go for a walk."

"It's pouring, isn't it?"

"I don't care."

"Of course, you don't.  I know that mood--and a good sloshing hike in
the rain is a splendid cure for it.  I know what's the matter with you,
too."  She shot a look at the closed door and lowered her voice.  "Why
don't you cut the Gordian knot and be done with it?" she added quietly.

"I--I don't get you."

"Elope, idiot child!  You and she are both of age.  Consider the late
Mr. Ajax of Greece--he defied the lightning and got away with it!  They
can't do more than excommunicate you with bell and book and candle."

"But that's plenty, Aunt Ocky."  A smile that had greeted her
suggestion faded away, leaving him gloomier than ever.  "If I only had
to think about myself--!  But I can't let Sheila in for a lot of
hardship.  It costs money, these days, to live in even the most
moderate comfort, and all I could bring into the family treasury would
be just what I could earn with my two hands--supposing I was lucky
enough to find a job!  It wouldn't be fair to Sheila--that's the long
and short of it."

"Have you given her a chance to speak for herself?"  His aunt sniffed
contemptuously.  "Gracious goodness, Copley, isn't there something more
in life than money?  Don't people think of anything else in America?"

"Oh, yes.  It's a free country and a man has a perfect right to be a
visionary and starve to death if he wants to.  It just happens I
don't!"  He grinned as some of her disgust went into a savage slashing
of uncut edges.  "As things are, I don't believe I'll ask Sheila to
share my crust of bread."

"Then I'll ask her for you--blessed if I don't!  I intended to run over
and see her in the morning, anyway.  Did it ever strike you that
matchmaking is the proper business of old maids?  They atone for
celibacy through vicarious marriage!"

"So that is the explanation of their favorite indoor sport, is it?  But
I can't regard you as a confirmed old maid, Aunt Ocky."  He moved to
her side and dropped a hand affectionately on her shoulder.  "If you
won't think me awfully fresh for saying it--you're about the youngest
looking woman for your age that I've ever laid eyes on."

"Oh, thank you, Copley; thank you very much.  Really, I must remember
you in my will for them kind words!  But about to-morrow--may I
represent myself as being your plenipotentiary?"

"Sure thing.  Go as far as you like, Aunt Ocky.  Anything you start,
I'll finish."  The sound of a chair being pushed back in the study
caught his ear and indicated a discreet change of subject.  He stooped
to retrieve the dagger that had slipped from her lap and examined it a
moment.  For all its exquisite beauty of design and workmanship, it was
a wicked little weapon.  "You have a bloodthirsty taste in paper
cutters, Aunt Ocky.  Where did you get this?  Has it a history?"

"Very likely, but I don't know it.  It is certainly old enough to have
a lurid past.  I picked it up in the bazaar at Teheran.  That
inscription on the blade is Persian."

"What does it mean?  They taught me Persian when they taught me chess."

"It reads, 'I bring Peace!'"

"Oh.  The Oriental point of view, I suppose!  We would be more apt to
think of a dagger as bringing war."

"We think backwards at times," commented Miss Ocky.  She reclaimed her
colorful souvenir of the East, then glanced up as the study door
opened.  "Hello, Simon.  I expect you will sleep easier to-night; no
fear of fire bugs in a rain like this!"

He grunted something unintelligible, and stared at Copley standing
there in the parlor in his raincoat.  The young man returned the stare
with expressionless face.  Neither he nor his father spoke, and in a
moment the tanner left the room.

Miss Ocky was as good as her word the following morning.  She marched
cross-country to the Graham house, some half-mile distant, and had a
long and enlightening conversation with Sheila.  She had met the girl
several times and approved of her highly, and when she left her finally
to return home her good opinion of Miss Graham was in nowise
diminished.  The young woman, if she were not mistaken, had just the
qualities needed to make a useful citizen out of a husband like Copley
whose chief defect was clearly a lack of decision.  He wanted
starching, that was it.

She bore homeward a book that she had borrowed from Sheila, and though
it only wanted twenty minutes to lunch time, she neither went to her
room to freshen up nor sought her nephew to make a hasty report on the
result of her embassy.  She betook herself instead to the study, and
there was a malicious twinkle in her eye as she tapped on the closed
door.  She obeyed a gruff command to enter.

Varr had made the best of his period of enforced idleness by working on
a batch of order-books that he had brought from his office.  He was
busy with them now, and he looked as displeased as he was surprised by
Ocky's interruption.

"What do _you_ want?" he snapped irritably.

"I've picked up some information that I thought you'd like to hear,
Simon.  How is your nerve this morning?  I've just been to call on
Sheila Graham and she fairly made my blood curdle."

"Serves you right.  Mine curdles when I even think of her."  He
frowned.  "Why did you go to see her?"

"I promised to take her a recipe for a cous-cous I described to her the
other day.  Anyway, I like her, even if you don't.  But that has
nothing to do with our muttons!  While I was chatting with her I
happened to mention our experience yesterday with the monk--"

"You did!  What in the world _for_?"

"Well, Simon, when I go to call on any one I like to talk about
_something_--I can't sit like a dummy--"

"You can't!"

"And that was certainly the most interesting bit of news that I had.
It quite woke her up.  She's something of a blue-stocking, you know,
and has read a lot about the early history of this country.  When I
spoke of the monk she looked very queer and went straight to a shelf of
books and took out this one--"  Miss Ocky held up the one she was
carrying, and Varr saw that she was keeping a place in it with one
forefinger.  "When she showed me a certain passage in it, I put it
right under my arm and brought it--"

"You needn't have," he told her abruptly.  "I recognize the thing,
though I've never bothered to read it; Jennison's 'History of Wayne
County,' isn't it?  There's a copy among your father's books in the
library."

"Is there?  I wish I'd known it!"  She opened the book at her place,
steadied the heavy volume on her knees and cleared her throat.  "I am
going to read this to you, Simon--it isn't long."

"Go ahead."  He had tried overnight to put the disagreeable subject out
of his mind but had not succeeded very well.  He was consumed by
curiosity now to learn what she had discovered, though nothing would
have induced him to admit it.  "What's it all about?"

She began to read in a soft, well-modulated voice.

"'Wayne County is not without its share of legends and quaint scraps of
folklore, some of them nicely calculated to chill the blood o' nights.
One fable, at least, has risen from a base of fact; I refer to the
famous Monk of Hambleton.  Ancient chronicles of this town record the
arrival--in pre-Revolutionary times--of an unfortunate individual whose
face had been shockingly mutilated by accident or disease.  He drifted
to Hambleton from the outer world and apparently quartered himself on
the countryside, living the life of a hermit in a small dry cave that
still shows traces of his presence.  He habitually wore the garb of a
friar--a penance, perhaps, for former sins--and his disfigured face was
always concealed from curious eyes by a mask of black cloth.

"'After his death--a lonely demise in his humble cave--a story sprang
up about him to the effect that his spirit still lingered in the
neighborhood of its passing.  Several credible persons claimed at
different times to have met the Monk, and since by some unhappy chance
these victims of an optical delusion were all subsequently visited by
misfortune in greater or less degree, it soon began to be whispered
about that to encounter the specter was a sure augury of impending
calamity.  A local poet, long since forgotten, was inevitably inspired
to preserve the legend in his rustic doggerel.  I append a few couplets:

  "_'Who meets the monk at crack o' dawn
  Shall rue the day that he was born._

  "_'Who meets the monk in light of day,
  Woe goes with him on his way.'_"


"Cheery little thing," grunted Simon Varr as she paused an instant.
"Is that all of it?"

"No, there's one more verse."  Miss Ocky deepened her tones a note or
two as she solemnly read it.

  "_'Who meets the monk when dusk is nigh
  Within the fortnight he shall die.'_"


She closed the book and regarded her brother-in-law with eyes
half-mocking, half-pitying.

"Of course you wouldn't dream of treating such nonsense seriously,
Simon; I know that.  But it's curious, and rather interesting, don't
you think?  Jennison had his tongue in his cheek when he wrote his
account of it, but even he relates as a matter of fact the coincidence
that those persons who saw the vision were subsequently badly out of
luck."  Ocky shook her head gently and glanced at him commiseratingly.
"If it _should_ come true in your case, Simon, I suppose this is an
opportune moment to offer you my condolences!"

"Thank you," he managed to reply dryly.

He felt very squeamish inside, though most of that was due to his
innate abhorrence of anything that brought up the subject of death.  As
far as the Monk was concerned, he had found in the letter thrust into
the cleft stick and now reposing in a pigeonhole of his desk the reason
back of that masquerade--though he had to admit that the writer of the
anonymous note had certainly hit upon a sufficiently gruesome method of
transmitting it.

"Thank you, Ocky, for your condolences," he continued after an
interval.  "The same to you and many of them!  We'll go together, no
doubt.  Don't forget you saw the Monk at the same time I did!"

"_Ah_!"

The monosyllable was almost a gasp of pain.  Simon stared at her,
rather startled by the effectiveness of his sardonic reminder.  The
book she was holding had dropped to the floor with a crash, her cheeks
had gone white to the lips, and now she was staring straight ahead of
her with a fixed expression of horror in her eyes as though they were
truly visioning the sure approach of Death.




_V: Miss Lucy's Man_

It did not take Simon Varr and Miss Copley very long to recover from
the perturbation they had shown when she finished reading him the bit
of folklore relating to the Monk.  Both of them were highly efficient
in the art of self-repression, or failing that, knew how to mask an
inner emotion behind their normal outward semblance.  When they
presently left the study for the luncheon table, Simon wore his usual
frown above knitted brows, while Miss Ocky displayed her accustomed
placidity of countenance with its high-lights of humor about her lips
and sharp gray eyes.

A dish of French chops annoyed the lord and master of the house.  He
pointed out to his patient helpmeet that times were ripe for economy
and that French chops are economical only in respect to their nutritive
content.  With the tannery closed down, an era of corned beef and
cabbage was strongly indicated--especially, she would understand, as
there now appeared to be four mouths to feed in the family instead of
the customary three.  He hoped she would heed his words and exercise
greater prudence in the management of her household--and the courteous
inflection of his tones as he voiced his hope was a masterpiece of
sarcasm.  It left his wife pale and resigned, his son red and
embarrassed.

"If corned beef and cabbage ever shows up in this dining-room,"
remarked the one member of his audience still undaunted, "my father
will turn in his grave."

"Your father thought entirely too much of his stomach," said her host
coldly.

"Yes?  Well, it repaid him for all the affection he lavished on it.
His digestion was wonderful to the very end.  How is yours?"

"I could say that that is purely my own business, but if you insist on
knowing, my digestion is excellent."

"I shouldn't have thought it.  I don't agree with you as to the
essential privacy of the subject, either.  It concerns all of us since
we have to live with you."

"_Do_ you?"

"Ah!"  A touch of color in her cheeks suggested that flint was at last
beginning to spark beneath the steel.  "Apropos of that and your
earlier remark, Simon--would it ease your financial straits at all if I
were to contribute something for my board and lodging?  It would be a
novel experience for me in this house, but I've always been able to
adapt myself to altered circumstances."

She did not expect a hurried and polite disclaimer from her
brother-in-law.  Disclaimers of any sort were not in Simon's line.  He
merely sent her a chill look as he thrust back from the table and rose
to his feet.

"That is something you can settle with Lucy," he said coldly.  "I'm
sorry I can't stay and chat with you a little longer, but I am due to
spend the afternoon at the tannery."

"It's nice to know that you can spend something," she threw after him
sweetly.  "Why don't you bring back a hide or two from the vats, Simon?
We might boil them down for soup!"

He glared back at her over his shoulder as he stalked from the room.
Miss Ocky glanced at the faces of the two who remained with her and
gave a contented little chuckle.

"Now, that scene was a bit of honest, downright vulgarity!" she said
cheerfully.  "Refreshing once in a while, don't you think?"

"Ocky!  I wish you wouldn't poke him up like that."

"Well!  Suppose he stops poking me first!  I haven't got the patience
of a saint like you, Lucy--and gracious only knows where _you_ get it
from, my poor child!  Twenty years ago you'd have taken that plate of
chops and shoved it down his throat."  A fleeting recollection
corollary to this thought impelled her to shoot a discontented glance
at her nephew across the table.  "What in the world has become of the
Copley spirit?" she demanded bitterly.

"You don't really understand Simon," murmured her sister.

"No," said Miss Ocky grimly, "but I'm beginning to."

They left it at that and withdrew from the dining-room.  From his
inconspicuous post near the sideboard, Bates followed the retreating
figure of Miss Ocky with admiring and grateful eyes.  Here, he told
himself, was the old Miss Ocky coming to life again, and his heart
rejoiced to think that Simon was in a fair way to get back as good as
he gave.  The spirit of the Copleys--aye, they had it, every one of
them, if only they would show it now and then!

Lucy Varr departed for the kitchen, possibly to caution the cook
against undue ostentation at dinner, and Copley, obeying an imperious
glance from a pair of gray eyes, followed his aunt to the veranda.  She
led the way to one end of it, and there turned the corner into an ell
that had been screened and glassed against the mosquitoes of summer and
the frosts of winter.  With comfortable wicker chairs and quantities of
soft cushions, it was a cosy nook that had become Miss Ocky's favorite
haunt for reading or writing.

She ousted a magnificent, smoky-blue Angora who, catlike, had decided
the best was none too good for him, seated herself and waved Copley to
another chair.

"I had a talk with Sheila this morning," she announced.

The young man's face had been flushed and dark, but now, at the mention
of Sheila's name, it lighted quickly.  He had been acutely embarrassed
during the exchange of courtesies between his father and his aunt, and
he had felt a quick resentment at the innuendo she had flung at him and
which he had by no means missed, but these passing moods vanished in
favor of happier emotions.

"I wondered if you really would!  But, say, Aunt Ocky--you surely
didn't have the nerve to mention your elopement scheme, did you?"

"I certainly did.  My nerve is a very superior article.  I wish to
goodness I could graft a piece of it onto your backbone."

"Oh.  Can't a fellow be sensible, Aunt Ocky, without being accused of
spinelessness?  However, for the love of Mike, tell me what she said!
She turned it down hard, of course."

"She did not, though it was obvious that she would have preferred to
hear it from your own lips.  Naturally.  At any rate, when I first got
there I broached the subject tactfully--"

"You couldn't do it any other way, Aunt Ocky."

"Don't be impertinent.  She soon made it plain that she was willing to
talk frankly and openly--was glad of the rare opportunity to discuss
matters with a person of some intelligence.  She has been having a
little unpleasantness of her own; did you know that?  It appears her
father has been fearfully stirred up over something yesterday and
to-day, and this morning when she spoke of you in some connection he
was quite savage.  He was never keen on the idea of a match between you
two, was he?"

"No.  I'm afraid he has sense, too!"

"Well, his daughter has a mind of her own, and she has made it up.  She
has wisely concluded that a lot of our happiness in this life has to be
snatched from the Fates who dangle it before our eyes, just out of our
reach.  She feels that the most practical way for you and her to grab
yours is to marry first and let the fireworks follow.  Opposition to
the marriage will be curiously ineffective if the marriage has already
taken place.  I thought she showed a good deal of fine logic, there."

"You mean, she agreed with everything you suggested!"  Copley made a
despairing gesture.  "Aunt Ocky, come down to brass tacks.  It's true
that I'm crazy about Sheila and that she cares more for me that I could
hope to deserve--"

"Ever so much more!"

"--but Sheila is a human being who has to _eat_!  She has to have
clothes to wear.  She probably has a preference for a roof over her
head.  And I--I'm _bust_!"

"Nothing saved from your allowance, I suppose?"

"It was never magnificent.  Now, it is discontinued.  Father has always
put it to my credit at the bank punctually on the first of the month.
Last Tuesday I dropped in to get my balance and--found an overdraft!
He was never careless in his life, so I don't need to ask him if he
forgot to make the deposit.  He has simply decided to bring it sharply
to my attention that I am in no situation to marry, so he has cut out
my allowance."

"Humph.  I expect you're right."  She frowned at this new manifestation
of Simon's ruthless determination always to have his own way in
everything, then shifted a portion of her severity toward her nephew.
"In a sense, Copley, I'm rather glad that he did.  If there's one thing
you need, it's a touch of adversity.  Stiffen up, boy!  I've done
everything this morning that I propose to do for you; now go to Sheila
and talk things over with her, as you ought to, instead of with me.
She's waiting for you!"

He rose with decision, a new alertness in his face and manner.

"Aunt Ocky, you're a brick."  Impulsively, he took a step toward her,
thrust forth a sinewy hand and gripped the one she raised.  "It makes
me feel like a new man just to listen to you--and the only thing I
can't understand is why you think me worth the trouble you take."

"There is no mystery about that.  I have always loved your mother
tenderly, and some of that affection you have inherited.  Sheila is a
lovely girl who I believe will make you happy--and do you good.  As for
my desire to have the business settled--well, I've my own reasons for
that which will be made clear to you in time.  Have you anything else
on your infant mind?  No?  Then, go--for goodness' sake, go!"

He went.

Miss Ocky sank back in her chair and for a space stared out at the
peaceful countryside that rose and fell in gentle undulations which
finally faded away into the blue distance.  The forgiving Angora leaped
to her lap and she caressed him absently, her mind centered upon her
thoughts, which were not always as cheerful as they might have been.

So rapt was she in meditation that she was not aware of Bates' presence
until he had stood near her for a full minute.  His house-shoes enabled
him to move on noiseless feet and he had never stooped to that common
subterfuge of butlers, the nervous cough.  He stood patiently, in
silence, and Miss Ocky, when she noticed him at length, was stirred to
remembrance by something in his attitude.  It was just so he had used
to come upon her in the old days when he was wont to bring his
difficulties to her, apparently deriving comfort from her half-mocking,
half-sympathetic comments.

"Well, Bates--you want to speak to me?"

"Yes, Miss Ocky, I do--and I don't."

"I understand perfectly, thanks to my exceptional cleverness and my
vast knowledge of human nature.  What you want to do is blow off
steam--as you used to--but you are not certain that it's quite the
right thing to do.  Isn't that it?"

"Yes, Miss Ocky."

"Well, I can set your doubts at rest.  It isn't right; and now that
we've settled that," added the lady comfortably, "go ahead and blow.
After a long and very virtuous life I'm beginning to think there is
much to be said for crime!  I can guess your secret sorrow, too."

"I'm sure you can, Miss Ocky."  A faint amusement that had lighted his
tired eyes at her philosophy vanished again.  "You've been here two
months or more, and you've seen how it is for yourself."

"Yes--I have.  I tell you candidly, Bates, if I had dreamed how things
were going here I would never have stayed away twenty years.  I was
shocked when I saw my sister--"

"That's it, Miss Ocky, that's it!"  In his eagerness he was oblivious
to his breach of good form in interrupting.  "It's not myself I'm
blowing off steam about.  It's Miss Lucy.  You can guess how I've felt
through these years, watching her change into what she is.  It has hurt
me, Miss Ocky, for when all is said and done, I'm Miss Lucy's man as I
was her father's before her--not Simon Varr's!  You remember what she
was like before you went away--always bright and happy and full of fun
and singing around the house.  We used to call her the Queen of
Fairyland--"

"My memory is excellent, Bates.  You needn't harrow me further."

"And look at her now," continued the old man relentlessly.  "A poor
meek woman that never dares to call her soul her own, faded and
lifeless as the flowers I throw out of the vases, looking twice her
age--"

"I hope she's well out of earshot, Bates."

"And it's all the fault of that man!" said the butler passionately, his
eyes shining with anger and indignation and his usual careful diction
sacrificed to the greater need of plain speech.  "It's him that has
done it with his sneerin' mockin' ways that would bring an angel to
tears--his penny-savin', snivelin' meanness that grudges her every cent
she spends, just as though he'd had a dollar to call his own before she
lifted him out of the gutter where he belongs.  'Twould have been
kinder if he had up in the beginning and struck her over the head and
been done with it instead of wearin' her down to skin and bones by his
naggin' and growlin' and snarlin'.  And how do you think I've felt,
Miss Ocky, while I stood by all these years and watched it goin' on
unable to lift a finger to her help?  'Tis only once and again, when he
has her near to tears at the table, that I'm able to drop a plate or
joggle his elbow and him drinkin' coffee the while, and so distract his
attention."

He paused for breath.  Ordinarily Miss Ocky would have been vastly
entertained by this sketch of Simon's attention being distracted, but
she was in no mood for amusement at the moment.  Her eyes were hard,
and if she deliberately kept her comments pitched on a semi-humorous
note, it was more to pacify and soothe the old butler than anything
else.

"I gather you don't care for Mr. Varr," she said.

"Does any one, Miss Ocky?" he retorted more calmly.

"You used a curious expression a moment since," she said, ignoring a
question she deemed purely rhetorical.  "You spoke of yourself as 'Miss
Lucy's man.'  Just what did you mean, Bates?  I know you don't use
words just because you like the sound of them."

"You don't miss anything, do you, Miss Ocky?"

His set face softened as he regarded her with a look almost of
affection.  "No, you were never one to miss anything!  I'll tell you
what I meant, though I've never breathed a word of it even to Miss
Lucy, bless her!"

"There are a lot of things you could tell me," said Miss Ocky, "and I
hope some day you will.  Go ahead with this one, first."

"It dates back.  I could make a long story of it, but I won't.  You
might say it goes back to the time I took service with your father and
mother.  I was in trouble, mortal trouble, when they took me in, Miss
Ocky, and they gave me a home and comfort and--and security.  That last
is a great thing in a hard world, as I guess you know.  The only way I
could repay them was by being a 'good and faithful servant,' as the
Bible puts it, and I had reason to believe that they both came to be
glad of the day they showed kindness to a less fortunate human."

"What was your trouble?" she asked quietly, for this was her first
intimation that his advent to the household had been marked by anything
out of the ordinary.  "My father never mentioned it."

"He wouldn't--and it doesn't belong with what I've started to tell you
now, Miss Ocky."  He glanced at her apologetically.  "I'm telling you
how I know they were glad to have me.  When your mother was dying, Miss
Ocky, she had me called in for a word with her.  She thanked me for the
service I'd given and said she hoped I would always stay with your
father as long as he needed me--'which will be to the day of his
death,' she said.

"The same thing happened when his time came.  I was in and out of his
room a dozen times a day while he was ill, and once he stopped me and
told me a few things he had on his mind.

"'It's a queer thing, Bates,' he said.  'Here I am dying with scarce a
relative to my name, and I'm leaving two daughters to face the world
alone.  They'll have money, but they won't have an older person to help
them over the rough places.'  I could see he was worried.  'Of course,'
he said, 'Miss Lucy is going to marry that young fellow, Varr.  I'm not
so fond of him as she is, though I've nothing against him that would
stop the match.  It's her I'm thinking about.  She will have this house
when I'm gone and she is married--and I want her to have you.'  Well,
Miss Ocky, to tell you the truth I started to say something about
hoping that _you_ would set up housekeeping and find a place for me,
but he wouldn't listen to me for a minute.  You know how quick he was.
'I'm competent to judge my own children!' he snapped at me.  'Ocky can
stand on her own two legs as long as she has 'em and will get along
nicely on crutches after that.  It's Lucy that may need help.'  He
looked at me very sharp--you have his eyes, Miss Ocky.  'I'm a dying
man and this is the last thing I'll ever ask of you,' he said.  'I
don't pretend that you owe me anything, but I'll ask you as a favor to
promise me you'll always stand by Miss Lucy.'

"There couldn't be two answers to that.  I promised."

"And you've kept your promise faithfully.  You've stood by."

"That's all I have done, though," grumbled the old servant morosely.
His troubled gaze sought hers.  "I've just--stood by."

"Well, you couldn't very well do more.  I think it is greatly to your
credit that you didn't leave the house long ago."

"I've been tempted often enough, Miss Ocky, but there's been the
thought in the back of my head that some day I might really be able to
help Miss Lucy in an hour of need."  His hands closed nervously.  "But
for that I'd have left, no fear!  I've stood so much from him that now
I _hate_ him!  Do you know, Miss Ocky," his voice dropped to awed
confession, "when he was so sick of pneumonia awhile back I just hoped
and hoped and hoped our troubles were near an end!"

"It would have been more practical to have left a window open on him,
but I suppose the nurse would have stopped that."  Miss Ocky's voice
was an amused drawl.  "Did you try prayer, Bates?"

"_Prayer_!  Good gracious, no, Miss Ocky!"

"It's effective sometimes."  She seemed to muse.  "Of course, if you
were only practiced in witchcraft you could make a wax image of him and
then stick pins in it until he curled up and died--"

"Good gracious, Miss Ocky, but you've brought back some terrible ideas
from those foreign parts!"  He was smiling, now, to show that he had
caught her mood and understood she was poking fun at him.  The ceremony
of the blowing off of steam was nearly concluded.  "If you ask me, I
don't believe that even witchcraft could hurt Simon Varr.  It was only
the other day I heard him tell Miss Lucy that he'd increased his life
insurance and that the doctor had told him he was good for a
century-mark."

"Humph!"  There was about her the air of one whose hopes have just been
rudely dashed.  Then her face brightened and she added with determined
cheerfulness.  "Never mind, Bates--you'd be amazed if you knew how
often doctors are wrong!"

"I hope you're right, Miss Ocky!"

"Suppose we drop the subject for the time.  If you will look in the
sitting-room you'll find a book on the table called 'The Court of the
Borgias.'  Bring it to me, please.  I think a little quiet reading will
settle my thoughts after our conversation."

He went off smiling to get the volume, and presently returned with it.
He lingered to produce a match for the cigarette she took from a stand
beside her.

"Thank you for listening to me, Miss Ocky."

"And thank you, Bates, for telling me what you did about father.  I am
glad he had confidence in my ability to take care of myself, and that
he wasn't worrying over me when he had so much else to think about."

"I wish Simon Varr was more like him!" said Bates.

She made no reply to that, and he withdrew in his noiseless fashion.
She did not immediately dip into the sedative history of the Borgias,
but remained looking at the corner around which he had vanished with
something akin to speculative interest.  She was pondering the old
man's revelation of his hatred for Varr and the curious glint she had
caught in his eye at dinner the night before.  It would be amusing, she
thought, if Bates instead of handing Simon the carving-knife should
sometime so far forget himself as to slip it between his master's
shoulders.

Amusing was the word she used to herself; perhaps, as the butler had
suggested, she had brought home some terrible ideas from the
East--ideas about Kismet and fatalism and the cheapness of human life
in comparison to human good.  Wrong ideas, from the point of view of
the queer, drab, cramped and hypocritical Occidental mind.

She contemplated the Occidental mind briefly, then dismissed it as a
negligible quantity and settled to her book.

_VI: An Aunt in Need_

It was very nearly dinner-time before Copley Varr came back from his
talk with Sheila Graham.  In deference to a hint from her that the
course of true love could not run smooth that afternoon in the vicinity
of her father, they had taken a long walk over the hills along quiet
country roads where hands could touch unseen by alien eyes.  They were
happy, but rather nervously so, with something of the nervousness of a
young colt about to kick over the traces for the first time and who is
a little uncertain about the consequences.

One bit of their afternoon was devoted to a ramble around the grounds
of a small, vacant house, whose exterior they viewed and discussed from
every possible angle.  It stood in the center of a wooded ten-acre
tract, a long mile by winding road from Simon Varr's house but not a
quarter of that distance from it as a plane flies.  It was situated, in
fact, at the bottom of the very hill on which Simon's home flaunted its
greater magnificence, and it had once formed part of the property until
severed from it by the elder Copley's will.

They tried the front and back door, but finding them quite naturally
locked they made no further effort to effect an entrance.  They
contented themselves with strolling around it once again, admiring its
shingles that were weather-beaten to a silvery gray, enthusing over the
quaintly-gabled windows of its upper story, calling each other's
attention to its palpable solidity of structure.

"A few hundred dollars spent on these grounds!" cried Sheila, her
cheeks flushed, her blue eyes shining.  "Coppie, isn't it a _love_ of a
place?  Did you ever in your life see a nicer?"

Coppie admitted freely that he never had.

It was for reasons directly connected with this desirable country
property that he sought audience of his aunt immediately upon his
return home.  She was not to be found anywhere downstairs, and since
his impatience did not welcome the idea of waiting for a fortuitous
opportunity to chat with her in private, he took the stairs three at a
time and rapped eagerly on the door of her bedroom.

This was presently opened to him by a tall, bony, angular woman of
fifty-odd who regarded him not altogether favorably through
steel-rimmed spectacles.  This was Janet Mackay, whom the
prosaic-minded would have designated a lady's-maid, but who had risen
from that humble position to be no less than Chancellor of State to her
sovereign majesty, Miss Ocky.  The two women had shared the
ups-and-downs, the sunshine and shadow, of that mystic, colorful Orient
through whose extent the restless curiosity of the younger had led them
to and fro.  Out there the line between mistress and servant had
inevitably been supplanted by the bond of companionship; but when they
returned to the more humdrum civilization of the western world, it was
Janet whose dour Scotch rectitude had re-established the distinction.
She took her meals with old Bates at a little table in the butlery,
found her chief relaxation in the one motion-picture house that
Hambleton boasted, and for the rest, "kept herself _to_ herself."

"Hello, Janet!" he greeted her.  "Is my aunt in there?  Ask her if I
can come in and speak to her."

The woman drew aside in the doorway as Miss Ocky answered for herself.

"That you, Copley?  Come in.  I'm out on the veranda.  Janet, you
needn't wait."

Miss Ocky's bedroom, like all the others on the upper floor, had a
small private balcony outside its tall French windows that made a
pleasant place to draw a comfortable chair in the late afternoon or the
cool of the evening.  She was sitting there now and called to him to
bring a chair for himself, but he preferred to lounge against the heavy
wooden rail of the balcony.

"Well, Romeo!  I expect affairs have been marching with you and Juliet
or you wouldn't be hunting me up so promptly."

"See here, Aunt Ocky, I'm just tickled pink and all that, but are you
sure you ought to have done it?"

"Suggested the elopement?"

"N-no, of course not.  That's all right.  That's lovely.  We are going
to take your advice and grab our happiness.  What I'm fussing about is
the house business."

"Yes, you'd find something to fuss about, wouldn't you!   I didn't
encounter any such obstinacy in Sheila, but women are much more
practical than men in every respect.  When I told her I owned that
particular property and proposed to settle it on you jointly as a
wedding-gift, she yelped with joy.  It's true that after that she began
to make polite gestures of remonstrance, but the yelp came first by a
good, wide margin!  I'm glad one of you has some common-sense."

"I'm just as grateful as I can be, but--"

"Really, Copley, you're a downright nuisance.  Let me tell you
something, my child.  I've a great deal more money than your mother or
you or any one else around here has any idea of.  I've made investments
in my time that would have turned a banker's hair gray, and never one
of them but brought me huge returns.  That property is of negligible
value to me--how negligible you don't know--and yet it will be very
valuable to you and Sheila as a haven of security that you can call
your own.  As a rich aunt, I have every legal and moral and ethical
right to give it to you--and as a poor but deserving nephew, it is your
cue to say 'Thank you' and accept."

"You're a brick, Aunt Ocky," said the young man soberly, for the second
time that afternoon.  "Sheila spoke of a check for a thousand--"

"For your honeymoon.  If you don't splurge too hard, there'll be some
of it left for initial expenses."

"You bet there will."  He drew a long breath.  "Thank you, Aunt Ocky,"
he said obediently.  "I accept.  But, look here--there'll be a holy row
when my father hears what you've done.  He'll want your head on a
charger!"

"Better men than he have wanted that--and it's still neatly articulated
to the end of my spinal column!"  She gave a low, reminiscent chuckle.
"There was a Chinese general, once, whom it was my privilege to annoy,
and he went so far as to put quite a flattering price on it.  He lost
his own!  Shall I tell you the story?"

He eagerly assented, and the gory narrative of the unlucky Chinese
head-hunter occupied them until dinner was announced.

It was scarcely to be wondered at that Copley was exuberantly cheerful
during the meal.  His aunt might really have succeeded in her wish to
graft a bit of her nerve on to his backbone, for he felt a new sense of
self-reliance and resolution.  Once married to Sheila, and with the
immediate future provided for by the generosity of Miss Ocky, he had no
doubt of his ability to pluck a pearl necklace from the world that was
his oyster!  He knew quite a bit about the tanning business, a
knowledge acquired casually during summer vacations, and he also
knew--from Sheila--something of Graham's disappointed ambitions in
respect to a partnership, if his prospective father-in-law elected to
seek his fortune in another field, there was no reason why he shouldn't
hitch his wagon to Graham's star as Graham had once hitched his to
Varr's.  The golden sun of finance was rising in the East for him, and
he and Sheila, hand in hand, would walk into the dawn--

So ran his thoughts, and between them he kept up a flow of badinage
with Ocky, rallied his quiet mother into some show of life, and even
directed a few flippancies at the glum figure which graced the head of
the table.  The tanner was taciturn, abstracted, and the only show of
emotion registered by his wooden countenance was a flash of uneasiness
when Copley made some casual reference to Leslie Sherwood.  Miss Ocky
did not miss that, and again she wondered what lay behind.

His son's airiness of manner distinctly jarred on Simon.  A young man
just bereft of his allowance and under orders to renounce his lady-love
had no right to act like that.  It wasn't natural--or else he had
something up his youthful sleeve.  Humph.  That might bear looking into!

"What are you going to do this evening, Copley?" he demanded, as he
returned the quill toothpick to his pocket and rose from table.

"Nothing special, sir.  Read a while and turn in early."

"I'm going to be busy with some work for an hour or so.  I wish you
would come to my study at nine.  Want to talk to you."

Copley's heart sank as he nodded acquiescence.  Then it rose again, for
his eyes had strayed across to Miss Ocky and the sight of his powerful
ally braced his courage--just as Simon, the day before, had gained
fresh confidence from the glimpse of a cabbage.  Nothing could harm him
while Aunt Ocky held up his arm!

Punctually at nine o'clock he passed through the living-room on his way
to the appointment, and paused for a word with Ocky, who was reading by
the lamp in the center of the room.  She had checked him with a gesture.

"What does he want to see you about?"

"I don't know.  Just a snappy laying down of the laws of the Medes and
the Persians, I expect."

"Well, don't quarrel with him!"

"You mean--he's my father, after all?  Right.  It takes two to make a
quarrel anyway."

"The most ridiculous aphorism ever coined!  I've made lots of them
myself, single-handed.  And it was policy, not filial respect, that
dictated my caution.  If you quarrel, you'll lose your temper; if you
lose your temper, you may let something slip that will reveal your
plans."

"Yours is the sapience of the serpent!  But what could he do if he did
know the truth?  We're both of age."

"Just the same, it's a good generalship to avoid risks.  I have learned
to leave little to chance."

"Aunt Ocky, will you come and live with us when we are really settled?
I've an idea I could profit a lot if I sat at your knees for a while!"

"I wish I could accept your invitation," Miss Ocky answered gravely.
Her eyes left his face and seemed to shield her thoughts behind a film
of blankness.  "I'm afraid I have other--plans," she added quietly.
"It's after nine--don't get the habit of unpunctuality."

He knocked on the study door at the end of the room, and closed it
after him when he had entered in response to a gruff command.

For some little time Miss Ocky tried to center her thoughts on her
book, lifting her head to listen now and again as she paused in her
reading to cut pages with her two-edged souvenir of Teheran.  The
conversation in the study appeared to be flowing along smoothly.  She
could not catch any words, nor did she try to; a shrewd listener can
glean a good deal merely by interpreting the vocal tones of the
different speakers.  Her ear told her that Simon was certainly laying
down the law but with no more than his usual acidity, and that his son
was pleading his cause patiently and without acrimony.  It was natural
enough that he should hope up to the eleventh hour for a favorable
change in his father's attitude, a foolish hope but a pardonable one--

Abruptly, Miss Ocky's ear cocked itself to a more alert angle.  The
voices in the study had suddenly altered.  Simon had said something in
his usual dictatorial accents, and Copley, instead of the soft answer
that turneth away wrath, had snapped a crisp rejoinder in louder tones
than any he had yet used.  For a minute the two men were speaking at
once, discharging verbal salvos at point-blank range.  Miss Ocky
shrugged her shoulders and smiled rather scornfully to herself.  She
was not surprised.  Lucy had told her of Copley's youthful flashes of
temper, which still persisted, though he had learned in some measure to
control them.

She was trying to guess the probable outcome of the battle of words
when her thoughts were interrupted from another quarter.  The bell of
the front door had rung violently, and Bates hurried from the pantry
and along the hallway to answer it.  Miss Ocky wondered who in the
world could be calling at such an hour.

She knew in a moment.  There was the briefest of parleys with the
butler, and then, through the door of the living-room, she saw two men
hurry rearward through the hall in the direction of the study.
Evidently they proposed to present themselves before Varr without the
formality of announcing themselves through Bates.

The first of the two she recognized instantly--it was Graham, the
manager of the tannery, whom she had met several times.  And he was
Sheila's father!  An awkward occasion for him to appear!  The second
man she did not know at all.  He was smaller and slighter than Graham,
a pale, anaemic creature.  He lagged behind his companion, and as the
latter kept a grip on his arm as they proceeded, he gave the effect of
a lamb going reluctantly to the sacrifice.

Graham's face had been deeply flushed--so much she had had time to note
as he swept past the open door.  She heard him knock at the study--from
sheer force of habit, no doubt, as he could not have waited for a
summons to enter before flinging back the door.  His voice carried
clear to Miss Ocky's ear as he swiftly took up some remark he had
caught from within.

"That will do, young man!  I can fight my own battles with no help from
you--!"

Obviously, events were marching to a proper row.  Miss Ocky had no
objection to rows when she could participate in them, but to sit by and
listen to others enjoying themselves was merely boresome.  She put her
book on the table, marking her place with the Persian dagger, rose and
left the room.  The angry voices from the study followed her upstairs
as she sought the quiet of her own room.

Here she found Janet Mackay, seated in a corner with a dozen new
handkerchiefs of linen that she was adorning with exquisitely
embroidered initials.  She looked up, but continued her work without
speaking.

"Hello, Janet.  Why aren't you at the movies this evening?"

"They're showing a gripping picture of purple passion," replied Miss
Mackay succinctly.  She snipped a thread, deftly inserted fresh thread
in her needle and added casually, "It's a small world."

This was a sample of Janet's cautious, crab-like approach to some topic
of interest.  Miss Ocky recognized it and soon had encouraged her to
persevere.

"A great thought, Janet, but scarcely a new one.  What brought it to
your mind?"

"A piece of news that Bates was telling me over our supper.  He got it
this afternoon from the postman.  Did ye know that old Simon's kitchen
garden had been looted the other night?"

"No."

"It was.  The fellow took a few tomatoes and did a wee bit damage with
his big feet.  Old Simon found out who it was, and he had him arrested."

"Humph.  He would.  The man was probably hungry, poor devil."

"Aye; so they're saying in the town.  No matter.  Old Simon appeared
against him this morning in court and they sent him to the lock-up for
thirty days."

"Ninety meals!  It might be worse.  Who was it?"

"A young fellow named Charlie Maxon."

"Charlie Maxon!  Well, he'll be no loss to the community for a month!"

"Aye?"  Janet looked up sharply from her work.  "Ye know him?"

"He's one of the leaders of the strike.  I've spoken with him once or
twice.  A bad egg, I should think."

"Aye, and his parents before him," said Janet Mackay.  "They used to
live around the corner from me in Aberdeen.  I can remember Charlie as
a bairn, and even then he was always into mischief.  He's no whit
better now."

"And he turns up again in this little out-of-the-way place in America!
I see now why you say the world's a small one.  Queer, but it's the way
things sometimes happen.  Are you sure it's the same?"

"Aye.  Three times I've seen him in town and thought his face familiar,
he looks so like his father.  When Bates spoke his name, I knew."

"Well, I take it you won't remind him of the old times in bonnie
Scotland!"

"No fear!" said the older woman promptly.  Then she looked keenly at
her mistress.  "Aren't ye up early to-night?"

"Simon is having a row with Copley in the study."  Miss Ocky shrugged
her shoulders and made a grimace.  "I didn't care to listen any longer."

"He's having a row with the boy, is he?"  Janet regarded her work
critically and bit off a thread neatly.  "The old deevil!  I'm glad I
have been with you all this time, Miss Ocky, and not around that 'un!
I've heard a few things about him from Bates."  She threaded another
needle with deft fingers.  "He's a rare curmudgeon.  D'ye suppose he'll
go on like this to the end of his days?"

"Can you teach an old dog new tricks?" asked Miss Ocky contemptuously.
"You should know better at your age, Janet."  She got up and strolled
out on the balcony to see the brilliant stars in a sky of velvet
blackness.  "Quarter past ten already.  I shan't need you for anything
to-night.  If you insist on ruining your eyes with that work any
longer, go off to your own room and let me get to bed!"




_VII: Out of the Past_

When the curtain rose on the scene of that interview between the tanner
and his son, Simon was discovered at his desk laboriously making
entries in his small, cramped handwriting in the red notebook that held
so many of his secrets.  He did not look up until he had completed the
memorandum which engaged him; when he swung his chair around he still
held the closed book in his hand and occasionally pounded his knee with
it when he wished to emphasize some point in the ensuing conversation.

He had his notions of good generalship no less than his shrewd
sister-in-law, and he did not make the mistake of pitching his
prefatory remarks on a note of hostility.  He was fishing for
information.  He hoped to get a clue to the reason for Copley's sudden
elevation of spirit, if a reason really existed.

"I was a little pressed for ready money at the beginning of the month
and did not see my way to making the usual deposit to your account," he
began, utterly indifferent, so he were not caught, that he was being
deliberately untruthful.  "Hope it didn't embarrass you.  Things are
easier, now, and I will attend to the matter to-morrow morning."

"Why--why, thank you, sir!"  This was so unexpected that the young man
was as bewildered as if a mine had exploded at his feet.  "That is very
good of you.  I had no idea you were--were strapped."  He flushed.  "As
a matter of fact, I thought--I thought--"

"Go on.  What did you think?"

"Well, sir, I thought you were just giving me a reminder of my absolute
dependence on you.  I've been a pretty useless animal, I know."

"Why the past tense?  Are you a useful animal now?"

"N-no, sir.  I guess it would be exaggerating the facts if I claimed
that!  But my intentions are good."  Simon's lips lifted.  "I want to
get busy at something useful right away."

"Humph.  You're just out of college and the general idea has been that
you would take a post-graduate course in the Columbia Law School; that
is your mother's wish.  The tannery, if I may so express it, has always
been a stench in her nostrils.  She is not the first woman to quarrel
with the honest source of her bread-and-butter."  He stared at his son
from beneath level brows.  "Well?  Have plans changed?"

"I want to make money, sir, and it would be years before I could hope
to do that at the Bar."

"I will undertake to continue your allowance until you have established
yourself."

"Thank you, father, but it's not the same thing.  I want to stand on my
own feet--and as soon as possible."

"Why?"

"Because I wish--I intend--to marry Sheila Graham."

"You shan't do it!"

It was the drop of the handkerchief; steel rang upon steel, and no
buttons tipped their foils.  It was careful fencing at first, thrust
and parry, parry and thrust, until Simon lost patience at length and
put all his viciousness into one deadly lunge.

"Now, see here, Copley!  If you persist in disregarding my wishes let
me tell you what will happen; I will throw Billy Graham out of his job
and I'll use every scrap of influence I possess to keep him from
getting another!  Put that in your pipe and smoke it!"  The notebook
slapped on his knee.  "Ruin your own prospects if you're fool enough to
do it; ruin Sheila's, if she's fool enough to let you; but _stop
there_!  Maybe she'll help you to stop when she knows that your
stubbornness and hers will be a knife in her father's back!  She _will_
know, too, for you can't go ahead in common decency without telling her
what it will mean to him!"  The tanner leaned forward, an ugly light of
triumph in his eyes, raised his free hand and slowly clenched his fist.
"I've got--you--right--_there_!"

"Father!"  The bitterest shame in the world, the shame of a son for his
father, was in that cry.  The young man rose from his chair and stood
looking at Simon Varr almost incredulously.  "You couldn't do _that_!
You couldn't do anything so contemptible!  Do what you please to me,
but take back that threat before I--I despise you!"

"Despise me?  _You_!  Ha!  I'll take back nothing, and I'll use my
advantage to its full extent.  Mark that!  I've said you shan't marry
Sheila Graham--and what I say _goes_!"

"Not any longer with me!" flared his son at white heat.  For a full
minute they indulged in a furious exchange of half-incoherent insults
before Copley's voice rose clear above his father's.  "I will marry
Sheila as soon as she'll have me, and I warn you to keep your hands off
Graham!"

It was then that the study door was flung open and a thick, heavy voice
cut through their abusive volleys.

"That will do, young man!  I can fight my own battles with no help from
you!"

Graham came into the study, dragging with him the shrinking figure of
the clerk, Langhorn.  His intrusion was startling enough, but there was
still a deeper significance in the slight lurch that the manager gave
as he halted, glowering, before Simon Varr.  His flushed face and
blurred utterance contributed their testimony to a fact that was
ominous in itself; he had been drinking, drinking heavily, though he
was notably abstemious by habit.  Varr got hastily to his feet, so
threatening was his manager's attitude.

"What do you want here?" he demanded curtly, though he knew well enough
what Langhorn's presence betokened.  "What do you mean by bursting in
like that?  Are you drunk?"

Possibly the crisp question went far to sober Graham, who was plainly
trying to shake off the effect of his potations as if the sense of the
undignified figure he was cutting was just beginning to filter into his
confused brain.  He straightened up, steadied himself.

"I want a talk with you, Mr. Varr.  It's overdue, I think.  I've been
waiting for you to make a move in a certain direction, and it seems
I've been fooling myself nicely."  He spoke slowly.  "More than a score
of years I've worked for you, Mr. Varr, and not you nor any man can say
I haven't done well by you and the business.  I'm entitled to something
more than the salary of a hired hand--Mr. Bolt agrees with me
there--and I've been hoping that you would give me some chance to
invest my savings in a business I've grown up with.  I've earned the
right--"

"Stop pinning medals on yourself and come to the point!"

"I've been wondering if maybe you didn't understand how I felt and if I
oughtn't to speak straight out, but yesterday afternoon this man,
Langhorn, told me he had heard you and Mr. Bolt discussing me.  He told
me you said you would never give me a partnership, that--that you were
going to throw me out so I would go to Rochester, taking Sheila with
me!  It--it nearly knocked me off my feet, Mr. Varr; it's no wonder I
took a drink or so too much this evening.  Now I've brought this man
here so you can say if he told me the truth--or so you can call him a
liar to his face."

"You needn't have gone to that trouble!" snarled Simon, purple with
rage.  "He's a sneaking hound, but he told you the truth this time, and
I'd have told you all you wanted to know without your bringing him
along!"

"Then--it's true?  You're going to let me out after all these years?"

"Yes!"  The word was fairly shouted.  From temper and sheer
exasperation, Simon was in a towering passion.  He flung the notebook
he was holding onto his desk, raised both hands above his head and
shook them in a frenzy at the two men.  "_Yes_!  And you can start
going by getting out of here, now, and taking your eavesdropping pal
with you!  Get out--and don't either of you ever come back!"

Langhorn wriggled free and stepped out into the hall.  Graham did not
leave without a parting shot--directed via Copley, who had been a
silent witness of the scene.

"This is your fault more than any one else's," he said, "but I know you
didn't mean it."  He glanced expressively at Varr and back again.  "I
hope you're proud of your father!" he added dryly, and followed the
departing clerk from the house.

There was a brief silence in the study for a moment or two after the
thud of the closing front door came to their ears.  Then Copley made to
leave the room, unchecked by his father, who stood watching him in
sullen mood.  The young man paused on the threshold and turned to face
his father.

"So," he said evenly, "you were threatening me with a course of action
that you had already determined on!  Isn't that so?"

A wave of color suffused Varr's face and answered him.

"Come back here!" snapped Simon.  "I've not finished with you!"

"Yes, you have, father," said Copley.  "Just that!"

White to his lips, he turned and left the room.  Varr listened to his
retreating steps and to a second closing of the front door as he went
out of the house into the dark night.

Alone, Varr sank into the chair before his desk and tried to take stock
of his position.  For once, it seemed, he had not only failed to have
his own way but had definitely come out at the short end of the horn.
It would be difficult to replace Graham--he could admit that to
himself.  It would be impossible to replace Copley--!  He did not try
to deceive himself with false hopes in that connection; there had been
a finality in his son's last utterance that rang true.

What curse had come upon him?  What malign fate had led Graham there
that evening at the very moment when he could least afford to have his
trickery revealed to his son?  Why was everything going wrong?

The solace of tobacco was denied him, since he did not smoke.  His
shaken nerves cried for some attention, and the faint odor of whisky
that still lingered in the room recalled him to Graham's resource.  He
stepped to the door and called Bates, who came from the rear of the
house.

"Fetch me a glass, and that decanter of Bourbon."

The butler returned in a minute with a tray.  He placed it on a small
table near the desk and looked inquiringly at Simon.

"Will you wish anything else, sir?"

"No.  Go to bed."

"Thank you, sir.  Everything is closed but the front door.  Mr. Copley
is still out.  Good night, sir."

Varr poured himself a stiff three fingers and tossed it off at a gulp,
making a wry face as the fiery liquor stung his unaccustomed throat.
Otherwise the effect was excellent.  He decanted another large drink
and was about to take a sip of it when his eyes, above the glass,
chanced to rest on a piece of brown paper in a pigeonhole of his desk.

Abruptly, he put down his drink, drew the paper out, and read the last
lines of the message so curiously received.


"_Take heed to thy ways and mend them, lest thou be destroyed by the
thunderbolts of wrath!_"


Bah!  He flung the paper back into its hole, yet continued to eye it
with a feeling of uneasiness that required another swallow of whisky to
allay.  Ah--that was better!  He took a second, and new life and
courage flowed into him with the liquor.

He threw back his head and squared his shoulders defiantly.  Blast
them--blast them one and all, root and branch!  Graham--Copley--this
lunatic Monk--!  Threaten _him_, would they?  Let 'em look out for
themselves--_he'd_ show 'em!

He raised his clenched fist preparatory to bringing it down with a
crash upon the desk.  It did not fall; it stayed aloft while a sudden
fear leaped into his eyes.  He bent forward, his head turned sideways,
his ears straining to catch a sound that had come to them from a
distance.

A siren was blowing--the siren whose raucous wail gave warning to the
people of Hambleton when fire threatened their homes.  Tensely, Simon
counted the long blasts.  One--two--three!  A short pause.
One--two--three!

Thirty-three!  _The tannery_!

He sprang erect.  Instinct born of habit impelled him to slam down the
roll-top cover of his desk before he rushed from the room and down the
hall.  He snatched his soft hat from a rack as he reached with his
other hand for the heavy latch of the front door.

Two minutes later he was guiding his light car down the curving
hillside road, driving fast but carefully.  He made such good time that
he arrived at the scene of the fire several minutes before the local
Fire Department had assembled its hats, its equipment and itself, and
had gotten its apparatus to the field of action.

A small mob of men, women and delighted children was gathered in the
open space before the office building and the gate.  They were milling
about in excited groups, eager enough to lend a hand but hopelessly
confused without the guidance of a leader.  Varr thrust through them
impatiently, opened the door--that the watchman had thoughtfully left
unbarred--and hurried through the building to the rear premises.

A column of black smoke shot with leaping crimson flames told him where
to direct his swift steps.  The fire, evidently, was confined for the
moment to one, or possibly two, of the small outbuildings.  These were
used largely for storage purposes; they were crammed full of packing
cases, extra carboys of acids and loose heaps of bark--a raft of stuff
that was highly combustible.  A glance told Simon that they were doomed.

Through a haze of greasy smoke he glimpsed an active figure--the only
human being in sight except himself--and he hastened to its side.  It
was Fay, the night-watchman, a powerful, stocky man who clearly did not
share the tanner's pessimistic conviction.  He had ransacked the
premises for every hand fire-extinguisher he could find, had brought
them to the burning buildings and, with fine optimism, was now spraying
their contents on the edges of the blaze.

"Stop wasting that stuff!" commanded Varr.  "Nothing to be done here!
All we can do is try to save the rest of the outfit."

The watchman withdrew, reluctantly at first but then with a succession
of leaps and bounds as a muffled explosion from the interior of the
building marked the passing of some overheated container.  He halted at
a safe distance, wiping his smoke-grimed face, until Varr rejoined him.
A faint cheer from beyond the boundary fence carried to them over the
roar of the blaze.

"Guess that's the Fire Department," grunted Fay.  "About time they
turned up!"

"There's oil in that fire!" snapped the tanner, gazing at the black
smoke.  "Where'd it come from?"

"Two five-gallon tins of it, brought from D building, spilled on the
floor and a match chucked into it.  I seen them lying on their side in
there at the start of it."

"Humph.  Brought from D building, eh?  Then there's no doubt of _this_
being the work of an incendiary!"

"Doubt?  Huh!  I'll tell the world there ain't no doubt!  I seen the
feller that did it!"

"Ah!  Could you recognize him?  Who was it?  Why in thunder didn't you
grab him?  Where'd he get to?"

Before Fay could even begin to sort out these questions and try to
answer the easier ones, their quick conversation was interrupted by the
appearance of a resplendent figure at their elbows.  A short, stout man
was Gus Wimpelheimer, grocer and butcher by profession and in his
lighter moments Chief of the Hambleton Fire Department.  His round
little body was now quivering with pleased excitement.

"Evening, gentlemen!" he greeted them politely.  He glanced at the fire
and wrinkled an expert nose.  "Kerosene!" he pronounced.

"The thought had occurred to us," retorted Simon.  Marshal Wimpelheimer
trotted briskly toward the fire for a better view, and trotted briskly
back again as another carboy let go.

"Bad business," he reported cheerfully.  "Nasty wind springing up," he
added happily.  "Blowing straight for the other buildings, too!" He put
a little whistle to his lips and its squeaky notes brought two
satellites of the main luminary.  "Hustle out those chemicals and get
'em to work on the blaze.  Rout out all the buckets you can find, and
send for more.  Call on that crowd out there for volunteers and get a
chain started from the stream to these other buildings.  Douse
'em--douse 'em _good_!  Don't stop till I tell you to.  Fay!  You'll
know where there are any ladders; fetch them out!"

"Yes, Chief!" came the admiring chorus, and the men sprang off to
execute his orders.  He rubbed his hands together with satisfaction and
turned brightly to the tanner.

"Don't you worry, Mr. Varr," he said indulgently.  "We'll handle this
little affair for you!"

Worry was not exactly Varr's predominant emotion.  There was small
reason to fear that the remainder of the buildings would not be kept
intact, and there was ample insurance on the property, including
contents.  The blaze could cause him inconvenience when business was
resumed, that was all.

The real significance of the affair lay in the fact that the fire had
been of incendiary origin.  His face was stormy as he contemplated that
angle of the situation.  Who was his enemy?  Who had made this second
determined effort to burn the tannery?  Second, for he could no longer
consider the first an accident in the light of this new attempt.  In
his mind he had always held the thought that Charlie Maxon might have
been the perpetrator of the earlier outrage, but Maxon was now in jail
and could not be guilty of this.  Had he a confederate?  Was this fire
a token of resentment on the part of his friends for the way he had
been treated?

He fumed with angry impotence.  How would he fight this unseen, unknown
foe?  He could take his suspicions to Steiner--but what could that
futile fellow do?  He would fiddle around and scratch his head and
mumble inanities!  Varr gritted his teeth in helpless rage as he
watched the men fighting their slow but certain battle to victory over
the flames.

The crowd outside the premises speedily discovered that this drama was
hidden from them by the high fence, and they were forbidden to pass the
guard stationed at the office door by the ubiquitous Wimpelheimer.  The
nimbler-witted among them reflected that they might obtain a good view
of the proceedings from the rising ground to the left of the tannery,
and they drifted there by twos and threes until quite a respectable
number of people were sprinkled over the field through which the
shortcut ran to Simon's house.  From this vantage point they could look
down into the tannery and watch the performance to their hearts'
content.

A little to one side of the crowd stood a woman alone, her gaze turned
steadily on the burning buildings.  Several passers-by spoke to her by
name, and she answered them mechanically without turning her head.
Finally, one of these greetings was overheard by a man who was standing
a few yards distant; he turned sharply to look at the woman addressed,
then approached her rather hesitatingly.  He took off his hat and bowed.

"I beg pardon," he said pleasantly.  "Is this Miss Copley?"

"Yes."  Miss Ocky peered at him through the dark, then gave a little
exclamation.  "Leslie Sherwood!"

"Correct.  How are you, Ocky?  It seems like a lifetime since I last
saw you."

"Twenty-odd years.  I heard you were back for the first time since
you--since you left the parent nest!"

"Yes," answered Sherwood quietly.  Then he added casually--too casually
to be convincing to her sharp intuitions--"How is Lucy?"

"She is--oh, pretty well."

"Er--happy, and all that sort of thing?"

"As happy as she could expect to be.  She married Simon Varr, you know."

"Yes--I know."  He disregarded her sarcastic implication.  "I hear
you've been back only a short time yourself.  Staying at Lucy's?"

"Staying at Simon's!" corrected Miss Ocky grimly.  "I suppose you know
that's his beloved tannery a-fire down there?"

"So they tell me.  I saw the flames from my house and thought I'd
stroll down for the show."

"I was just turning in myself when I heard the siren," said Miss Ocky.
"Rather pretty effect, don't you think?"

"Beautiful," agreed Sherwood.  He surveyed the scene of the fire
critically.  "Beautiful--only I'm afraid they are going to save most of
the buildings."

"Eh?  What's that?" cried Miss Ocky sharply.  Then she gave a chuckle.
"Did you say 'afraid'?"

"Are you a friend of Simon's?"

"I detest the creature," she answered promptly.  "And you?"

"It would afford me great pleasure," stated Sherwood calmly, "if that
were Simon's funeral pyre."

Miss Ocky pursed her lips in a soft, almost inaudible whistle.  She was
thinking back to the expression on her brother-in-law's face when this
man's name was mentioned.  Simon had been afraid!  And here was Leslie
Sherwood expressing, not fear, but--but what?

"Any one would think you hated the poor man," she suggested at length.

"That," said Mr. Sherwood, "exactly expresses my feeling toward him."

"But--but, Leslie--"  Miss Ocky was groping for the truth back of all
this--"I don't understand!  Why do you hate a man you haven't even seen
for over twenty years?"

"Some hates have very lasting qualities, Ocky.  They endure for ever
and a day."

"Then--whatever it was--happened before you left here?"

"Yes.  Simon came between me and something that I wanted--and did it in
a way that made a mortal enemy of me.  Sounds theatrical, doesn't it?
But it's true.  He contrived at the same time to cause the trouble
between me and my father that has kept me from returning to Hambleton
until now, when the old gentleman has ended with worldly cares."

"I wish you'd tell me the whole story in words of one syllable," begged
Miss Ocky.  "It's not that I'm just curious.  I'm trying to learn all
that I can about Simon.  He interests me as a--as a specimen."

"I would hardly have told you as much if I weren't willing to tell you
all.  I'm puzzling over a problem that might be simplified by a woman's
wit.  We can't talk here, though.  Too public."

"Suppose you escort me home.  I've a torch, and I'm going up this
short-cut.  We can chat on the way."  She glanced downhill.  "This
excitement is about over; shall we start?"

"Whenever you please."

They were turning away side-by-side when a fitful gust of wind swept up
to them from the direction of the sinking flames.  There is only one
thing more malodorous than a tannery, and that is a burning tannery.
Miss Ocky choked.

"Pwhew!" she gasped.  "It smells like--like--"

"Like the soul of Simon Varr," supplied Sherwood promptly.




_VIII: Two Victims of Theft_

Varr remained at the tannery until the last dying ember had been
extinguished.  Not till then did Marshal August Wimpelheimer come gayly
up to him, his regalia a trifle the worse for wear and his breath
coming a little short from his exertions but his expression that of one
who has been hugely enjoying himself.  He saluted with a flourish.

"All over, Mr. Varr!  I told you we'd handle it.  I'm sorry we couldn't
save those first two buildings, but they had too much of a start.  Full
of that inflammable stuff and with a breeze like this blowing sparks as
big as my helmet"--the article of attire referred to was nearly as
large as himself--"We were lucky to get control--"

"Have you seen anything of Fay about?"

"Your watchman?  Yes, sir, he was in the thick of everything!  I'd like
to add him to my Department.  But the boys all did
splendidly--smoke-eaters, Mr. Varr, every mother's son of 'em!  I hope
you noticed, sir, that when it came to volunteers for the bucket-gang a
lot of your workmen stepped up.  They forgot about the strike and
pitched in with both hands!  It shows there's a heap of good in human
nature."

"It shows they know which side their bread is buttered!" grunted the
tanner.  "How would they get their jobs back if they let the whole
outfit burn?  Eh?"

The Fire Marshal flushed, but the grocer bit back the words that
trembled on his lips.  Little Wimpy had gallantry to spare when it came
to facing fire, which is a clean foe and a clean fighter, but his
courage stopped there.  Varr owned his store, Varr held a chattel
mortgage on his fixtures--and there were the little Wimpies to be
thought of!

"Good night, sir!" he said, and went sadly home.

Simon Varr joined the stragglers who were leaving by way of the hall
through the office building, but he did not go with them as far as the
exit.  He ascended the creaky stairs, went into his office and snapped
on the electric light.  He had seen nothing of Fay, but he confidently
expected the watchman to seek him out as soon as possible.

In this he was not disappointed.  The man had only paused to remove
some of the traces of his activities before presenting himself for
Simon's inquisition.

"Well, Fay, what can you tell me about this?  Where were you when you
discovered the fire?"

"I was making my second round at twenty-five minutes to eleven.  You'll
remember, sir, you left orders that I should make another trip about
the premises five minutes after my regular round, which was ten-thirty
in this case.  That was a good idea, sir, if you'll let me say so; it
certainly led to my seeing the fire right after it started."

"That scoundrelly fire bug was watching you, depend on that!"

"Yes, sir; there's dozens of places he could keep a look-out from, once
he got inside.  Soon as he saw me finish one round and go out front, he
commenced his dirty work."

"You say you caught a glimpse of him?"

"A poor one, sir.  I was just quietly passing one of those storage
buildings when I saw a flicker of light beneath the doorsill.  It was
too soon to hear the crackle of burning wood or smell any smoke, but I
knew what was up.  I pushed open the door.  That was when I saw the two
oil-tins lying on their sides and the whole floor flooded with the
stuff.  There was smoke enough, then, sir!  That's why I could only get
a poor look through it at the feller."

"He was in the building when you saw him?"

"Yes, sir--and out of it again like a deer, by the door at the other
end, as soon as he saw me.  I couldn't run through the flames, and by
the time I'd jumped back and cut around the building, he was lost in
the darkness.  I swept my torch this way and that, but never a sign of
him.  I heard him, though," he added significantly.

"Yes?  Where?"

"He stumbled over something near the left-hand corner of the yard where
the fence runs down to the brook.  That tells us what we didn't know
before, sir.  He doesn't come over the fence, nor under it; he either
wades the brook around the end of it, or else scrambles around by way
of the bank.  Unless I'm all wrong, sir, we'll find his footprints
there in the morning."

"We'll find them there now," Varr corrected him curtly.  "You have your
torch?  Come along, then."

He extinguished the light in the office and led the way downstairs and
out into the yard.  They passed the smoking ruins of the two destroyed
buildings and came in a few seconds to the spot described by Fay.  Varr
took the torch from him and played its beam on the ground near the
juncture of fence and brook.

"You're right!" he exclaimed.  "Here are footprints--and that piece of
wire is what you heard him trip over.  Take a close look at those
prints, Fay, while I hold the light.  Don't muck 'em up with your own
dainty feet!  Anything noticeable about them?"

The conscientious watchman dropped on his hands and knees and seemed to
fairly sniff at the marks like a bloodhound.

"No, sir," he reported regretfully.  "They're just footprints."

Varr corroborated the truth of this when he bent to make his own
examination.  The prints were sharp and distinct, but their very
clearness only added to the general obscurity.  They were large and
clumsy, rude of outline, and had obviously been made by a pair of heavy
shoes such as workmen wear--and they might have been worn by any one of
a million workmen!  Varr grunted his disgust as he sought in vain for
some little mark by which they might be distinguished from two million
like them.

"A big man," was the extent of his deductions.

"Yes, sir, that was what he looked like to me.  I wish I could have
seen his face--though I've a notion he might have been masked."

"_Masked_!"  Varr fell back a step.  "_Masked_?"

"Why--yes, sir.  That wouldn't be so unlikely, considering the errand
he come on!  But I'm not sure--I had just that moment's look at him
through a swirl of smoke."

"Could you tell how he was dressed?"

"He was in black, sir.  I thought so at first, and the way he got out
of sight in the darkness makes it seem likely.  What, sir?"

Varr had muttered an oath.  A figure dressed in black, with a mask!
That was circumstantial enough, the Monk had been busy--launching a
thunderbolt of wrath, presumably!  Simon's lip curled; Ocky's familiar
of the Spanish Inquisition was a pretty scurvy knave if he would stoop
to firebrands by night--!

"Fay," he commanded abruptly.  "Keep a close tongue in your head about
this.  I've my reasons for it.  Don't tell any one of these footprints
until I give you permission.  Understand?"

"Yes, sir," replied the watchman dutifully and dolefully.  He had
rather been looking forward to public kudos and acclaim.  "You'll tell
Steiner, sir, I suppose?"

"Do as I tell you, and leave the rest to me!" Varr returned sharply.
He handed back the borrowed torch, first glancing at his watch by its
light.  "Only half-past one!  I could have sworn I'd been down here the
best part of the night.  Come along!"

They returned to the office building, Varr leaving a few more
directions for increased and unceasing watchfulness as the exhausted
Fay dropped into his chair in the front hall.  Then Simon betook
himself to his car and drove slowly homeward.

His bad temper had largely worn itself out on the various irritations
that had kept it jumping, and in sooth the time had come for anger to
give way to calculation.  There were so many things to be thought of!
Enough to make a man's head spin!

The matter of Copley by itself--!  He did not know yet just what was
back of the boy's angry declaration that his father was "finished" with
him.  Was he planning to leave home?  A nice row there'd be with a
wounded mother!  And Copley--Simon judged others by himself--would be
sure to make the most of his grievance with her over a parental
stratagem that had miscued!

The thought of that nasty few minutes in the study reminded him of
Graham.  Another coil.  Jason Bolt would have some bitter comment on
the wisdom of firing a useful man with no substitute in sight; Jason
had a rough tongue at times for all his good-nature.  That would be
still another quarrel--and he couldn't fire Jason!

And this blasted Monk, with his anonymous letters and talk of
thunderbolts!  He must be taken seriously after this night's work.
True, there was no definite proof to connect him with the fire but it
was too probable a hypothesis to be lightly dismissed.  What had he
better do to cut that fellow's claws?  There was hope, of course, that
he had worked off his spleen in firing the tannery, and also that a
wholesome fear of being caught and convicted of arson might cool his
spirit!   Unless he was mad--!

He left his car in the garage and locked the sliding-door behind him
with a feeling of relief that the balance of the night was likely to
pass without further incident.  As he walked from the garage to the
house, he remembered the decanter and glass still standing on the study
table and welcomed the idea of another bracer before bed.  He had
earned it.

The darkened house, as he approached it, provided him with a new
grievance.  Every one asleep!  What did they care if the tannery went
up in smoke?  More than likely they'd be _glad_!

It was not in him to feel a sense of shame when he presently learned
that his assumption of their indifference was unjustified.  As he let
himself in with his key, a slippered step shuffled from the rear to
greet him.  It was Bates, sleepy but inquisitive.

"The fire's out.  Yes, it was the work of an incendiary.  The actual
damage is immaterial."  Varr's answers were curt.  "Every one asleep, I
suppose?"

"I expect so, sir.  Miss Ocky went down to the fire, but she came home
long ago and told us it was under control.  Miss Lucy came downstairs
and waited until she heard that, then she went to bed.  She wanted you
to wake her when you came in and tell her all that happened."

"Humph.  I'll go up in a few minutes.  And--my son?"

"He's not in, sir.  I haven't seen him all evening."

"Very well.  Go to bed.  Leave the door unlatched."

The old butler wished him good night and padded softly up the front
stairs.  Simon struck a match and went along the darkened hall to his
study, where he struck another and lighted the wall-lamp near his desk.
It was then he noticed something that caused him to fall back a pace
and utter a sharp exclamation.  The roll-top cover had been thrust up
to its fullest extent--and the same glance showed him that his
red-leather notebook, which he distinctly remembered tossing on to the
desk, was gone!  With a cry of pure rage, he darted to the door of the
study.

"Bates!" he shouted.  "Bates!  Come down here!  At once!"

The butler heard, and hurried to obey the urgency in Simon's voice.  He
found the tanner standing before his desk and examining its rather
inadequate lock.

"We've been burgled," announced the victim grimly.  "It just needed
that to round the night off nicely."

"Burgled!  Robbed!  Surely not, sir!"

"Don't talk like an idiot!  Get your torch.  We'd best have a look
around, though there's no doubt the dirty devil got what he came for!
Where were you while--"

"What is it _now_?" interrupted a plaintive and sleepy voice from the
doorway.  "Another fire?"

Varr wheeled toward the speaker and saw Miss Ocky regarding him with
wondering eyes.  She had slipped on a vivid negligee, a trophy from
some Eastern bazaar, and she made a most attractive picture in the
soft, kindly light from the lamp as she stood there looking her inquiry
at one and the other of the two men.  Simon was somehow glad to see
her, for much as he disliked her, he admitted her level-headed
shrewdness and welcomed the help of another brain in coping with a
situation that was rapidly getting beyond him.

"Some one has broken open my desk and taken the notebook in which I
keep memoranda of formulas and experiments," he explained gruffly.  "I
don't miss anything else.  It must have been done within the last few
hours."

"I see.  I thought I detected a note of tragedy in the way you hollered
for Bates just now."  She eyed the butler reflectively as she drew a
silver case from a pocket of the negligee and lighted a cigarette.
"Bates--I see you are still dressed!  Where have you been for the past
few hours?"

"Right in the pantry, Miss Ocky, except when I came out to let you in a
while back.  I heard nothing, nor no one."

She turned, as if to measure distances with her eye.  "Right in the
pantry," she repeated.  "Fifteen yards--and two closed doors--away.
Still, it's queer you heard nothing."

"I was reading a paper, Miss Ocky, and I dozed once or twice."

"Ah.  That probably accounts for it.  Have you found out yet how he got
into the house?"  She moved her shoulders slightly as she put the
question.  "I can feel a draught on the back of my neck, now.
Something is open--in the living-room, perhaps.  Did you lock up as
carefully as usual this evening, Bates?  Things were rather upset!"

"That didn't make any difference, Miss Ocky," he protested eagerly.  "I
had closed everything as usual--I had even started for bed--before the
siren blew and I heard Mr. Varr hurrying out to the garage.  Nothing
was left unlocked."

At the first mention of the living-room, Simon had secured a small
torch from a nearby stand.  Together, they trooped through the door
leading to the parlor, where he flashed the light on the two sets of
tall French windows that gave on to a side veranda.  They exclaimed in
chorus at the sight of one pair ajar.

"That's that," said Miss Ocky.  She took the flash from Simon, opened
the window wide and turned the light on the planking of the piazza.
"Nothing to be seen by this light!" She directed the beam at the
fastenings of the window.  "Huh!  Didn't take much to force this
affair!  Your defenses are pretty flimsy, Simon!"

"You're not in the heart of Asia, Ocky.  We don't go in much for
fortifications in this country."

"Well, I could wish you did.  I don't want to wake up some night and
find a burglar going off with my treasures.  What did you say this one
took--a notebook?"

"Yes."

"What's the idea?  Who wants an old notebook?"

"Exactly what I'm asking myself, Ocky."  Simon sent a sideways look at
the old butler as if reluctant to speak too openly.  "It was full of
important data relative to tanning processes.  Not much of a loss to
me, for I know 'em all by heart--but it might be extremely useful to
any one else in the business or--or to any one who might be expecting
to go into it--"  His voice trailed off as if he were lost in some
thought that had just struck him.  "Humph!" he grunted.

"What is it?" demanded Ocky alertly.

"Nothing--nothing to be discussed now, anyway.  Bates!"

"Sir?"  The butler had just finished lighting the lamp on the center
table and he glanced at Varr with expressionless face.  "Yes, sir?"

"Stop fiddling with that lamp.  There's nothing to be done to-night.
And look here--I don't want this business mentioned to the other
servants or any one else until I have decided just what action I shall
take.  Understand?  Go to bed, then,--and I hope you stay there this
time!"

"One moment, Bates."  Miss Ocky had moved over to the table and was
contemplating it with thoughtful gaze.  "Simon--what sort of an
implement would have forced that desk of yours?  A knife, for instance?"

"Yes, that would have done the trick.  It could have been slipped under
the top near the lock; a slight pressure would have done the rest."

"I like a lock that is a lock," sniffed Miss Ocky.

"A matter of taste, I suppose.  Bates, you know that Persian dagger of
mine I've been using here lately for a paper-cutter?  When did you see
it last?"

"This evening, Miss Ocky."

"Sure?"

"Yes, Miss Ocky.  I was straightening up in here just after you went to
your room the first time, and I knocked the book you had been reading
on to the floor.  When I picked it up, the dagger fell out.  I knew I'd
lost your place and was sorry, but I couldn't do anything to find it
again so I just laid the dagger down beside the book--right here."  He
indicated a perfectly blank spot on the table and looked mystified.

"I came down for the book just before one o'clock--couldn't seem to get
to sleep," explained Miss Ocky musingly.  "The dagger was not here
then--but it didn't occur to me to raise the house about it.  I took it
for granted there was some simple reason for its being gone, and I
didn't stop to look for it, as I was only striking matches to find what
I wanted."  She made a face.  "For all I know, the burglar was right in
this room at that very minute!"

"Pity you didn't run on to him," grunted Simon.  "What are you
suggesting, anyway?"

"I think your burglar came in here and noticed the dagger--he probably
had a flash--and decided it was just what he needed in his business!
He opened the desk with it, and unless he dropped it around somewhere
when he was finished with it, I guess _I've_ been robbed, _too_."

"Huh.  Wasn't valuable, was it?" asked Simon impatiently.

"Well, I don't care about losing it--thanks for your kind and
sympathetic interest!" retorted his sister-in-law tartly.  "Thank you,
Bates, that's all."

"Yes, Miss Ocky."  The old man bowed.  "Good night, sir," he said, for
the third time that night.

"I'll be off, too," said Miss Ocky, moving toward the door, where she
lingered for a parting shot.  "If I were you, Simon, I'd either have my
locks seen to or  else have my more valuable possessions nailed down.
Good morning!"

She was gone before he could think of an effective retort.  He occupied
himself briefly in dragging a heavy chair against the broken window,
then put out the lamp and went into his study.  Bed seemed to make no
appeal, though there was a suggestion of weariness in the way he
dropped into his chair before the desk.  He was mentally tired.

Who had dealt him this latest blow--a shrewder one than he had
confessed to Ocky.  That notebook full of formulas, the results of a
lifetime of experiment and research, would be worth more than a gold
mine to a competitor.  There were men in the business who would pay
handsomely for the picking of Simon Varr's brain!  But who had known
that, and turned his knowledge to advantage by the crooked way of
burglary?

Two names kept bobbing up in the back of his brain.  Copley was one;
Graham the other.  Either might have done it, or they might have
entered into an unholy partnership of crime.  Both knew the value of
the notebook, and both had seen it in his desk that evening.  Where had
they been since?  He had not noticed either of them at the fire; had
they been robbing his desk while they knew him safely absent?

No sentiment played any part in these cogitations.  He measured the
possibility of his son's guilt as coldly as if the young man had been a
complete stranger--or an ex-convict.  Measured it, perhaps,
unconsciously, by his own standards of behavior.  He had done things in
his time that would have made a self-respecting burglar blush.

There was a third possibility.  The Monk.  Simon tried to shake off
that thought.  There was no sense in it.  Queer how anything like that
masquerader's mischief-making could get under a sensible man's
skin--dig its way into his brain until it became an obsession!  Suppose
he _had_ set fire to the tannery--was that any reason to believe he had
proceeded to further activities the same night?  There was not a shred
of proof connecting him with the burglary.

He yielded to the fascination that the scrap of brown paper was
beginning to exercise over him and drew it from the pigeonhole.  He
opened it and let his eye travel over the illiterate text to the threat
at the end that was already known to him by heart: "Take heed to thy
ways and mend them, lest thou be destroyed by the thunderbolts of
wrath!"  Then he started violently in his chair, for he had come upon
the very proof he had thought lacking.

Beneath the last line of the message a few words had been scrawled with
a blunt, blue crayon and then deeply underscored for emphasis.  He
stared at them, his face flushing and paling by turns, his lips
soundlessly shaping the ill-formed characters.

"_Behold, the bolts are loosed!_"




_IX: Simon Seeks Advice_

The discovery that his unknown enemy after first firing the tannery had
then rounded off a perfect evening by burglarizing his house threw
Simon Varr into a state of mental confusion.  Here was a saturnalia of
crime condensed into the space of a few hours.  And the man's audacity
was no less bewildering than his swift efficiency!  Who, in this
hitherto quiet township of Hambleton, had suddenly developed a brand of
vicious courage that nerved him to commit arson and burglary?  Simon
reviewed an imposing procession of possible suspects until his brain
wearied, and his wits, seeking vainly for light, were hopelessly at
fault in a fog of conjecture.

It was nearly three o'clock before he laid an aching head on his
pillow, it was nearly five before sleep came to him, but he was up at
his usual hour and downstairs in his study by eight.  Physically he was
still tired, but the brief spell of slumber had at least rested his
brain and cleared it against the problems of a new day.

However undeserving he might be of sympathy, mere humanity would
suggest that it would be pleasanter, far pleasanter, to record that
this day of all days in Simon Varr's life was peaceful and calm, but
the truth is exactly the reverse.  It was destined to be a day of
bitterness and strife, terminating in actual violence.

The trouble began with Jason Bolt.

Lucy Varr did not descend for breakfast, nor did Ocky, who elected to
depart from custom and have a tray brought up by Janet to her bedroom
balcony.  Simon ate his usual hearty meal with more deliberation than
appetite, and had barely returned to his desk when he heard the squeal
of brakes that distinguished Jason's car from its numerous fellows.

He came straight back to the study and threw himself into a chair, his
round, good-humored face unwontedly grave.

"Well, Simon, here's a pretty kettle of fish!"

"There are several kettles of fish.  Which do you mean?"

"Well--Billy Graham's, to commence with.  He was around to see me an
hour ago--"

"Was he sober?"

"Of course he was, don't be too unjust, Simon!  Graham doesn't make a
practice of drinking, and if he took one or two too many last evening,
as he admits he did, I for one don't blame him.  That confounded pup
Langhorn told him what he overheard--"

"I know--I know all that.  I have fired Langhorn and I have fired
Graham."  Simon's jaw tilted truculently.  "What about it?"

"That's what I've come to ask.  What about it?  If you keep on at this
rate, another week will see you down to bed-rock--reduced to one
partner and one idle tannery.  And some one seems determined to burn
that up piecemeal!"

"I didn't see you there last night."

"No, thank goodness, I was in blissful ignorance of our latest trouble.
We have guests, you know.  Mary and I took the Krechs to Barney's road
house just to give them a taste of night-life in Hambleton.  Mr. Krech
and Barney spent the evening extemporizing cocktails--"

"I'm not interested in your orgies.  What did Graham have to say this
morning?"

"Nothing that wasn't mighty decent, all things considered.  He is sorry
to go after all these years, but he doesn't question your right to fire
him.  He prefers to discuss the details attendant on his quitting with
me--you have no objection?--and he is writing to Rochester to tell the
Thibault crowd he accepts their offer."

"That doesn't break my heart.  The sooner he gets to Rochester the
better pleased I'll be."

"Oh, yes--because of Copley, I suppose, and the girl.  Well--I guess
Billy Graham isn't in the market for sympathy.  He tells me that he is
fairly familiar with the Thibault tanneries from hearsay and he is
confident that he is taking them some tips that will make him solid
with them from the start."

"Eh?  What's that?"  Suddenly intent, Simon Varr leaned forward and
fixed a sharp gaze on the speaker.  "What is he taking them?  What did
he refer to?"

"Why--nothing specific, Simon!  No doubt he has picked up a score of
useful tips during the time he has been associated with us.  We can't
stop him from giving them the benefit of his experience; that's the
sort of thing you must expect when you fire a good man without any
reason except that he has a pretty daughter whom you can't keep your
only son away from.  I must say, Simon--"

"Must you?  Please try not to!"

Jason complied with a shrug of his shoulders; why waste his breath on
this human lump of obstinacy?

Varr relaxed in his chair again, thinking.  He ran over the events of
the previous night.  Graham had drunk at least enough to render him
irresponsible for his impulses and actions.  He had seen the notebook
lying on the desk.  Enough time had elapsed between his departure and
the alarm of fire to have enabled him to slip down the hill and fire
the tannery.  He might then have returned and watched his opportunity
to break into the house.  Yes--it was possible, physically, for him to
be the guilty man.  "Taking something valuable to Thibault?"  The
notebook?  Would he have the brazen nerve to make such a remark if he
were the thief?  Yes!  If Graham were the man, that identified him with
the masquerading monk, and _he_ had nerve enough for anything!

It struck Simon--while his partner waited in glum silence--that it
would be interesting to learn where Graham had been on the night before
after leaving him in the study.  To put it more bluntly--had the man an
alibi?  How did one go to work to learn such things, short of asking
open questions?  Varr shelved the problem temporarily, though an idea
in the back of his head was slowly shaping itself into the answer.  He
would do nothing decisive until he had weighed things more carefully
and was sure--

"How shall we replace Billy Graham?" said Jason Bolt, having fidgeted
in silence to the limit of his patience.  "Have you any one in mind?"

"Certainly I have!" snapped his partner, who had given not a thought to
the matter until that moment.  "D'you suppose I'd fire a man unless I
saw my way free of that difficulty?  There's old Maple; let him take
hold when he is hungry enough to come back to work."

"Maple?  A good, steady man, Simon, but not the sort I'd pick.  Not a
scrap of initiative.  He knows enough to do just what he's told to do,
but--"

"That's the sort of man I want."

"And what you say goes!  Don't trouble to point that out; I have heard
it before.  Do you mind, however, if I mention another man whom I've
been thinking might fit in?"

"Well--who?"

"Copley.  Your son.  Don't look as if a snake had bit you!  I think he
would make up in intelligence anything he lacks in experience.  He is
quick to learn--"

"You may leave him out of your calculations."

Jason started at the tone of the remark, glanced at Varr's set face and
shot at him an impulsive question.

"Simon!  You haven't gone and quarreled with him _too_, have you?"

"Never mind that."

"By thunder, you _have_!"  Jason Bolt regarded his partner
open-mouthed.  Then he added, half to himself: "'Whom the gods would
destroy they first make mad!'"

"What's that?" snapped Simon.  The quotation had jarred on him,
something in its phraseology savoring unpleasantly of the anonymous
message he had received.  "I'm a long way from being mad!"

"You can't prove it by me," said Jason rudely.  He came to his feet.
"I'll be getting back home; only blew in to talk with you about Billy."
He hesitated before continuing.  "By the way, Simon, are you going to
be at the office this morning?"

"Very likely--yes, I shall.  Why?"

"This chap who's staying with me--Herman Krech--very nice fellow--he's
the broker I was speaking of to you the other day.  I thought I might
bring him in and introduce him to you."

"Listen to me, Jason!"  Varr's face was slowly flushing with anger.
"We are _not_ going to incorporate!"

"Oh--bless me, I'd practically abandoned that notion myself," said Mr.
Bolt, airily mendacious.  "Nothing was farther from my thoughts; I just
thought I'd show him around and introduce him to you--let him see all
the sights, huh?  You may as well meet him; we're bound to be dining
together either here or at my house as soon as our wives get their
heads--"

"Bring him in by all means," interrupted Varr.  The idea in the back of
his head had suddenly burgeoned while his partner rambled on.  "If
either of you mentions the word incorporate I'll have you thrown out,
but there is another matter in which he may be of service to me."

"Krech?  Why, you don't even know him!"

"Well, you're going to fix that difficulty, aren't you?"  Varr turned
to his desk in his usual gesture of dismissal.  "I'll be there at
eleven."

True to his word, at a few minutes past ten Simon left home for the
tannery.  He would have a busy day, there, what with insurance data and
other matters relative to the fire.  The prospect fretted him--and it
steeled his resolution to leave no stone unturned to bring the author
of his troubles to book.  Blast him!  He'd learn that it was safer to
monkey with a buzz-saw than with Simon Varr!

He stopped at the door of the office-building for a word with Nelson,
who was already yawning at his post.  Without any suggestion other than
the promptings of good-nature, he had turned out long before daybreak
to relieve the tired Fay.

"Mr. Bolt and another gentleman are in back, sir," he reported.  "Just
looking around.  A young man was in about the insurance--said he'd be
back later.  Steiner was here, very curious about the fire, but I told
him he'd have to see you."

"Right.  You can tell Mr. Bolt that I'm upstairs.  Did you or Fay look
around any more in the neighborhood of those footprints?"

"Footprints?  He said nothing to me--"

"True; I told him to keep his head shut.  I will talk to you about that
later, Nelson.  There hasn't been any trouble from the strikers?"

"I haven't seen a soul, sir, but I've heard they are having a sort of a
meeting this morning.  There's been talk of appointing a committee to
call on you and discuss things."

"There's nothing to discuss.  However, I'm perfectly willing to meet a
committee from them and tell them again that they'll gain nothing by
their strike but trouble for themselves.  You have to tell a fool the
same thing over and over again before he'll believe it.  Send 'em up
when they come--but not more than three of 'em, I don't want a whole
mob mucking up my office."

"Yes, sir.  There's been a young woman askin' for you, too, sir.  A
girl named Drusilla Jones."

"Never heard of her."  Simon, on the point of turning away, paused and
looked curious.  "What does she want?"

"She's been goin' around pretty steady with Charlie Maxon, sir.  I
guess she'll want to see you about lettin' him out."

"Humph.  He's where he belongs, and I wouldn't do anything to get him
out even if I could.  Tell her that, and say I won't see her.  Make it
clear, Nelson, I've no time to waste on Maxon's women."

"Yes, sir."

The watchman had nothing further to offer, and Varr went up to his
office and busied himself with the morning mail.  There were more
indignant demands from aggrieved customers, and the fact that Simon had
expected them did not lessen their power to annoy.  His face grew
steadily redder and redder as he worked through the pile of
correspondence.

A clock in the outer office struck eleven, and as the last loud stroke
thinned to silence there came the sound of heavy footsteps ascending
the stairs.  Jason Bolt believed in punctuality.

He entered with a cheerful greeting that suggested he had recovered
some of his equanimity since his earlier talk with his partner.  On his
heels came his friend, a genial-looking, red-faced, smooth-shaven
gentleman whose personal dimensions and displacement were such that
they seemed to dwarf the small office to the proportions of a room in a
doll's house.  He stood well over six feet, was broad, deep-chested and
bulky, but moved with a light-footed agility that argues muscle rather
than fat.  Simon was not a small man himself, but he felt like a pigmy
as his hand disappeared into one that opened like a suitcase.

"Glad to meet you, Mr. Varr," said the newcomer pleasantly, in a voice
that was deep but agreeably pitched.  "Bolt has been showing me the
whole works, here.  You have a fine proposition."

"I think so," concurred Simon with mild gruffness.  "Jason is
dissatisfied with it, but it suits me very well."

"So I have gathered from talking with him," said Mr. Krech, genially.
"No doubt you are right--at any rate, I seldom try to advise other men
in respect to their own business."  He took a huge cigar-case from his
pocket and opened it, then offered it to Varr and Jason Bolt.  "No?
You don't mind if I do, though?"  He carefully lighted a mammoth cigar
and sat down on a chair toward which Simon had waved.  "I see that some
one else is dissatisfied with the tannery, too.  You must have had a
narrow escape from being burned out last night."

"Ah, yes!  We have had some little trouble with a number of malcontent
employees.  I am gradually weeding out the more noxious of them--eh,
Jason?"  Mr. Bolt palpably winced.  "In fact, Mr. Krech, there have
been developments in connection with that fire, and certain other
occurrences, that put it in my mind to ask something of you."

"Bolt told me that you wanted to see me about something," said the big
man heartily as the tanner paused to choose his words.  "If I can be of
service to you I'll be delighted."

"Thanks.  It's really a very simple matter.  You see, I have decided to
have this fire--and those other occurrences--investigated, competently
investigated, and their perpetrator punished to the full extent of the
law.  Unfortunately, the local police are utterly incompetent to handle
a case of this kind, and I don't think much more of the County
officials.  It finally struck me that a private detective agency might
do the trick.  But I don't know any such concern and I don't feel like
employing one blindly, so I thought I'd take advantage of your coming
from New York and ask you to hunt up a responsible agency for me."

"A private detective!" exclaimed Jason Bolt.  "Why, Simon, what has
happened to require any such critter as that?  What are those other
occurrences you speak of?"

"I'll tell you--I'll tell you in good time.  First, I want to hear if
Mr. Krech is disposed to assist me.  He has facilities in New York for
locating a reputable agency, no doubt."

"I don't have to go to New York for that," answered the big man
promptly.  "You've come to the right place for information, Mr. Varr.
I know a very capable chap."  He turned to Jason, and added slowly: "We
don't talk much about it, as you can imagine, but possibly you have
heard that my wife's brother was murdered under rather curious
circumstances; a cold-blooded crime if ever there was one."

"I've heard Mary speak of it," admitted Bolt.

"Well, the detective I have in mind is the man who cleared up that
mystery."  His gaze shifted back to Simon.  "Of course, knowing him and
getting him are two different things.  He's usually up to his ears in
one thing or another.  If it's not too confidential, and you want to
give me an idea of your problem, perhaps it would help me interest him.
At least, if it is out of his line, he will recommend some one else
who'll be competent to handle it for you."

The tanner gagged a bit over the idea of any private detective
rejecting his patronage, but after all he wanted a good man and not the
first Tom, Dick or Harry to offer his services so he gulped down the
tart comment that had sprung to his lips.

"There's nothing confidential about it--short of its getting into the
papers and giving my show away.  I've got to tell Jason about it, and
if you care to listen I'll be glad of your opinion on the whole crazy
business.  It began with--"

He got no farther for the moment.  There was a scuffling and shuffling
of feet from the direction of the stairs, and Nelson appeared in
advance of three rather ill-at-ease visitors.  They were dressed in
workmen's clothing and carried their caps respectfully in their hands.

"A committee from our strikers," explained Varr curtly to his partner.
He stood up.  "Don't bother, Jason, stay here with Mr. Krech while I
talk to them in the outer room.  It'll take me about two minutes to get
rid of 'em!" he added grimly.

He strode from the room and met the approaching delegation halfway
across the main office.  From where they sat, Jason Bolt and his friend
could watch the ensuing proceedings and hear every word that was spoken.

Varr was instantly wrathful at discovering in the gray-haired
individual who turned out to be their spokesman an old employee whose
name was Maple, the very man he had spoken of to Bolt as possibly
replacing Graham as manager.  He could almost hear Jason chuckling over
the fact as he snapped a curt command at the fellow to state his
business.

"We've come for a talk with you, Mr. Varr," began Maple soberly,
"because there's some of us who feel that this strike has gone on too
long as it is.  It's bad for us, sir, and it must be bad for you and
Mr. Bolt.  We three have been appointed to call on you gentlemen and
ask you to look into the whole situation with us.  There's points on
which we've been unreasonable, maybe, and there's others where we think
you've been unreasonable.  If we give in a bit and you give in a bit
perhaps we can reach some sort of a compromise that'll let us all go to
work--"

"Stop!  I've been waiting for that word compromise!  You can go back
and tell your crowd that this strike isn't going to be settled--it's
going to be _broken_!"  Varr smashed one fist into the other as he
roared his defiance.  "Go back and tell 'em!  Tell 'em I'll watch every
man of you starving in the gutters before I'll be driven into doing
what I've said I won't do.  Go set some more fires in the tannery;
you'll soon find that'll get you nowhere but in jail!"

"We've set no fires, Mr. Varr," answered Maple with dignity.  "On the
contrary, sir, the three of us here now were amongst them who helped to
put out the fire last night.  You've no call to blackguard honest men.
As for starving in the gutter, sir--"

He stopped speaking to reach in his pocket and draw out a few small
bills, which he held up for Varr's inspection, and at a nod of his
head, his two companions also produced money from their trousers.
Simon glanced at it and sneered.

"Found a union to support you, eh?"

"No, sir, not that.  To tell the truth, Mr. Varr, there don't seem to
be any good reason to tell you where this came from, or how it came,
but we feel in duty bound to say it brought with it a message for you."

"A message?  For me?"  Simon repeated the phrases quickly, his mind
alert for new alarms.  "Well, what was it?  Get it out!"

"We were told to tell you that while we held out against you we could
count on getting money for our needs from the 'Black Monk'."

"The Black Monk!"  Simon fell back a pace as he whispered the words.
"The Black Monk!  What--what do you mean?"

"That's all we can tell you, sir."  Maple fumbled with his cap and
coughed nervously.  "We'll ask you again, sir, as in duty bound to our
comrades, if you'll help us come to a compromise--"

"_No_!"

The committee shrank back from the explosive quality of the
monosyllable that was like a door slammed in their faces.

"Very well, sir, then we'll wish you good day--and a kinder heart for
your fellowmen."

"Stop!"

Sheer anger at this latest evidence of his enemy's activity had swept
Simon Varr beyond self-control, beyond reasoning and beyond decency.
He launched upon the stolid committee a rushing torrent of insult and
invective.  The veneer of dignity that had come to him with wealth and
position slipped from him, as the old skin slips from a snake, and he
went back to the vocabulary of his youth for terms sufficiently
blasphemous and obscene to express his opinion of the strike, the
strikers, the committee and its sponsors.  He did not stop until his
breath failed and left him panting.

The two men in the small office listened to that tirade in embarrassed
silence.  Jason Bolt fidgeted in his chair and grew pink to the tips of
his ears.  Herman Krech, as became a tactful bystander, gazed at the
floor, stared at the ceiling, studied the glowing tip of his cigar,
peered through the grimy window at the uninspiring view of Hambleton
and generally comported himself with discretion and _savoir faire_.
Inwardly, he was wondering if he had any right to inflict this
termagant tanner on his unsuspecting friend, the detective.  Not by a
jugful, unless the mutt had a mighty interesting case--

"I think," said Simon Varr, reentering his office, "I think I have now
made my position clear to those fellows!"  A grim satisfaction was
apparent in his voice and bearing, the usual aftermath with him of an
outburst of temper.  "Now we can resume where we left off."

"What was that stuff about a monk?" demanded Jason.

"That's part of my story.  When Mr. Krech has heard it, he will tell us
if it is likely to interest his friend."  He sent a questioning glance
at the big man.  "By the way, what is his name?"

"Peter Creighton," said Mr. Krech.




_X: Creighton Takes the Case_

Jason Bolt and Herman Krech listened to Varr's narrative in rapt
silence.  The former's interest was mixed with amazement, the latter's
with enthusiasm.  As the tale progressed the big man hitched farther
and farther forward in his chair, his expression that of a little child
who proposes to miss no syllable of a fascinating fairy story.  He
considered himself something of a connoisseur in crime, did Mr. Krech,
thanks to a few experiences with his friend Creighton, and a subject
that had always made an appeal to his imagination was now become the
hobby of his every idle moment.  Although he would not have abandoned a
lucrative business to take a position on Creighton's staff of
operatives, it was his secret grief that the detective had never
recognized his ability to the extent of offering him one.

He was beaming with delight by the time Varr had ended his curt account
of his tribulations, and his distaste of the tanner's personality had
been temporarily forgotten.

"Gee Joseph, Mr. Varr!" he burst out.  "You really ought to
congratulate yourself!  You've been the victim of the prettiest piece
of persecution I've ever heard of!"

"Thanks," returned Simon without enthusiasm.

"He seems to be waltzing all around you and jabbing you just where it
will hurt the most, and yet he's clever enough to evade capture and
even to keep you from guessing his identity.  Why not make a list of
your known enemies and check them off one by one?"

"Too many of 'em," retorted Simon briefly.

"Ah, yes--I should have thought of that!"  A muffled snort from Jason
marked his appreciation of the seemingly ingenuous jibe.  "If a man's
known by the enemies he makes, I should say this fellow was a lasting
credit to you.  You'll miss him when he's gone."

"I'll miss him with pleasure.  But when is he going?  D'you think this
is a problem that will appeal to Mr. Creighton's critical taste?"

"It will have my hearty endorsement, anyway, when I submit it to him.
He likes crooks with imagination, I know, and this bird has it.  I wish
you had brought along that note you got from him."

"I did."  The tanner reached into his pocket and drew forth the message
that he had found in the deft stick.  "I decided to fetch it as long as
I intended to tell you the story."

Krech accepted the bit of brown paper, carefully taking it by the tip
of one corner and opening it with a shake.  He held it out for Jason to
read, but drew it back from the other's outstretched hand.

"Naughty, naughty, mustn't touch!"

"Fingerprints?" grunted Varr skeptically.

"It's a possibility we must consider," insisted the big man firmly.  "I
don't believe there are any, sort of pity if there were."

"Pity, eh?  What do you mean, pity?"

"It would cheapen our crook.  I don't believe he's the lad to leave
clues."  He added calmly, "Hush, now, and let me read this carefully."

Simon gasped and hushed.  He consoled himself with the reflection that
this human mastodon probably knew what it was about.

"Well, I'm hanged!" blurted Jason Bolt, when he had perused the
missive.  "What do you make of it, Krech?"

"Why, there are a number of curious features about it that leap to the
eye," said Mr. Krech blandly.  "I will call them to Creighton's
attention, of course."  He stepped to Varr's desk, helped himself to an
unused envelope and inserted the note.  "How many other people have
touched this paper besides yourself, Mr. Varr?"

"Not a soul.  I've shown it to no one."

"Oh, that's fine."  He picked up a clean letterhead and held it out to
the tanner.  "Ink your thumbs and forefingers on that pad there and
then press them on this."  He waited until Simon had gruntingly obeyed.
"Good.  These will identify your marks on the message, and if there are
any others they will be the sign manual of our crook."

"How can you be sure?" argued Jason.  "It's obviously an old scrap of
paper and a dozen people may have handled it before the crook got hold
of it."

Mr. Krech regarded his friend with a look of dignified annoyance.

"There's always some one around to make difficulties," he said
severely.  "You're a fly on the wheel of progress."

"Excuse me for living," begged the fly meekly.  Then he looked at his
watch and exclaimed, "Hello.  Our wives, Krech, our wives--!  We're
late for lunch already!  Drop you anywhere, Simon?"

"I have my car."  The tanner glanced at Krech.  "You'll notify
Creighton?"

"With pleasure.  I'll keep these for him, too."

He placed the envelope containing the message and the fingerprints in
his pocket, then moved to follow his friend, already on his way to the
stairs.  He paused at the door, however, and came back rather
hesitatingly.  "Say--just how did that couplet run?"

Simon made a wry face, but obligingly recited:

  "_'Who meets the monk when dusk is nigh
  Within the fortnight he shall die.'_"


"Do you take that seriously?" asked the big man.

"Do you take me for a blasted fool?" snapped Simon irritably.

"Yes," said Mr. Krech simply.  "Just the sort of blasted fool I would
be in your place, or that nine out of ten men would be.  Because the
threat is directed at _you_, you scoff at it and ignore it."

"What are you getting at?"

"This: the fellow who wrote that note and does his stuff in a monk's
costume has all the earmarks of a maniac.  Maniacs are dangerous.  If
he has made use of this old local legend to further his purpose, he may
go ahead with it to the bitter end--your bitter end!  Until he is laid
by the heels, why not play safe and stay home after dark?"

"Humph.  I'm likely to, aren't I?" jeered Simon.

"No, you aren't, because, to use your own expression, you're 'a blasted
fool,'" conceded Mr. Krech cheerfully.  "Anyway, if you happen to get
bumped off, don't come around haunting me on the score that I didn't
warn you!"  He smiled benignly.  "Ta-ta!"

The tanner choked back an oath.  For some time after the loud groaning
of the stairs beneath his visitor's tread had died away, he sat at his
desk and scratched his chin gently as he meditated.  The striking of
the clock in the outer office recalled him to more present matters.  It
was understood that if he did not return home by a certain hour in the
middle of the day he would lunch downtown, and the hour was now past.
On these occasions he usually walked to the Hambleton Hotel, the town's
one hostelry, where he could regale himself on a couple of heavy
sandwiches and a cup of doubtful coffee.

Thither he now betook himself, frowning on the way as he noted some
condemnatory expressions on the faces of those he passed on the street.
He knew that public opinion was antagonistic to him in the matter of
the strike and his treatment of Maxon--the Hambleton _News_ had run a
nasty paragraph about the last--and the censure irritated, if it did
not move him.

He had no sooner entered the dingy lobby of the hotel than his eye
rested on his son, Copley, seated at a rickety writing table and
industriously scribbling on a pad of cheap paper.  Varr strode across
to his side and addressed him curtly.

"What are you doing here?"

"Living here," returned the young man, glancing up but making no move
to rise.  He met his father's angry glare coolly.  "More convenient to
my job."

"Your job!" echoed Simon derisively.  "What mental incompetent has
employed _you_?"

"Barlow, the editor of the _News_.  I'm a reporter now."

"Humph.  Why?"

"For ready money, naturally, until I can get something good."

"Am I to understand you have left my roof?"

"Absolutely.  Left it last night, and returned for clothes and a few
personal belongings this morning.  You piled it on a bit thick last
evening--too thick.  I've quit."

"Saved me the trouble of throwing you out!" said Simon between his
teeth.  "What did you tell your mother?"

"The truth.  I didn't intend to, but I found Aunt Ocky had overheard
our little chat and had told her we'd had a holy row.  Sorry."

"Blast your Aunt Ocky!"

That did not seem to call for a reply and Copley made none.  After a
few seconds of silence he raised his pencil suggestively.

"Speaking as a prominent citizen, Mr. Varr, what have you to say
regarding the opening of the new sewer in State Street?"

"Nothing--except that I hope you'll fall into it!" said his father with
asperity, and walked away.

Copley wrote an item on another sheet of paper.  "Among those lunching
at the Hambleton Hotel yesterday was Mr. Simon Varr, of the Varr-Bolt
Tanneries.  He did not tip the waiter."  He cocked his head at a
critical angle and contemplated the last six words before reluctantly
obliterating them.  Discretion must be his watchword, he told himself,
and a job is better than a jest.

Simon finished his meal and returned to the office, noticing already
the premonitory symptoms of the mild indigestion that habitually
followed the greasy cooking of the hotel chef.  He found his insurance
man waiting for him and spent two tedious hours over an inventory and
proofs of loss before he could rid himself of the fellow--and sped his
going with a curse because the broker warned him the insurance company
would certainly cancel their existing policies if they got wind of an
incendiary.

That reminded Simon of the footprints in the tannery yard which he had
wished to examine by daylight.  He had intended to show them to that
chap Krech, but Jason had spoiled things by hurrying him off to his
silly lunch.  He descended the stairs, called Nelson to join him, and
went to the end of the fence around which the fire bug had fled.

He gave the watchman a brief account of Fay's experience at the
commencement of the fire, when he had actually obtained a glimpse of
the incendiary at his evil work.  He discussed with Nelson, a shrewd
man, the possible identity of the miscreant, but they arrived at no
conclusion.  Together they traced the footprints from the yard around
the fence and up the muddy bank of the little stream until they
vanished on the firmer ground outside the premises.

"Make anything of them?" asked Varr.

"Nothing more than you do, sir; they seem to be the tracks of a large
man.  That friend of Mr. Bolt's could have made 'em nicely."

"Get a couple of empty boxes," directed Simon, mindful of the
protective device he had used in his kitchen garden to preserve the
marks left by Charlie Maxon.  "Cover up two good sets of these; they
may come in handy later."  He studied the skies.  "We'll probably have
rain before morning."

"Fay won't object to that," declared the watchman, grinning.  "If he
had his wish, it would rain chemical fire-extinguishing fluid!"

Simon lingered to see that the work of covering the tracks was properly
done, and hoped that Mr. Krech and his detective would appreciate his
thoughtfulness.  Then he left the tannery, climbed into his car and
drove home.  The strain of the night before had told on even his iron
physique--and there was the mute appeal of a decanter of Bourbon that
he knew would freshen his nagging spirit.

Jason's dilapidated little touring car greeted his gaze as he drove
past the front of the house to the garage, and a sound of light voices
came to him from the side veranda.  Easy enough to guess the meaning of
that, the Bolts had dropped in with their friends for tea and a chat
with Lucy, who counted Mary Bolt her closest friend.

He joined them a moment later.  Lucy, he saw at once, had been crying.
No amount of powder or superficial gayety could conceal that fact from
him.  She did not look at him directly, and her voice was frigid as she
introduced him to the one member of the party he had not met.

"Mrs. Krech--my husband."

Varr bowed to a tall, slender, strikingly handsome young woman with
deep-blue eyes and a mass of dark red hair, who was seated beside his
sister-in-law on a couch.  The two were talking earnestly together
until he interrupted them, as though they had taken an instant liking
to each other.

"Excuse me if I don't get up," apologized Krech from the deep chair in
which he was sitting.  "I'm anchored."

The handsome Angora had found him, and as though to mark his
approbation of another animal as fine as himself, had leaped into his
lap and curled up contentedly beneath his caressing hand.  Despite his
words, Krech put him down and rose immediately when Simon indicated
that he did not propose to join them.  He followed the tanner into the
house and accosted him in the hall.

"I'd like to see the window where that burglar got in last night," he
said.  "Got a minute to show me?"

"Very well.  In this way."  They went into the sitting room and Varr
spoke on the way of his recent activities in the tanning yard, a piece
of foresight that Krech instantly applauded.  "This is the window; it
was either pushed open by main force, or the catch was pressed back by
some tool."

"The last is it," announced the big man promptly.  "See here where the
paint has been broken near the lock and the brass of the bolt is
scratched?  It's a cinch to open these things--a child could do it with
a penknife."

"You have sharp eyes," admitted Varr grudgingly.  "I hadn't noticed
those scratches on the brass."

"Oh, I've helped Creighton on his cases any number of times, and of
course a man soon gets the trick of observing the least thing out of
the ordinary.  Smaller marks than those scratches have hanged many a
man, Mr. Varr."

"What a cheerful thought!" exclaimed a laughing voice behind them.
They turned and found Mrs. Krech, with Miss Ocky at her elbow.  "What
are you two talking about hanging for?  Herman, I came in to look for
you; we're just leaving."

"All right, Jean; I was just giving Mr. Varr my celebrated imitation of
an expert criminologist!"  He did not proceed further until he had
glanced questioningly at his host, who gave permission with a nod and a
shrug.  "Some one broke in here last night and staged a burglary; I
didn't tell you before because I didn't know how far it was being kept
secret."

"Can't keep secrets in this place," grunted Simon.  "I gave up trying
long ago."

"Have the police any idea who did it?"

"The police!  My dear Mrs. Krech, it's evident that you don't know much
about country constabulary.  I wasted no time telling them of my
troubles.  Your husband is going to place them in the hands of a friend
of his."

"Peter Creighton!  Is he coming here?  Lovely!"  She turned impulsively
to Miss Ocky.  "He's just the nicest man you ever met!"

"Who is he?" demanded Miss Ocky, but before she could get her answer,
Varr had interrupted.

"We don't know yet that he is coming.  You will surely write to him
to-night, Mr. Krech?"

It was the very question the big man had been waiting for, but no one
could have guessed it from his perfectly simulated surprise.  His
eyebrows were delicately arched as he made bland reply.

"You don't realize the value of time in these matters, Mr. Varr.  Write
to him!  To-night!  He'd have my life!  No, sir, as soon as I left you
this morning I went straight to the village and telephoned him.  Bolt
was fearfully annoyed about his lunch--he doesn't understand urgency,
either."

"You got Creighton?  What did he say?"

"He will handle it.  He can't get here until the first train in the
morning, but of course he is working on the case already."

"Working on the case?" repeated Simon impatiently.  "How in thunder
_can_ he?  He doesn't know anything about it yet."

"Oh, yes, he does.  You forget that I was able to give him a lot of
information.  We had a long talk--ask Bolt."

"But, what can he do in New York?"

"Plenty," said the big man airily.  "You don't know him."

"May I ask again," said Miss Ocky plaintively, "who is this Peter
Creighton?  And what?"

"He's a dear!" said Mrs. Krech.

"He's a wonder!" said her husband.

"He's a detective," said Simon grimly.

"A detective!  Coming here!" cried Miss Ocky, her eyes bright with
interest.  "My word, won't _that_ be jolly!"




_XI: Checkers and Chicane_

Miss Drusilla Jones, whose fortunes were temporarily bound up with
those of Charlie Maxon, was a rather tall and shapely young woman,
handsome in a coarse sort of way when her face was in a state of
animation; in repose, its expression was marred by a too-great boldness
in the big dark eyes and a suggestion of sullenness about the heavy,
full-lipped mouth.  She dressed well--"too well for an honest woman,"
was the dark verdict of ladies more reputable and less attractive--and,
with a shrewdness surprising in one of her type, avoided the cheapening
allure of cosmetics.  She spent most of her days in bed, and earned her
living, at least ostensibly, by spending most of the night at Tom
Martin's dance hall, where she was kept on the payroll as an
"entertainer."  It was there she had first met Charlie Maxon.

In accordance with her promise to return at a later hour, she left her
small house on the edge of the town shortly after four o'clock and
turned her steps in the direction of the tannery, where she hoped to
catch Simon Varr in his office.  Her natural sullenness of expression
was intensified as she walked slowly along her way, for certain friends
of hers had pointed out to her that she was wasting her time.  Simon
could do nothing if he would, and would do less than that if he could,
for the lover languishing in jail.

"Then I'll give him a piece of my mind!" she retorted.  "I'm not afraid
of old Varr nor any other man."

Her course led her through the heart of the town, and her exact social
status could have been nicely determined by the glances of disfavor she
received from certain thin-nosed, pursed-lipped matrons of Hambleton
whom she passed en route.  She could pretend to ignore these glances,
and she did, but they aroused a fierce resentment in her breast and
hardened a resolution already half formed--she was sick of this place,
she was sick of these people, she was sick of her undue prominence in a
small town where every one knew all about every one else, and she
proposed to shake its dust from her high heels at the first opportunity
that offered.

At the tannery, Nelson opened the door when he recognized her through
the peephole and greeted her with a shake of the head.

"No use, Drusilla.  He isn't here, and he wouldn't talk to you if he
was.  Said to tell you he'd no time to waste on Maxon's women."

"He did, did he!" flared the girl.  "Then you can tell him for me that
he's goin' to get into a peck of trouble if he don't look out!"

"I wouldn't say things like that if I was you, Drusilla," admonished
the watchman.  He had always liked the girl and regarded her with as
much kindly tolerance as was fitting to a respectable family man.
"There's talk around town already that your Charlie knows more about
the fires we've had than he ought to."

"Sort of thing this town would say!  How could he start a fire when he
was locked up in jail?  Answer me that."

"He's got friends, ain't he?"

"That's neither here nor there.  You can take it from me, he don't know
anything about those fires."

"You may be wrong, Drusilla, a man don't have to tell a woman all he
knows.  Anyway, it will be best for you and best for him if you keep
your mouth shut."  He looked around them cautiously.  "I know what I'm
talking about.  Take my tip and watch your step."

"What do you mean?"

"Varr's sending to New York for a detective."

"A detective!"  Miss Jones was startled, and made no effort to conceal
the fact.  "How do you know?"

"Mr. Bolt was here this morning with a friend of his from New York, and
I heard them speakin' about it as they went out.  So you tell Charlie
Maxon to be a good little boy and put away his box of matches."

"He had nothing to do with those fires," reiterated Drusilla
mechanically, her thoughts elsewhere.  She had met country detectives
and done business with them on terms satisfactory to both sides, and
she held them consequently in contempt, but a detective from New York
was an unknown and possibly ominous quantity.  "When's he comin'?"

"Dunno.  To-morrow, I'd say likely."

"Well, to-morrow's another day," remarked Drusilla easily, recovering
something of her poise.  "I guess he won't amount to so much!  I'm
obliged to you just the same for tipping me off.  Drop in at Martin's
one of these evenings and have one on me--he's serving a pretty good
brand just now."

"Don't you try to vamp me, Drusilla," grinned Nelson.  "I'm a decent
married man."

Miss Jones tossed her head and strolled away.

She quickened her step presently as she decided on a course of action
that appealed to her restless, rather adventurous nature.  She had
played with this same idea previously, but had lacked the animus to put
it through.  Nelson, with his good-natured hint about a detective from
the city, had supplied that.

She went straight to the dance hall, closed at this hour to its
nocturnal patrons, where she knew she would find Tom Martin in the
office back of the main room.  He was there as she expected--a
keen-eyed, sharp-featured little cockney whose history from the time he
disappeared from London in a fog to the day when he emerged in this
unlikely corner of the great United States would have made a thrilling
story--particularly to the English police!  Through the open door of
his office he was keeping an eye on the activities of several waiters
who were cleaning up the dance hall and straightening the small round
tables where "only soft drinks" were served, and he looked up to
welcome his visitor with a nod of surprised recognition.

"'Ello, Drusilla.  Wotcher doin' 'ere at this time o' dye?"

Miss Jones had two wants and voiced them promptly.

"Give me a quart of rye, Tom, and a couple of knock-out drops."

Mr. Martin jumped in his chair and shot a nervous glance at the men in
the outer room.  "The rye's all right--you've got some wiges comin' ter
yer an' I'll take it out o' them.  But I don't know nothin' about them
other things, Drusilla.  Wot are they?"

"Don't try the baby-innocent act on me, Tom!  I want some knock-out
drops, same's you put in the beer of that drummer from the city last
Tuesday night--and I mean to have 'em!"

Hers was a carrying voice, and she was speaking with fearful
distinctness.  A visible shudder ran through Mr. Martin's slender frame
as he sprang to his feet and hurriedly shut the door.

"All right, Drusilla, you can have 'em--but fer the luv o' Mike don't
tell th' blinkin' world abaht it!  Wotcher want 'em for?"

"What you don't know won't hurt you," responded the girl.

That gave him pause, but in the end she had her way after some cajolery
and a few loud threats.  She left the premises with a paper parcel in
her hand and the wished-for pellets in her bag.

Her house was not far removed from the police station, in the rear of
which was the small square building that served as a lockup for such
casual unfortunates as were not of a quality to be sent to the county
jail.  Here Charlie Maxon was incarcerated, his quarters consisting of
a small room with a grille door and a barred window too high for
anything but light and ventilation.  The only additional deterrent to
his escape was to be found in the person of a nondescript elderly man
who received a dollar a day from the town funds to act as jailer when
the lockup was in use.  His name was Moody, his chief characteristic
the determined grouch he had cherished since the advent of prohibition.

He was seated on the stone steps of the jail, smoking a small but
powerful pipe, when Drusilla Jones appeared from the direction of her
house.  She bore a basket in one hand, its contents scrupulously
covered with a white napkin.  It was about six o'clock.

"Good evening, Mr. Moody!"

"Hullo."

"I've brought a few things I've cooked myself for Charlie's dinner,"
she informed him.  "Want to look 'em over?"  She put down the basket
and whipped off the napkin, replacing it when the jailer had cast a
gloomy eye over the contents and signified his satisfaction with a nod.
"Come and unlock the door so I can give it to him, there's an old dear!"

The old dear arose grumbling and proceeded to obey, pulling the door
key from his pocket.  She followed him into the building, where their
advent was hailed with joy by the prisoner, upon whose hands time was
already beginning to hang heavy.

"That you, Drusilla?  Say--that's fine!  Twenty-five cents a day is the
food allowance in this jail, and nineteen of that is grafted by some
one before it turns into grub."  He accepted the basket from Moody, who
promptly relocked the door of the cell.  "Get a chair, Drusilla, and we
can talk while I polish off this dinner."

"No, you don't," corrected Moody.  "What do you think this is--a hotel?
You can have five minutes, young woman, an' then out you go!"

He went back to his doorstep and resumed his pipe.  He might or might
not be within earshot; Drusilla could not determine which and she dared
not take chances.  Fortunately she had guarded against such a
contretemps as this by providing a second line of communication, and
after chatting loudly with her _vis-a-vis_ through the bars of his cell
she suddenly dropped her voice and whispered swiftly:

"Bottom of the basket.  A note.  Read it!"

He registered his perfect comprehension by an eloquent wink the while
he discoursed long and loudly upon more innocent topics.  They
exchanged sally and quip through the forbidding grille until a warning
grumble from the doorstep marked the expiration of the five minutes and
the end of their interview.

"'Night, Charlie.  See you again soon!"

"'Night, Drusilla--and thanks.  If you run into old Varr, give him a
bust on the head for me!"

"Hush, Charlie--you shouldn't talk that way!  Should he, Mr. Moody?"
she added brightly to Cerberus as she passed him.  "I'm always telling
him he talks too much and doesn't mean half what he says."

"Every one talks too much except me," declared the disappointed
disciple of Bacchus.  "I only talk when I'm drinkin', and I haven't
said a word for months and I haven't been what you might call
loquacious for some years."

"Charlie knows where to get liquor," suggested Drusilla, quick to seize
this happy opportunity to titivate the jailer's thirst.  "Make him get
you some!"

"On your way!" said Mr. Moody virtuously--but thoughtfully.

Charlie Maxon, hearing their voices and sure that he was unobserved,
delved rapidly into the bottom of the basket at some cost to a custard
pie that recklessly intervened.  He discovered a quart of rye which he
promptly thrust into concealment beneath the single blanket on his
narrow cot, a half dozen excellent cigars that he stored in a pocket of
his vest, and an envelope that contained two white pellets and a
hastily-written note.

The latter he carried nearer to the window and read its contents
hurriedly; a soundless whistle relieved his emotions when he had
finished its perusal.  He was briefly pensive.

"Well--why not?" he demanded of himself finally.  "She's not such a bad
looker--and she's sure got a brain!"

He secreted the letter inside his shirt, proposing to destroy it at the
first opportunity, then settled himself to the tranquil enjoyment of
Drusilla's dainties quite as if no weightier matter than her pastry
portended.  A hearty eater always, he did not desist until the last
fragment of the damaged pie concluded his repast.  Then he went to the
door of his cell, stuck his head between the bars and hailed the seated
figure of his personal attendant.

"Wotcher want?" asked Moody, grudgingly coming to his call.

"Thought you might like a cigar," explained his prisoner, poking one
through the grille.  "Smoke 'em, don't you?"

"When I c'n get 'em," admitted the jailer, and regarded this one with
the dark suspicion of a man who has been the victim of practical jokes
before.  "What's the matter with it?"

"Nothin'.  Smoke up!  Gimme a match, will you?"

"You ain't supposed to smoke in your cell," objected Moody, but
produced the match and lighted both their cigars.  "However, I guess
you won't tell the Chief of Police if I don't!"

"No fear.  You're a good sport, Moody.  I always knew that."

"Fine cigar," commented the jailer critically.

"Leave it to Drusilla.  You can bet she helped herself from the best
box Tom Martin has."

"Women are useful when they provide a man with good tobacco, but in
other ways they can get you into a mortal lot of trouble.  Take it from
me, Charlie, and steer clear of 'em."

"I guess you know your way around, eh, Moody?"

"You can tie to that.  Frinstance, if you knew as much as me you never
would've got into this jail."

"I expect you're right.  You've got a head on your shoulders!"

"Well, it's an ill wind that blows nobody some good," reflected the
jailer complacently.  "I'm gettin' a dollar a day because you coveted
your neighbor's tomatoes and then had no more sense than to shy one at
him.  Missed him, too, they tell me."

"I won't miss him another time if I get a shot at him, whether it's
with a tomato or something else!" snapped Maxon with sudden
viciousness.  "I'd like to pitch him into one of his own vats!"

"You don't love him much, eh?"

Charlie Maxon thereupon expressed his exact opinion of his late
employer in studied terms to which Mr. Moody lent the attentive and
appreciative ear of a connoisseur in language.  When the recitation was
ended, he nodded approval and returned to his doorstep, where he sat
down and contentedly finished his cigar.

Maxon dropped on his cot, eased the cork from the bottle of rye and
took one satisfying drink of the invigorating liquor.  More, he dared
not allow himself for the moment.

At nine o'clock Moody rose from his doorstep and came inside, carefully
locking and double-locking the door and putting its key in his pocket.
He did the same by the rear exit, and was preparing to retire to the
privacy of his own small room when he was hailed a second time by his
charge.

"Now, what?"  Moody went to the barred door of the cell with more
alacrity on this occasion, hopeful of further largesse.  "Can't you let
a man have a minute's peace?"

"Going to bed so soon?"

"Nothin' else to do."

"Remember two years ago how we used to play checkers at the Workmen's
Club?"

"What of it?"

"You used to beat me then pretty regular, but I guess it'd be different
now.  I'd beat you four out of five."

"That's nonsense.  What are you gettin' at anyway?"

"What's the matter with letting me out of here for a while?  A few
games of checkers wouldn't do any harm--help pass the time."

"Help pass--!  Say, where do you think you are?  Why don't you ask me
to take you to the movies?  Mebbe you'd like me to send for Drusilla
so's we could have a dance?  Want me to lose my job, huh?"

"Who's going to know anything about it except us?  Slip out and get a
board--and a couple of glasses!"

"_Glasses_?  What kind of glasses?"

"Whisky glasses."

Moody started.  He looked keenly at his prisoner.  Slowly, a warm light
stole into his eye, he moistened his lips with the tip of his tongue.

"Quit your kiddin'!"

"I'm not kidding--look here!"

Maxon knew his man.  Satisfied that he had Moody quivering with
anticipation, he stepped to his cot, produced the flat bottle and shook
it invitingly.  The rich gurgle was music to the jailer's ear.  A more
hard-boiled, professional warder would have followed just one course
with decision and dispatch, to Moody's credit be it said, it did not
once occur to him that he might safely confiscate the treasure and
dedicate it to his own delight.

"I'll go after those glasses," he said promptly.  "Sure it's good
stuff, Charlie?"

"Wouldn't drink it myself if I wasn't, would I?  Hustle up--I'm ready
for a drink right now."

Tempted beyond his strength, the faithless keeper of the Hambleton
lockup departed on winged feet.  He was back in remarkably quick time,
a checkerboard under his coat and two bar glasses in his pockets.  A
last feeble flicker of responsibility stayed his hand an instant as he
opened the cell door.

"No tricks, Charlie!"

"'Course not.  Cross my heart and hope to die."

With the doors locked and no windows through which they could be seen,
they sat themselves confidently at a small table, a glass at each side,
the checkerboard between them and the precious bottle on the floor
within easy reach.  The proceedings opened with one apiece.

"A-a-a-ah!"

"Told you it was good, didn't I?  Have another."

"Thanks.  This is like old times.  Black moves first."

"Teach your grandmother.  Chin-chin."

"If that's bootleg, it's good enough for me."

"It ain't, though.  He gets it from Canada himself."

"An empty glass is a mournful sight.  Thanks.  Your move."

They played and drank and drank and played.  Moody won most of the
games, which suited both of them.  An hour passed.  There was lots of
time, Charlie told himself.  He wasn't due at Drusilla's until
eleven-thirty--the rendezvous she had made in the event that all went
well.  On the other hand, he was beginning to feel the effect of the
whisky he was drinking.  It wouldn't do to get tight himself.  Better
speed things up a bit, then take a walk for half an hour or so before
going to Drusilla's--

"Em-py glash--mournful shight."

Charlie's left hand hovered an instant over the mournful sight, his
fingers crumbling something; then he picked up the glass and filled it.

"A-a-a-ah."

Five minutes later he was half-carrying, half-dragging the inert figure
of his jailer to the cell which by rights he should have been occupying
himself.  He dropped Moody on the narrow cot, relieved him of his keys
and stepped out, grinning as he locked the door behind him.  It would
be a long, long time before the recreant warder awakened to discovery
and disgrace.  No one from outside would come near the place until
eight or nine in the morning; he had oceans of time in which to make
good his escape before the alarm could be given.

He possessed himself of a slouch hat that he found in Moody's room and
drew its brim well down over his eyes, then cautiously unlocked the
back door of the jail.  This gave on to a narrow, unlighted alley,
which led to a quiet side-street.  There was little chance of his
meeting any one at that hour of the night.  After a quick survey which
assured him the alley was deserted, he left the building and locked the
door.

The fresh night air after the stuffy atmosphere of the jail hit him
hard.  It sent the potent fumes of the whisky to his head, and by the
time he had reached the end of the alley he was staggering perceptibly.
He vaguely realized his condition and the peril it implied, and paused
for an instant at the first corner to steady himself against the wall
of a building while he strove to clear his brain.  He jerked off his
hat to give the air access to his head, too fuddled to note that a
street-lamp not ten yards away was shining directly on his face.

Then a tight grip fastened on his arm and he was pushed back into the
obscurity of the alley.

"Charlie Maxon, by glory!  Who let _you_ out?"

"Wh-who are you?"

"Who am I?  Well, that's pretty good!  Mean to say you can't _see_ me?
I'm Langhorn!"




_XII: Starlight on Steel_

When he had finished his examination of the broken window in the
living-room, Herman Krech contrived--partly by his sheer physical bulk
and partly by the exercise of a soft assertiveness that was saved by
his bland geniality from being plain rudeness--to sequester Simon Varr
for a word in private.  To accomplish this end he was obliged to shake
off his own wife, the tanner's wife, the Jason Bolts and Miss Ocky
Copley, the last lady in especial revealing the pertinacity of a
cockle-burr in her objection to being shaken off.  Krech didn't succeed
in losing her until he had shut the door of the study in her face with
a courteously affected air of absent-mindedness.

"What do you want?" inquired Varr ungraciously.

"I've got a message for you--sorry if I'm intruding," replied the big
man, half-amused and half-resentful at his host's tone.  "I'm afraid it
will annoy you--but most things do, don't they?  But Creighton thought
it best to give you a tip and of course I feel obliged to pass it on as
received."

"All right.  What is it?" said the tanner less irascibly.

"Practically a repetition of the warning I gave you this morning on my
own account.  I read him that note over the telephone.  He said it
sounded like the work of a nut, and added that a bad nut is often a
dangerous proposition.  He thinks you should take reasonable
precautions against a personal attack at least until he gets here."

"When peace will mantle the earth, I suppose!"

"Possibly so," answered the big man imperturbably.  "I know if I were a
crook engaged in a campaign of crime I'd be apt to desist if a
detective suddenly appeared over the horizon.  Wouldn't you?"

"Not if I thought he was scared of me!"

"Oh--I see."  Mr. Krech's face, normally pink, deepened to a delicate
shade of rose.  "Rather cheap, that, isn't it, Varr?  No, Creighton is
not scared of crooks so you could notice it, but he's not a darn' fool
either.  Anyway, there it is.  Take it or leave it."

"I'll leave it, thank you.  Does he think I'm going to wire the
Governor to turn out the militia?"

"He'd be more likely to suggest that you wire the nearest asylum for a
competent keeper; he has a rough tongue at times."

"Humph.  When's he coming?"

"First train in the morning.  Gets here at eleven."

"I'll drive down and meet him.  Will he stop at the hotel, or will he
expect me to put him up here?"

"You'd better settle that with him, Mr. Varr.  He's not a roughneck, if
that's what you mean."  Krech contemplated the tanner reflectively;
there were several things he wished to tell him but he manfully
swallowed them all.  "Good-day, sir!"

His doubts of the morning were reborn as he left the study, unattended.
Had he any right to inflict this specimen on Creighton?  He could only
hope that the detective's sense of humor would prove a buffer between
him and his patron's boorishness.  If not--

His cogitations ended abruptly as he spied Miss Ocky awaiting him in
the living-room.  He had caught her with her eye so attentively fixed
on the study door as to suggest that a less refined woman might have
had an ear glued to the keyhole.  He beamed on her, his customary
good-nature again in the ascendant as he left the irritating tanner
behind.

"Hello," he greeted her cheerfully.  "Others all waiting for me
outside?"

"Yes.  Your wife has apologized for you twice, I believe.  I think it
was mean of you to shut yourself up like that after getting me all
excited about detectives and things!  What were you two talking about?"

"Secrets," chuckled Mr. Krech.  He continued to move implacably toward
the front door as she marched with equal determination at his elbow.
"Just a girly-girly heart-to-heart talk.  Delightful fellow, isn't he?"

"Humph.  You might remember he wasn't the only victim of the robbery.
If he lost a notebook, I lost a perfectly good dagger.  Why can't I
know what's going on, too?"  She cooed softly.  "_Please_, Mr. Krech!"

"Well, if you _must_ know!  I asked him, 'Vot iss a tanner?' and he
said, '_Vat_ do you mean?', and then--"

"_Oh!_" cried Miss Ocky, and flounced.  Then her indignation gave way
to laughter.  "Mr. Krech, you're a--a _sus domesticus_!"'

"French for diplomat, I take it," he retorted amiably, and left her on
the top step as he surged across the piazza and down to the waiting
car.  Nevertheless, he sought his more erudite spouse at the first
opportunity.

"Jean, what's a _sus domesticus_?"

"Gracious!"  She wrinkled her beautiful brow for a moment, but she had
taught school for a while before acquiring wedded affluence and the
answer presently came to her.  "Why--a common pig, I suppose."

"Gosh.  A _common_ pig?  Not even a nice, clean, pink-and-white,
prize-winning pig?"

"No.  What _are_ you talking about?"

"Nothing.  Nothing _a_-tall!  Say--what did you think of that Copley
woman?"

"Miss Copley?  Very interesting.  Very attractive.  I liked her
immensely.  Didn't you?"

He thought that over an instant.  Then, like Miss Ocky, he surrendered
to amusement and gave one of his deep chuckles.

"Yes," he said.  "I did.  Sometime I'd like to pack a dictionary with
me and drop in on her for a chat!"

After Krech had dropped his unwelcome warning and departed, Simon Varr
turned to his desk and tried to forget some of his immediate problems
by attacking a small mass of correspondence that he had brought home
from the office after the innumerable interruptions of the morning.  He
did not succeed any too well in concentrating his thoughts on the task.
They would persist in wandering to other matters, leaving him staring
blankly at a letter while his wits went the weary round of his
perplexities.  With reflection came temper, and he rather welcomed the
sound of his study door being opened with no preliminary knock.  That
foreboded more trouble of some sort, and he was in the humor for a
fight--  He swung his chair around and started at the sight of his wife
in the doorway.

"Well?  Come in.  What is it?"

She accepted the invitation.  She came into the room slowly, but she
ignored his gesture toward a chair.  She stood looking down at him, her
face all the whiter for a touch of vivid color that burned in each
cheek, her arms hanging loosely at her sides but her hands clenched in
token of restrained emotion.  Her voice was calm as ever when she
spoke, but passion lent it a husky quality that smote ominously on his
ear.

"What have you done to--my son?"

"Done to him?  Done to him?  What d'you mean?" He sputtered.  "I
haven't _done_ anything to him!"

"You quarreled with him?"

"Call it that if you choose.  He forced the issue--though he probably
went cry-babying to you with some other version!"

"He doesn't lie.  And he told me just what I managed to drag out of
him--no more.  I got the impression that he was--ashamed of you, that's
all."

"Well?  I'll live it down, I guess!  What do you expect me to do about
it?"

"The decent thing, just for once in your life.  I want you to go to
him, or send for him, and--and make peace."

"You can see me doing it, can't you?  Ha!"

"He has left our roof."

"His own choice!"

"You drove him to it."

"That's not so!  He's free, white and twenty-one; he can do as he
pleases elsewhere, but he'll do as I say while he's in my house!"

"_My_ house, please!"

"We've had that argument before and you've had precious little change
out of it!  As for Copley--let him rustle his own living or starve
until he learns to obey my wishes!"

"You won't consider mine?"

"No!"  The word was like a thunderclap.

"Very well."  She held herself erect to every inch of her slim height,
her steadfast gaze leveled at him from beneath straight brows.  "I warn
you, Simon, that you are going too far.  I don't know if you realize
all the brutalities, the ignominies, that I've suffered from you since
we were married.  Much kinder if you'd beaten me.  It hasn't seemed
possible to me that you can have realized--!  Yours is a very curious
nature--I've had to make allowances--often--"  Her voice faded into
silence.

"_What are you going to do about it?_"

She jumped beneath the lash of that crisp question.

"I don't know--_yet_."  Abruptly, she turned on her heel and left the
room.

"That's that!"  Simon swung back to his desk, a grim smile on his lips.
"It always boils down to the same thing--they don't know what they're
going to do about it.  Let 'em rant all they please, in the end what I
say _goes_!"

He resumed his correspondence, refreshed.

The only aftermath of this latest squall instantly apparent was the
message Bates gave him as he announced dinner.  Miss Lucy would not be
down.  She was indisposed.

"Another word for a bad disposition," Simon informed his sister-in-law,
as they seated themselves at a table laid for two, indifferent to the
fact that he was criticizing his wife within the hearing of a servant.
"She'll have recovered by morning."

"We can't all have your sunny nature, Simon."

"Humph.  You've heard about the roekus with Copley, I suppose?"

"Rumors have reached me."  Miss Ocky peppered her soup composedly.
"Need we discuss it now?"

"No.  There's always the weather, if you prefer that."

The topic did not seem to appeal to her.  They did not talk about the
weather, nor anything else.  A silence that would have been perfect but
for the sound of a subdued champing from the head of the table was
broken only once during the progress of the meal.  Occupied though he
was with his food, Varr gradually became conscious of a steady scrutiny
that first puzzled, then irritated him.  He glared at her angrily.

"What do you keep looking at me like that for?" he demanded.

"Interest, Simon.  Pure, unadulterated interest."

"Well, stop it!  I don't like it!"

For a wonder, she acceded to his insistence without a word.  It cost
her no effort to avoid looking at him for the remainder of the time at
the table, after which they rose in silence and parted.  Simon went
inevitably to his study, Miss Ocky in sisterly fashion to Lucy's room
to inquire the cause of her _malaise_.

Two hours passed before she came down again.  Two somewhat trying
hours, to judge from the expression on her face, which wore a look as
grim as any ever sported by Medusa.  Her eyes were cold and hard as she
marched promptly to the closed study door and rapped upon it--a gesture
of icy politeness.

"Come in!  Humph.  So it's you, Ocky!  Dropped in to take another good
look at me?"

"No--to have a rather serious talk with you, Simon."  From the
effortless way in which she drew a heavy armchair into the position she
desired, a shrewd observer might have gleaned a hint of the muscular
strength that was her heritage from many a camp and trail.  "Hope you
don't mind."

"Quite the contrary.  By a serious talk I presume you mean a row.
Well--I've gotten so I thrive on 'em!"

"Yes.  I pity you just enough, Simon, to wish you weren't so fond of
them."  Miss Ocky dropped into her chair and lighted a cigarette with
pensive deliberation.  "I don't know that I can offer you a real row,
my idea was to hand you a few straight-from-the-shoulder remarks and
then a couple of ultimatums.  As for the brutal badinage in which you
delight, I'm in no mood for it this evening."

"Let's have your remarks.  I guess I can stand 'em."

"First, then--I suppose you know that you have played the cat-and-banjo
with Lucy's happiness for the last twenty-odd years?"

"Don't assume I know anything.  Just tell me!"

"Consider yourself told that, to start with.  I was literally shocked
when I came back and saw the change in Lucy.  She's the shadow of her
old self, nothing more.  It is you who are responsible for that."

"Humph!"

"Now you have started on Copley--made a good start, too, if the boy's
manner is any criterion.  Possibly I may be doing him an injustice.  It
might have been consideration for his mother rather than fear of you
that has restrained him until now.  Anyway, I'm glad he has summoned
the courage to defy you at last."

"Indeed.  May I ask you one question?  How long has it been considered
good form for a woman to enter a man's house and interfere with his
domestic relations.  Eh?"

"It was my father's house first, then Lucy's.  I am more at home here
this minute than you could ever be."

"Try and prove it in a law-court!"

"Perhaps I shall--some day."  She paused to scrutinize her polished
finger-nails, brushed a speck from one of them, raised her eyes to his
and added dryly, "After all, Simon, you know you only got in here by a
trick."

"A _trick_!  Now--what do you mean by _that_?"

"Memory gone _phut_, Simon?  Perhaps I can refresh it.  While I was
watching the fire last night a man came up to me and called me by name.
It was--Leslie Sherwood."

"_Ah!_"  The exclamation was wrung from him through stiff lips.  The
color drained from his face as he leaned forward tensely, one hand
gripping an arm of his chair like a vise.  "G-go on!"

"That shot went home, did it?" asked Miss Ocky coolly, watching the
effect of her words.  "I've several more in the locker!  We had quite a
long talk together and he told me many things I didn't know.
Interesting things--very!"

"_What?_"  Simon's voice was hoarse.  "He didn't tell you--he didn't
dare tell you--"  He stopped, a deadly fear in his eyes.

"Yes.  He told me why he quarreled with his father.  Why he left home.
Why he has come back now, freed by his father's death.  Shall I go on,
Simon?"

He sank back in his chair, shaken in all his being.  He could not speak
until he moistened his lips with his tongue.

"Have you--told Lucy?"

"No.  That is Leslie's right, I should say.  No doubt he will use it.
As far as I can see, there is only one way by which you can make a
decent exit from the mess you're in."

"If--if you're suggesting--suicide--forget it!"

"Suicide?  No!  Why should I waste my breath proposing an act that
requires courage?  What I meant was--divorce."

"Divorce!"

"It needn't cost you a penny.  Make it easy for her to get--your
lawyers will arrange that.  You'll have the tannery--and welcome!  All
you need do is--go!  Go from this house!"

"Divorce!  Stand aside--hat in hand--bow another man into my place--!"
The rage of a cornered animal swept aside his fear.  "I'll see you all
in--"

"Don't shout."

"So _that_ is why Sherwood has come back!"  He gritted his words
through set teeth.  "He thinks he is going to make trouble for me, eh?
Just let him try--just let him try!  If he dares to say a word to
Lucy--if he even dares to set foot on this property--"  His clenched
fist crashed on the desk beside him as he abandoned himself to a very
ecstasy of fury.  "If he dares try that, by Heaven, I'll kill him like
a dog!"

"I wouldn't," advised Miss Ocky in her quiet, hard little voice.
"Everything would have to come out in court, then, and you'd have a
fearful time persuading any jury that it was justifiable."  She had
finished her cigarette, and since Simon's study boasted no ash-trays,
she rose and went to the open window to toss the stub outside.  She
remained there, leaning against the casement and breathing deep of the
cool night air.  "Wouldn't you rather be divorced than hanged?"

"_No!_"

"Humph.  Queer tastes, you have!  Well--I've kept my promise.  I've
told you a few straight facts and issued an ultimatum.  The rest is up
to you.  Would you like time to consider--"

"No!  Not a minute--blast you!"

"I don't blast easily, Simon.  I'm to assume, then, that you reject my
well-intentioned--_Hello!  What's that!_" Her voice dropped to an
excited whisper as she bent her head and peered into the darkness.

The alteration in her manner penetrated through the fog of temper that
had clouded his brain.  He left his chair and was at her side in a
bound, surmising her answer even before he snapped a swift question.

"What is it?"

"That monk--!  I could have sworn--!  Over there by the big silver
birch--!  I can't see him now.  Can you make out anything?"

Side by side they leaned from the window, striving to accustom their
eyes to the starlit night.  A long minute passed.

"I must have been mistaken."  Miss Ocky drew a long breath.  "A shadow
from a swaying bough--or imagination."

"There isn't wind enough to sway a twig!" he corrected curtly.  He
lingered a while longer, his angry gaze continuing to search the
darkness, before he drew back into the room.  "It's quite likely you
saw him," he muttered.  "No doubt he saw you, too, and heard you--and
has slunk off with his tail between his legs!"  He half made to pull
down the sash, then contemptuously refrained.  "I'd like to get my
hands on him!"  His fingers curled longingly.

After a moment's hesitation, she accepted his dismissal of the subject.
She stepped back and confronted him.

"To return, then--divorce, Simon?"

"Never!"  He fairly barked it.

"I know of just one thing to your credit, Simon," said Miss Ocky rather
sadly, rather dully.  "You do mean what you say.  I must accept your
decision as--final."

"You must!"  The interlude had braced him.  "And--what are you going to
do about it?"

She shrugged her shoulders, looked at him with expressionless
eyes--turned and walked quickly from the room.  His sharp, sardonic
laugh followed her down the hall.

"Another false alarm!"

He threw himself into his chair, mopping his brow.  Some ten minutes
went by before a thought occurred to him that was fortuitously
anticipated by the sudden appearance of the old butler.

"That decanter of Bourbon, Bates!  Then go to bed."

"Yes, sir.  Thank you, sir."

History repeated itself.  He drank two glasses of the fiery liquor in
swift succession.  As he did so it rather staggered him to reflect that
barely twenty-four hours had elapsed since he had stood there the night
before, doing the same thing.  Gad--what a day!  Last night that monk
had interrupted him--

That monk!  He muttered the words.  Had Ocky really seen him?  Was he
loose again on some fresh errand of crime?  Had he been frightened away
by their appearance at the window?  Had he been frightened away
_permanently_?

On the spur of a swift impulse, born perhaps of the whisky, he reached
up quickly and extinguished the solitary lamp.  The room was instantly
plunged into darkness, through which he groped his way cautiously as he
set the stage for a game of cat-and-mouse.  He pushed the chair that
Ocky had used directly in front of the open window and settled himself
in its depths, his hot eyes staring into the night and challenging it
to yield its secrets.

He moved only once during the next half-hour.  That was to pour himself
another drink, which he sipped slowly while he continued to watch the
neighborhood of the big birch that Ocky had indicated.  Would he come
back?  Would he?  Varr waited for the answer to that, waited and waited
while a murderous rage filled his breast and grew ever more intense
with each succeeding mouthful of raw drink.  Would he come?

Yes!

The empty glass slipped from his fingers to fall with a light thud on
the carpeted floor as he slowly rose from his seat.  He rubbed his
eyes, quite unnecessarily, for they were now used to the dim starlight.
No possible doubt existed--the ominous black figure was _there_!
Straight and tall, it stood, exactly as he remembered seeing it at the
head of the trail.  Now it was on a concrete path that bisected the
kitchen garden, motionless, apparently inspecting the darkened house of
the man it pursued.

Stealthy as a cat, nearly as swiftly, Simon rushed from his room and
out of the house by the front door.  His plan was to circle the
building, taking advantage of every shadow, and get as close to his
enemy as he could before revealing himself.  Suppose the fellow took
alarm and got off to a running start?  Could he hope to catch him?  For
the first time in his life, he wished he had a revolver.

Less than ten yards intervened between them when he finally broke cover
and hurled himself furiously forward, hatred in his heart, a deep oath
on his lips.  At last!  His fingers itched for the throat of his enemy.

It was disconcerting suddenly to realize that he had not taken his foe
by surprise; his swift approach was slightly checked as he saw that the
figure was facing him, watching him--waiting for him!   It was still as
any statue up to the very instant when he flung out his arms to seize
it; then it fell back a pace and its left hand went slowly up to lift
the black veil that masked its countenance.

If another emotion as strong as his hatred existed in Simon's breast,
it was curiosity as to the identity of his relentless enemy.  His
advance came to an almost involuntary halt as he thrust his head
forward the better to distinguish the features of that face so dimly
visible in the uncertain light.

Then it was his turn to step back, his arms dropping to his sides, his
brain reeling from the shock as it apprehended the truth.

"_You!_" he gasped chokingly.  "_You!_"

In that moment he was helpless, defenseless, mentally and physically
paralyzed from sheer amazement.  It was the moment for which his crafty
foe had played--and won.  The figure darted, forward, its right arm
rose and fell.  One flicker of starlight on metal, then the thud of
steel driven home--

A single groan escaped the lips of Simon Varr before they were sealed
in death.




_XIII: A Deduction or Two_

The eleven o'clock train from New York was commendably punctual the
next morning.

Its brakes had barely ceased squealing on one side of the Hambleton
platform when Miss Ocky brought her small car to a smart halt on the
other.  She sprang to the planking and waited for the passengers to
alight, her face reflecting the cheerful knowledge that she was looking
her very best that morning in a becoming hat and a well-fitting coat
and skirt of gray English tweed.

Not many people alight at Hambleton on even the liveliest occasions,
and this time a mere handful descended from the train.  Among them was
a middle-aged man in a dark-blue serge, a light overcoat on one arm and
a heavy suitcase suspended from the other.  He was compactly built
without being too heavy, his smooth-shaven face wore an expression of
good nature, and his eyes looked out on the world from behind
tortoise-shell glasses with a friendly twinkle that concealed something
of their sharpness.  They had an inquiring expression now as he glanced
about him.

Miss Ocky did not have to be much of a detective herself to know that
here was her search concluded, though no one in the world could have
measured up less to her expectations.  She had visualized something
with large feet, a big mustache and a heavy jowl, that would descend
from a smoker with a dead cigar gripped between its teeth.  Silly of
her, she admitted to herself as she walked over and accosted him
briskly.

"Mr. Creighton, isn't it?  Knew it must be.  I'm Miss Copley, and if I
hadn't come down for you I don't know who would!"

"Very good of you, Miss Copley."  He looked not unnaturally mystified
by her greeting.  "I was rather expecting a friend of mine--"

"Mr. Krech?  He couldn't get away from the police."

"The police!"  He was startled at first, then the twinkle in his eye
deepened.  "Don't tell me that his sins have found him out at last!"

"I have to tell you something much more serious than that," she
answered soberly.  "Come along and stick that bag in the car.  We can
talk while I drive you to the house.  To begin with, Simon Varr was
found in his kitchen garden this morning--stabbed to the heart."

Peter Creighton had a fashion of receiving such bits of news in a
little silence that gave him time to gather his wits.  Miss Ocky saw
that the good humor was gone from his face which was now grave and
stern.  He did not speak until he had deposited his bag in the tonneau
of the car and seated himself at her side in the front.

"Murdered," he said; it was not a question.

"The doctor says the blow could not have been self-inflicted."  She
touched the starter and turned the car homeward.  "Yes--murdered."

"That is terrible, Miss Copley.  I feel deeply shocked.  Has the
murderer been identified?"

"I can't say positively.  He was found about six o'clock this morning
by the cook, and you can imagine that we have been simply inundated
with police and officials ever since.  They've been doing a lot of
whispering and conferring and I think they _do_ suspect some one, but
of course they haven't confided in me."

"Excuse me, Miss Copley--just who are you?  I gather you are a member
of the Varr household."

"He was my brother-in-law.  He married my sister.  I've been visiting
them about two months."

"I see.  Thank you.  Now--what about Krech and the police?"

"Well, they notified Jason Bolt--he was Simon's partner--and he came
right over, bringing Mr. Krech, who is staying with him.  There was a
lot of talk about a mysterious monk--I know something about him,
too!--and just when it was time to go to the train, Mr. Norvallis was
questioning your friend in the living-room.  So I slipped away and came
to your rescue.  It's as well I did--there are no taxis in Hambleton!"

"It was very good of you to remember me, with so much else to think
about.  You--er--how did you know I was expected?"

"Mr. Varr told us yesterday that Mr. Krech was sending for you."

"'Us'?"  He turned to look at her while she answered.  "How many people
knew that I was coming, do you suppose?"

"Oh--several, anyway!  Why?"

"I'm wondering if the news could have reached the ears of the
murderer," he explained.  "Some one was persecuting Mr. Varr, we know
that.  If he suddenly learned that a detective was coming--you see?"

"He might have thought it better to--to strike while the striking was
good?  Yes, I see."  She took her eyes from the road long enough to
give him a quick look.  "You think of things very quickly, Mr.
Creighton!"

"Practice makes perfect," he murmured.  "Who is Norvallis?"

"Assistant County Attorney, or something like that.  Murders are rather
too complicated to be handled by the local police, evidently."

"Yes, the County takes hold usually--sometimes the State, if the County
can't make the grade.  You spoke of a doctor--was that the County
Physician?  Has the body been moved yet?"

"Yes--thank goodness!  I wasn't a great admirer of Simon's, but it
wasn't nice to think of him lying out there in a tomato-patch!
However, I suppose you're disappointed."

"Why?  Oh, I see!  You're assuming that I might be interested in the
investigation.  That doesn't seem likely.  I came here on some matter
of burglary--and quite possibly that has ceased to be of importance
now.  I must talk to Norvallis, though."

"If you investigate the robbery, you will be investigating the murder,"
said Miss Ocky quietly.  "When Simon's notebook was stolen, his desk
was forced open by a Persian dagger, belonging to me, that happened to
be lying handy.  That was missing with the notebook--and it was found
again this morning in--in Simon!"

"Golly!"  Creighton looked at her with renewed interest.  "Not pleasant
for you, that!"

"It seems to link the two crimes, doesn't it?"

"Decidedly.  Here we are, I see."

A small crowd of curiosity-seekers was gathered at the gate which gave
access to the driveway from the highroad, and a policeman in uniform
was chatting with them amiably while barring their closer approach.  He
saluted as Miss Ocky waved her hand to him and vigorously honked her
way through the staring crowd.

"I'll drop this bag in the hall for the time being," said the detective
as they mounted the piazza steps and entered the house.  "Will you put
me deeper in debt to you by finding Mr. Krech for me?"

She said she would, and departed on the errand while he lingered in the
hall.  The sight of no less than twelve automobiles of various sizes
and sorts parked in front of the house had prepared him for a mob
inside.  A hum of voices reached him from a room on his left, the door
of which was discreetly closed, and another hum came from one on the
right, which he could see was a dining-room.  Farther back in the hall,
three solid-looking gentlemen had their gray heads together in a
serious confab.  For some reason they appeared to regard his entrance
with considerable interest, and seemed to be discussing him while he
waited.  He put it down to the fact that he was a stranger where it was
the custom for every one to know every one else.  Then Herman Krech
came out of some room in the rear and swept down upon him, accompanied
by a short, stout, worried-looking individual.

"Hello, Creighton.  This is Mr. Bolt, Mr. Varr's partner."

"Glad to meet you, Mr. Bolt."  Creighton barely acknowledged the
introduction as he searched his friend's face.  "Krech, how did this
happen?  I wouldn't have had it--"

"I know."  The big man broke in quickly, earnestly.  "I know what you
are thinking.  Forget it!  It isn't your fault, nor mine.  I warned him
yesterday morning on my own account, and again in the afternoon after I
had talked with you.  He simply disregarded it."

"A pity!" muttered the detective.  His face had cleared somewhat at
Krech's statement.  "Thank goodness, I haven't got that negligence on
my conscience!  It has been worrying me ever since I heard the news.
So he wouldn't listen to you?"

"Nary a bit.  Let's go out on the piazza.  There's a place around the
corner that this merry throng hasn't discovered."

He led the way with his easy self-assurance and they followed at his
heels.  He was right about the privacy of the retreat to which he took
them; a few men were standing around the front piazza, but no one had
turned the corner.

"I'm glad to have a chance to speak to you, Mr. Bolt," said the
detective when they had found seats.  "This is a shockingly different
state of affairs than I expected to find.  What of the burglary that
Mr. Varr had on his mind?  Has that any importance now apart from its
obvious connection with the crime?"

"Yes, indeed, great importance for me and a number of other people who
may suffer from the theft of Simon's notebook."  Jason looked ten years
older than when he had risen that morning.  "If that has gone it will
be a serious blow to our tanning business--and a gold-mine to any
competitor who might get his hands on it and not be honest enough to
return it."

"Um.  Secret formulas--that sort of thing?"

"Exactly.  On my own behalf, and out of respect for my partner's
wishes--his last wish, practically,--I would be very glad to have you
take a hand in the affair and see if you can locate that notebook."

"The theft and the murder are linked by the dagger.  If the police have
their eye on the murderer, the notebook should be recovered when he is
arrested."

"That's only a possibility, Mr. Creighton--and--oh, frankly, I want you
to take the case anyway!  Mr. Krech and I must try to tell you the
whole story as we heard it from Simon yesterday.  He was the victim of
an unknown enemy.  Threats--robbery--arson--murder!  I won't be
satisfied until that scoundrel is well and truly--_hanged_!  As for the
police--well, I think better of them than Simon, perhaps, but I'd still
be glad of another string to my bow.  It's proper for me to employ
extra assistance if I wish, isn't it?"

"Perfectly.  I quite understand how you feel--and I will be glad to do
what I can.  The family won't object, I suppose?"

"Not a scrap," said a woman's voice behind him.  They started to their
feet at the sight of Miss Ocky, who had come upon them unawares.  "I
can answer for the family.  Please sit down again.  I'll take this
sofa--unless you're talking secrets," she added, with a faint smile for
Herman Krech.  "I tried to stay quiet in my room upstairs,
but--nerves!"  She lifted her shoulders and looked apologetic.

They assured her they had no secrets from her.  She sat down and
listened attentively as Jason Bolt, at Creighton's request, gave a
careful account of the events preceding Varr's death as he had heard
them from his partner, appealing to Krech from time to time for
corroboration.  His voice shook with emotion as he described his horror
that morning when the news of Simon's fate was brought to him.

"A rotten business," he ended huskily.

Miss Ocky eased the tension by suddenly producing her cigarette case
and passing it around; Creighton accepted one and lighted it, a thought
surprised at this touch of outer-worldliness in a demure, middle-aged,
country lady.  It might be, he mused, that she called herself not an
old maid, but a bachelor girl.  He liked her, though; liked the bright
eyes that lost nothing that passed, the alert brain that missed no
trick, the strength of character revealed in the finely-modeled mouth
and chin that were still invested with feminine charm.

"Let's tackle this business at once," he suggested.  "Sooner the
better.  In a murder, look for the motive.  Miss Copley--Mr. Bolt--can
either of you tell me who might have wanted to kill Simon Varr?"

They looked uncomfortable.  It was Krech who took the bull by the horns.

"_De mortuis ml nisi bonum_," he said gravely.  "Otherwise, I should
say that it would be simpler to give you a list of the people who
didn't."  He spared a regretful glance for Bolt's hurt little
exclamation.  "I know it jars on you just now, but truth is truth.
I've seen enough in the last three days to know that Varr must have had
a host of enemies."

"Yes," said Miss Ocky.  "A notable collection."

"That won't do," objected the detective.  "To dislike a man is one
thing, to hate him to the point of murdering him is another."

"Greed is a motive for murder," said Krech.  "Who stood to profit
financially by his death?"

Jason Bolt stirred uneasily in his seat.  Miss Ocky looked
uncomfortable.  Krech glanced from one to the other, then nodded to
Creighton.

"It's the same answer," he said.  "A lot of people."

"Neither the question nor answer are pertinent," commented the
detective.  "This murderer did not kill for money."

"Why are you so sure?" demanded Krech stubbornly.

"If he made up his mind that it would pay him to kill Simon Varr, he
would have gone to work and done it out-of-hand, skillfully or clumsily
as his limitations might permit.  He wouldn't have wasted a lot of time
with ineffective fires, bugaboo masquerading--and, above all, he never
would have been so gracious as to send a warning note!"  Creighton had
the satisfaction of seeing his argument score a grand slam; there was
conviction in the eyes of Krech and Jason Bolt, and something like
admiration in Miss Ocky's.  "No, the motive was not mercenary whatever
else it may have been."

"There's this strike we've had on our hands," offered Jason.  "I'll
swear most of the men are decent fellows, but there are always some
exceptions.  They knew pretty well that Varr was the man who was
fighting them--in other words, locking them out.  With him out of the
way, they knew they could count on better terms from me."  He added
diffidently, "Mightn't one of them have done it?"

"I spoke of the fires just now as being ineffective," replied
Creighton.  "I have gathered that they were.  The second was the more
serious of the two, wasn't it?"

"Yes."

"Well, was it serious enough to cripple the business?  Was it a vital
blow?"

"Not at all.  The contents of the two buildings burned were worth
money, of course, but they were only reserve stuff."

"But there are buildings in the yard whose loss might have hit you
hard?"

"Oh, yes.  Several."

"Then, if one of the striking workmen had set the fire, he would have
selected one or more of them.  I think we may safely assume that the
incendiary was unfamiliar with the tannery and consequently was not one
of the strikers."

"You win," said Jason Bolt, after a pause.  "I've wondered why the
scoundrel didn't touch off something more important, but the
significance of his failure to do so never occurred to me.  Go on, Mr.
Creighton; I'm getting a lesson in straight thinking."

"Not so very straight," smiled the detective.  "Given a fact, you have
to think over and under and all around it before you can grasp its
every implication.  It's only because I've had a lot of experience that
I can draw inferences a shade faster than the average man--and often
quite as inaccurate!"

"If it wasn't either a striker or a person actuated by the desire for
gain," said Krech, "who is left?  What other motives are there for
murder?"

"Revenge.  Jealousy.  What about the last, Miss Copley?  Was he
interested in any other woman than his wife?"

"No," said Miss Ocky, "and remarkably little in her!"

"Um.  Friction?"

"No--not friction."

He saw her reluctance to answer this line of questioning and took it
for granted that the presence of the others embarrassed her.  He
dropped the topic, intending to pursue it at a later, more favorable
moment.

"Revenge," he continued.  "Did Varr ever wrong any one to the extent of
driving them to murder him?"

"No," said Jason Bolt.  "Simon was a hard man but not as bad as that."

"No," said Miss Ocky--but she had gasped, and Creighton had heard her.
He made a mental note of that.

"We're getting along nicely," said Herman Krech, who never liked to be
out of the limelight too long.  "It wasn't for money, it wasn't for
revenge, it wasn't jealousy; by the time we've eliminated a few more
motives we'll have only the correct one left."

"Meanwhile," said Creighton, "what's going on in the house?  Who is
running the police show?"

"Chap named Norvallis," answered the big man.  "The Sheriff, the County
Physician and a few plainclothes sleuths are in attendance, but
Norvallis is the real leader of the gang.  He has been going through
the usual motions--asking everybody about everything--"

"Hold on!" broke in Jason.  "I don't know that I agree with you.
Seemed to me his questions were mighty casual and indifferent.  Did it
strike you that he had a sort of a pleased-with-himself air?  I got the
impression that he might already have made up his mind as to who was
the guilty man and considered everything else relatively unimportant."

"It's not impossible that you're right," suggested Creighton.  "The
murderer may have left some glaring clue to his identity.  Naturally,
the police wouldn't talk about it until they got their hands on him."
He turned to Krech.  "You told him about this monk business, didn't
you?  How did he take it?"

"His first attitude," said Krech, "was that of a polite but skeptical
child listening to a bedtime story.  I soon convinced him of its
importance, though.  He says it simplifies things."

"Um.  He must be even quicker at inferences than I am!"

"By the way, I told him about you and he said he wanted to see you the
moment you got here."

"Well, this is a nice time to tell me!" laughed Creighton.  He stood
up.  "I'd better take my place in line."

"I can count on you, then, to help us in the matter of locating that
notebook?" asked Jason Bolt.

"Yes, sir," the detective assured him for the second time.  "I can
promise to take a personal as well as a professional interest in this
case.  I feel deeply the fact that Mr. Varr should have met death in
such a fashion after he became my client."

"You did what you could to warn him."

"Now, about my headquarters; there's a hotel in the town?"

"Yes, but I've been hoping you would let us put you up."  Bolt wrinkled
his brows thoughtfully.  "Mr. and Mrs. Krech are staying with us, but
there's always room for one more."

"You're both talking nonsense," interrupted Miss Ocky.  "The logical
place for Mr. Creighton is right _here_."

"Kind of you, Miss Copley, but I hardly think I'll add to your
problems.  Let us agree that the hotel is the best for the time being.
It is too soon yet to say where my activities will center."




_XIV: Lucy Varr_

There were four men in the living-room when Creighton tapped on the
door and entered in response to a command.  Two of them were standing
by a French window which they appeared to be examining and discussing,
and as Creighton knew that the theft of the notebook had been prefaced
by the breaking of one of the windows in this room, he had no
difficulty in deducing that this was the one and that the two men were
plainclothes detectives of the county staff.

The other two were seated at the table in the center of the room, a
litter of papers scattered in front of them.  They looked up
inquisitively as Creighton advanced and laid his card on the pile of
memoranda before the more important gentleman of the pair.

"Ah, yes.  Glad to meet you, Mr. Creighton.  Very glad, indeed.  My
name's Norvallis--County Attorney's office.  This is Sheriff Andrews,
of Wayne County.  Andrews, this is Mr. Peter Creighton of New York."

"Your name's familiar to me, Mr. Creighton," said Andrews, and
stretched forth a long, bony arm with a calloused hand at the end of
it.  He was a mild-eyed individual with a soft, sweeping,
tobacco-stained mustache.  "I read the New York papers pretty reg'lar
and I've followed one or two of your cases."

Norvallis was a stout, prosperous-looking man of forty-odd, a typical
product of country politics.  His manner was carefully bluff and hearty
and characterized by a sort of _bonhommie_ that was useful in
impressing voters with the fact that he was a pretty good fellow, his
close-set eyes sparkled with intelligence that his low brow defined as
cunning rather than wisdom, and there were puffy semicircles beneath
them that told of parties not entirely political.

"Your friend Krech told us the circumstances under which you were sent
for," broke in Norvallis before Creighton could find some polite
acknowledgment of the Sheriff's interest.  "Must have been quite a
shock to you to learn of Mr. Varr's death."

"It certainly was.  Fortunately for my peace of mind, I took care
yesterday to warn him against taking undue risks.  He disregarded the
advice."

"Oh.  You warned him?  You had some reason to believe his life was in
danger?"

"Nothing so definite as that, but it was apparent that he had some sort
of a queer, tough customer on his trail and it's always in order to
take reasonable precautions."

"A queer customer, eh?  This monk we've been hearing so much about!
What opinion have you formed about that?"

"None at all," replied Creighton promptly.

Norvallis did not quite conceal the disappointment he felt at the flat
negative.  He changed the subject.

"I think you have a piece of evidence that should properly be turned
over to me.  Didn't Mr. Krech send you an anonymous note that Mr. Varr
received from his enemy?"

"Yes."  Creighton took an envelope from his pocket and handed it to
Norvallis.  "There it is, in good order.  I had it tested for
fingerprints this morning before I left the city."

"Find any?"

"Only those made by Mr. Varr himself.  Further than that, the
microscope showed that the surface of the paper had been uniformly
abraded before it was written on, as if the crook had taken a rubber
eraser and removed all traces of any prints that might have been there
already."

"Cautious devil, wasn't he?"

Creighton did not answer.  His eye had suddenly fallen on an object
imperfectly concealed beneath a blank sheet of paper at Norvallis'
elbow.

"Is that the knife that was used?" he asked.

"Yes."  The county official rather reluctantly uncovered the exhibit.
"Don't touch!"

"No fear!" Creighton reassured him.

He moved nearer to the ghastly souvenir and bent over it.  A fine bit
of Oriental workmanship that any museum might have valued; the haft was
of silver, exquisitely chased, the blade was straight and slender,
narrowing to a needlelike point, so that it belonged rather to the
stiletto type than the dagger.  An inscription ran lengthwise down the
steel, which was of a distinct bluish tinge where it was not darkly
stained.  About an inch from the tip a tiny triangular nick had been
made in one of the sharp edges, the only flaw in the weapon's
perfection.  Creighton looked up from it to meet the Sheriff's
speculative eye.

"Can you read what it says on the blade, Mr. Creighton?"

"No!  I have my limitations."

"It means, 'I bring peace'!"  The officer tugged at his mustache and
smiled.  "Miss Copley told us that.  It belongs to her."

"Well, I expect she won't want it back."

Norvallis put down the anonymous letter which he had been reading.  His
eyes were alight with satisfaction.

"This case will make people talk when it gets into the papers, Mr.
Creighton!"

"Sure to."

"Have you any other information, or evidence, or exhibit, for me?"

"Not a scrap."

"Mr. Varr's death must alter your plans, of course.  May I ask if you
are returning to New York this afternoon or evening?"

Creighton knew perfectly well that Norvallis had been eager to put that
question since the moment he had come into the room.  He shook his head
smilingly.

"Mr. Bolt has invited me to do what I can to recover the notebook that
was stolen from Mr. Varr's desk."

"Oh."  Norvallis exchanged a quick glance with the Sheriff.  "Then, in
a sense, we'll be working together.  Possibly it hasn't occurred to Mr.
Bolt that when the murderer is found, the thief will be found."

"Yes, he knows that.  But my inquiry may diverge from yours, Mr.
Norvallis.  It may have to go farther than yours.  Of course, you
realize that yourself."

"Eh?  Ah--yes, yes!" said the other blankly.

"I expect our relations will be both amicable and of mutual benefit,"
continued Creighton cheerfully.  "If I turn up anything good I'll let
you know, and I can hope for as much from you, can't I?"

"Er--well, I don't know about that."  Norvallis looked pink and
uncomfortable as he began to fidget with the papers on the table.  "I
don't know about that, Mr. Creighton.  I may not feel free--er--no, on
the whole I think it would be preferable if we conducted our
investigations independently of each other.  Yes, that would be
better!"  He had an air of relief as he got that dictum off his chest.

"All right," agreed Creighton, still cheerfully.  He surmised the
reason for the official's embarrassment, the police already knew, or
thought they knew, the identity of the murderer, and it was a secret
they proposed to guard jealously until they could cover themselves with
glory by making an arrest.  He did not blame them in the least, and
accepted the rebuff good-humoredly.  "As you please, Mr. Norvallis."

The two men by the window apparently had concluded their examination.
One of them sauntered over to the table and reported.

"Nothing much there, sir.  There's a few prints made by the butler
opening and shutting the doors."

"Just as I expected," said Norvallis composedly.  "Lucky we don't have
to rely on fingerprints in this case, Mr. Creighton."

"Found none at all?"

"Not one.  I'll make you a present of that bit of news."

"Thank you for nothing," grinned Creighton, then added mischievously,
"Of course, before you can find fingerprints you have to know where to
look for them."

"Oh."

"Yes.  You stick to that window and Varr's desk and the hilt of this
dagger--and leave the less obvious places to me."

"Indeed.  I suppose it would be useless for me to ask you to designate
some of those less obvious places?"

"Quite useless," answered Creighton truthfully.

He was smiling over that as he excused himself and left the room.  He
could not have answered the hypothetical question on a bet, for his
remark had been a chance shot simply intended to annoy.  No one would
have been more surprised than himself to learn that this same shot
would develop the qualities of a boomerang.

He was stopped in the hall by a pale, gray-haired man whose trembling
hands betrayed the strain under which he labored.

"Mr. Creighton, isn't it, sir?  Miss Copley told me to fix up some
sandwiches and coffee in the butler's pantry.  There's so many coming
and going through the house she thought it would be quieter there.  Mr.
Krech is there already, waiting for you, sir."

"Very thoughtful of her.  What is your name?"

"Edward Bates, sir.  I'm the butler."

"Oh, yes, Miss Copley spoke of you.  She tells me you handled things
very well this morning after Mr. Varr was found."

"I did what I could, sir.  I knew the body mustn't be moved, so I kept
the news from Miss Lucy--that's Mrs. Varr, sir--until the police and
the doctor got here."

"Knew that, did you?  Been with the family long, Bates?"

"Thirty-five years, sir.  I worked for old Mr. Copley before his
daughter married Mr. Varr.  This is a shocking business, sir."

The conversation carried them to the pantry door, whither Bates had led
them.  His hand was on the knob when Creighton checked him with a touch
on his elbow, at which the old man jumped nervously.

"One moment.  A butler who keeps his ears open often knows a lot that
other people don't.  What is your idea about this?  Can you guess who
murdered Mr. Varr?"

"No, sir!"  His voice was almost panicky.  "Indeed I can't, sir!"

"Uh-huh," said Creighton easily.  Was the old fellow suffering from
frazzled nerves or from hidden knowledge?  Another little matter for
future examination.  "By the way, how is Mrs. Varr standing the shock?"

"Not too well, sir.  She bore up like the brave lady she is until Mr.
Norvallis was through with her, then broke down.  She's in bed.  The
doctor says she must keep quiet and that she'll be all right, but he's
coming again this afternoon."

"Get him to give you something for yourself," was Creighton's kindly
admonition.  "You're trembling like a leaf.  The family will be
depending on you a lot these next few days.  Don't let them down by
getting sick."

"I won't, sir.  Thank you, sir."

Creighton permitted him to escape, well satisfied with the new tone in
the man's voice as he acknowledged his appreciation of the detective's
interest.  Creighton was never harsh with a witness, never tried to
bulldoze or rattle him, until all else had failed.  His policy was to
put people at their ease and gentle them into talking freely, a course
that was all the more facile for him by reason of his genuine sympathy
and understanding and his native kindliness.

Krech was waiting patiently behind a plate piled high with sandwiches.
There was coffee, too, and before the butler left them alone, he stood
an interesting decanter on the table.  A shadow of gloom that
overspread the big man's extensive countenance was visibly lightened by
this.

"Bolt's gone home," he announced.  "Mrs. Bolt and Jean must be
suffering agonies of curiosity.  I stayed here because I felt I might
be able to help you."

"Stout fellow," said Creighton with a grin, and selected a huge
sandwich.  "Where do you think we'd better begin?"

"There's no use adopting that superior attitude with me.  You know
perfectly well I come in handy at times.  Say--I'm sore at Bolt!  He
did you out of a good job."

"Me?  How come?"

"Did you notice three solid-looking citizens in the hall when you
arrived?  Well, that was the Board of Selectmen of Hambleton, yes,
sirree, b'gosh.  Bolt had told 'em you were coming and they were all
het up.  They don't get along with the county crowd too well, and for
that reason they'd about decided to retain your services just to show
they were ready to hold up their end.  Then Bolt came along and blurted
out that he had commissioned you to investigate the matter and they
pulled their horns in like a bunch of frightened snails.  If he had
only kept still you could have made a deal with them."

"I see.  And what makes you think I'd be guilty of the indelicacy of
letting two outfits pay me for the same job?"

"'Thnot 'n 'ndelicathy," said Mr. Krech vigorously through a sandwich.
"If Bolt can have a second string to his bow, why can't you have a
couple of employers?"

"Krech, you're a nice fellow with all the instincts of a crook."

"Huh.  I suppose nothing could ever lead you from the narrow path of
rectitude?"

"No," laughed Creighton, "nothing ever could!"

"Well, it won't be the Hambleton Selectmen, anyway.  The three of them
were pale when they discovered how close they'd been to spending a
bunch of money unnecessarily."

They finished their lunch without the loss of much time, the detective
setting the pace.  Once into a case, he could be as patient and
plodding as an ox, but the preliminaries found him restless and
impatient.  He detested the inevitable gathering of masses and masses
of information that must subsequently be pulled to pieces and mulled
over until the most of it had been discarded and the important residue
determined.  It all took so much time--precious time that the criminal
might be using to strengthen his own position.

"Let's have a look at the place marked 'X' in the picture," he
suggested, rising.  "Kitchen garden, wasn't it?  That means the rear of
the house.  Let's go out this back way, through the kitchen.  Sometimes
it pays to look the servants over in a casual fashion before having
them on the mat.  They're less apt to be on guard."

He bustled cheerfully into the kitchen, asked a question or two about
the exact location of the crime, and left the house by the rear door,
Krech close behind.

"One Irish cook," summarized the detective when they were safely out of
hearing.  "Fat and fifty, good-natured and violent by turns.  One
rather pretty girl, a housemaid from the white cap, frightened, been
crying, inclined to be hysterical.  Old Bates, the butler.  Last, one
gaunt, tall, vinegary, nondescript female.  Who's the nondescript,
Krech?"

"Search me.  Here's the place."

Creighton took one look and groaned.  Whatever precautions the police
might have taken in the first stages of their investigation had
evidently been relaxed thereafter.  The garden might have been the
scene of a recent rodeo.  A mob of curious Hambletonians had held high
revel in it from one end to the other.

"That ought to be classed as criminal negligence," snorted the
detective, turning away.

"It's no use to you?" asked his friend disappointedly.

"Not for the moment.  If I were nature-faking a book on Africa I could
run a picture of it as an elephant's playground, but that's all."  He
stopped and gazed at the house long enough to memorize the windows that
commanded a view of the garden.  "No use going back there, now," he
decided.  "Chuck full of a man named Norvallis.  Suppose we drop down
to the tannery.  Not far, is it?  Where's that short cut through the
woods in which Varr first saw his monk?"

"Right over here."  The big man had gleaned that piece of information
earlier in the day.  The two men crossed the garden by its path,
passing the very spot where Simon Varr had met his tragic end, and
plunged into the trail.  Like the garden, this had been trampled by a
multitude of feet.  "What are you going to do at the tannery?" asked
Krech, yielding to his favorite weakness, curiosity.

"Talk to whoever is in charge.  Poke around the premises.  We know the
crook was there twice, on the occasions of the fires, and where a man
has been he may leave a trace.  It's an off-chance, but we can't
neglect it."

In default of any orders to the contrary, the watchman, Nelson, was at
his post behind the office building door, though he shrewdly suspected
that the chief necessity for guarding the premises had ceased with
their owner's death.  He willingly admitted Krech, whom he recognized
afar, and nodded comprehension when Creighton introduced himself and
his present mission.

"Yes, sir, I've been wondering when you would get here."

"The deuce you have!  You knew I was coming?"

"Yes, sir.  I heard Mr. Bolt and this gentleman mentioning you
yesterday as they went out of here."

Creighton turned and looked at his friend sardonically.  Beneath that
fixed regard Mr. Krech reddened, but stoutly defended himself.

"That was Jason Bolt," he averred.  "He was full of the subject and I
remember his chattering about it as we left."

"Um.  Can't be helped now."  He shifted his gaze to the watchman.  "Do
you remember if you mentioned it to any one?"  Nelson hesitated, and
the detective was on him in a flash.  "You did!  Speak out.  Tell the
truth, and you'll have no reason to be afraid of me or any one else.
This is a murder case, you know.  It's an awful mistake to hold
anything back.  Who did you tell?"

"Only one person sir.  A woman.  It just slipped out--"

"And probably did no harm.  Don't get worried.  Who was she?"

"A girl named Jones, sir, Drusilla Jones."  An expression akin to
horror dawned in Nelson's eyes as he grasped for the first time the
significance of what he was about to add.  "She had been keeping
company with a fellow named Charlie Maxon, who was put in jail a few
days ago by Mr. Varr--and last evening Charlie drugged his keeper and
never was missed until this morning!"

"My sainted aunt!  What time did he break jail?"

"Moody--the keeper--says the last thing he remembers was the clock
strikin' ten."

"Krech, do they know what time Varr was murdered?"

"Approximately at eleven."

"Let's hope for his sake that Charles has a whacking good alibi!  Have
you told the police about your talk with Drusilla Jones?"

"No, sir, they haven't been near me yet."

"Oh.  Well, eventually you will find yourself having a heart-to-heart
talk with a man named Norvallis.  Don't fail to tell him about your
chat with the lady--and you might just say that I advised you to repeat
it to him, will you?"

"Why, yes, sir.  Do you think that Charlie Maxon--?"

"No embarrassing questions, please!  Now I'd like to have a look about,
if I may."

"Yes, sir."  Painfully anxious to escape any suspicion of withholding
more information, Nelson hurriedly related the incident of the previous
afternoon when he and Simon Varr had examined the tracks left by the
incendiary.  "There was some light rain last night, sir, but those I
put the box over will be plain enough."

"Good.  Show us where they are at once."

The watchman obeyed with alacrity.

Together the three men stood by the edge of the sluggish little brook
and contemplated the tracks that Nelson indicated.  The detective did
not even take his eyes from them as he accepted and mechanically
lighted one of the cigars that Krech offered his companions.

"Big feet!" said Krech presently.

"That's what Mr. Varr remarked yesterday, sir."

"Um."  Creighton slowly came out of his trance.  He pointed to a small
piece of wood that lay down by the water's edge.  "Krech, will you step
down there and get that for me?  I want to look at it."

"Sure."  Astonished but amiable, the detective's willing assistant
strode to the object indicated and retrieved it handsomely.  His
astonishment increased when Creighton, after turning it over two or
three times in his hands, suddenly pitched it into the water.  "Don't
like it?"

"No.  That's all I want here just now."

They returned to the office building, where Creighton patiently
questioned Nelson at some length about the various phases of the
strike.  It was not until they had left the tannery and were walking
back up the hill that Krech was able to put an eager question.

"What was the racket with that piece of wood?"

"That was a stunt to cover my real interest from the watchman.  No use
letting the whole world in on what I'm thinking about."

"You didn't fool him any more than you did me.  Please explain why I'm
going home with over an inch of mud on my expensive shoes."

"I wanted you to make a set of tracks alongside those of the
incendiary.  I didn't want to ask you right out loud to do it, so I
asked you to get me that bit of wood.  When you did so, you left a very
nice set of footprints parallel with his.  Thus I was enabled to
compare them, as were you, if you happened to think of doing so."

"Well, I didn't!  Why should I?"

"Suppose you were a small man about to commit a crime and wished to
disguise yourself past recognition.  What would you do?"

"Make myself look like a large man," said Krech slowly.

"Exactly.  Suppose again that you were an educated man about to write
an anonymous, threatening letter.  How would you go about doing that?"

"I'd use a typewriter to conceal my handwriting.  I'd sign the thing in
an awkward scrawl."  Krech saw the drift of it now.  "And I'd take good
care to misspell a bunch of words!" he concluded triumphantly.

"That he faked illiteracy was a pure surmise, a mere possibility, until
now, when it gains color from the evidence of the footprints.  A mental
twist that would make a small man disguise himself as a large one would
make an educated man resort to illiteracy.  Logical, I think."

"Very likely.  But how did you get this from footprints?"

"They were too shallow.  I noticed that at once, and proved it by
parading yours alongside them.  That fellow wore shoes as big as yours
and was running to boot, but his tracks were scarcely half the depth of
those you made.  Get it?"

"Oh, yes," said Krech rather mournfully.  "Two and two always make four
when you add them up.  They never run to more than three and a half for
me."  He sighed.  "Creighton, I'd like once--just for _once_--to score
a beat over you!"

"Well, you may do it in this very case," remarked his friend
encouragingly.  "You never can tell."




_XV: Treasure Trove_

The instant they stepped into the house they knew that the police had
left it.  A calm, almost holy, peace seemed to have settled upon the
place, a far more fitting atmosphere considering the motionless form
that lay in a room upstairs, its eyes closed and its face more
reposeful than ever it had been in life.  "I bring peace," wrote some
long-forgotten craftsman on the blade of the dagger he had just
fashioned, and in some measure wrote the truth.

"And I've got to stir them all up again," said Creighton half
regretfully.

"Can't make omelets without breaking eggs," was the responsive
platitude from Herman Krech.  "I suppose you mean you're going to start
in asking questions."

"Millions of 'em.  I've been here just a few hours and I've barely
scratched the surface of this case, yet I've learned already that Mr.
Varr had a fine bunch of evil-wishers.  Where is that desk which was
broken open?  Do you know?"

"Yes.  It's in a small study in the back of the house that he used as a
sort of office, I guess.  Come along and I'll show you.  There's not a
soul in sight and we may as well make ourselves at home."

Creighton agreed, but before they reached the study a light step on the
stairs warned them that their privacy was to be invaded.  Miss Ocky
advanced upon them with determination, and instantly revealed that she
had at least one quality in common with the inquisitive Mr. Krech.

"Where have you been?" she demanded.  "What have you been doing?  I
sent Bates to look for you a while ago and he reported you missing."

"Anything special, Miss Copley?"

"Mostly curiosity," she confessed shamelessly.  "I've never seen a
detective at work and I've always wanted to.  I think yours must be the
most fascinating profession in the world even if it's a rather sad one.
Don't you find after looking into the hearts of people and dissecting
their mean little minds and motives that you grow cynical on the
subject of humanity?"

"Indeed I do not," he answered earnestly.  "Your question makes you
sound more cynical that I ever dreamed of being.  My experience is that
very few persons have mean minds and motives, and they are often
victims of some pressure of circumstance they can't control or resist.
I've put handcuffs on more than one poor devil for whom I've had
nothing but sympathy."

"You put them on just the same, though?"

"Certainly.  I'm supposed to, you know."

"It seems very hard-hearted.  If you knew that 'poor devil' was morally
justified in committing his crime, wouldn't you be tempted to--leave
the key of the handcuffs where he could get it?"

"Tempted, perhaps; that's all."

"Suppose it was some one who had a claim on you--a sister or brother or
child?"

"You must ask that of some unfortunate sleuth with a family.  My
nearest relative is a third cousin who lives in Chicago but has
nevertheless shown no criminal tendency to date.  I'm remarkably
well-protected from any potential struggle between duty and
inclination."  He smiled, and added apologetically, "Detective ethics
is a pretty complicated subject to discuss, and I'm afraid it isn't
getting on with the problem of who stole a notebook from Simon Varr's
desk."

"Of course it isn't--and I'm much more interested in seeing you attack
that!  But I warn you our conversation is only postponed!"

They entered the study, where Creighton went straight to the window and
stood looking out at the now devastated garden where Simon Varr had
been found.

"Who _did_ find him, by the way?" he voiced a sudden thought.

"Katie, the cook.  She came down first, as usual, and saw a man lying
flat on his back in the tomato patch.  Her first idea was that some one
had taken a drop too much and had strayed there and gone to sleep, so
she went up to Bates' room and routed him out.  He came down and
discovered the awful truth--and he behaved wonderfully.  He seemed to
know just what had to be done, and he actually managed to keep the news
from the family until official permission had been received to bring
the body into the house.  Poor Lucy--my sister--was at least spared the
thought of his lying out there."

"Who saw him last--in the house, I mean, of course?"

"Bates, who brought him a decanter of whisky here to the study, wished
him good-night and left him."

"What time was that?  Did the butler notice?"

"Yes, because he was interested in getting to bed.  It was about
ten-thirty."

"Um.  He was left here--alone--with a decanter of whisky and a troubled
mind.  It's safe to assume that he took a drink or so.  Tell me, was
your brother-in-law an impulsive sort of person--liable to outbursts of
passion--inclined to do things in a headlong, reckless way?"

"A very good description indeed."

"I've been wondering how he happened to be out in the garden so
opportunely for the murderer.  If he was sitting in this room, looked
out the window and spotted the fellow hanging around, his first impulse
might have been to rush from the house and tackle him.  Does that
impress you as being a likely scenario, Miss Copley?"

"Very.  To tell you the truth, when he was really angry I'm inclined to
think he was scarcely responsible for his actions."

"His enemy knew that, you may be sure, and counted on it to his own
advantage.  Now, another question about the matter of time.  You told
me, Krech, that the hour of the murder had been approximately set at
eleven.  Do you know how that was determined?"

"It was the doctor's opinion, for one thing.  Then it was pretty
plausibly substantiated by a trick of the weather.  There was a shower
at eleven-thirty last night from which the ground was still wet early
this morning.  The local Chief of Police covered himself with glory by
noticing that the earth beneath Varr's body was as dry as a bone when
they took him up."

"Good enough.  I must have a chat with that lad.  I wonder if he
noticed anything else that was useful."

"Somebody did," commented Miss Ocky thoughtfully.  "There was a man out
there making a plaster cast of some footprints.  Why do you suppose he
was doing that, Mr. Creighton?"

"My golly!" The detective's eyes flashed with excitement.  "Did you see
them, Miss Copley?"

"Yes, but they meant nothing to me."

"How large were they, do you remember?"  He waved a hand at Mr. Krech's
extremities.  "Large as those?"

"Oh, my, no," said Miss Ocky, glancing at the objects indicated.  "Not
nearly as large as those."

"I'd like to interrupt these proceedings," declared Krech in an injured
voice, "long enough to remark that any sculptor would tell you they are
beautifully proportioned to my size."

"I wasn't criticizing their--architecture," said the lady.

"Second time to-day he's called attention to them!"

"Shameful.  What was the first?"

"Oh, that was rather interesting.  I'll tell you about it if he'll let
me."

"Tell me anyway.  He doesn't seem to be paying any attention to us at
all.  What _is_ he doing?"

"Hush! he's thinking," said the big man vindictively after a brief
inspection of his friend.  "He always looks like that when he thinks.
Scientists aver the eye reflects the mind; note the perfect blankness
of his?"

That effectively aroused Creighton from his momentary abstraction.  He
grinned at the two of them.

"Pay no attention to him, Miss Copley.  Yes, you can tell her what we
found at the tannery, Krech."  He looked at Miss Ocky.  "That is in
deference to your interest in the art of detection; may I count on you
not to breathe a word of what I tell you to any one?"

"You may."

"It's a bargain.  Go ahead, Krech, while I amuse myself looking over
his desk."

Miss Ocky listened eagerly to Krech's somewhat embroidered account of
their activities at the tannery, but managed to keep an eye on Peter
Creighton the while.  He was going over the desk and its roll-top cover
inch by inch, peering at its surface, trailing his fingertips over the
polished wood in case touch might find something that vision hadn't.
Once he interrupted Krech by asking him to bring a magnifying glass
from his bag in the hall.

"What are you looking for?" asked Miss Ocky in the interim.

"Nothing--anything.  I expect the first and may chance on the second.
This is just routine, Miss Copley.  When I know a crook has been in a
certain spot, I go over the place with a fine-tooth comb.  You'd be
surprised to know the number of microscopic bits of evidence a man can
leave behind him in spite of every precaution."

"Have you found anything here?"

"No."  He accepted the glass that Krech handed him and went back to his
task.  "This fellow was careful, sure enough."

The big man resumed his story.  She interrupted him with a quick little
exclamation when she heard of Charlie Maxon's escape.  Her interest
brought a question from the detective.

"Know him, Miss Copley?"

"I've spoken to him once or twice.  Casually."

"How did that happen?  Where did you meet him?"

"In a grocery store in the town.  He came in for something while I was
there.  Of course he knew who I was, and he started talking to me about
the strike and how hard it was on the men."

"Um.  What sort of a chap is he?  Capable of--murder?"

"Good gracious, I don't think so!"  Miss Ocky straightened in her chair
and shot a quick glance at the detective.  "He's the agitator
type--more bark than bite.  I don't believe he'd have the courage to
kill a man.  Is--is he suspected?"

"I can't tell you.  We may know more about that after the
inquest--unless Norvallis gets it adjourned, which he may.  I don't
think he'll want to show his hand so soon."

"This will be a spicy bit of gossip for Janet," mused Miss Ocky half to
herself, then caught Creighton's raised eyebrow and explained her
remark.  "Janet Mackay is my maid, and she used to know Maxon in
Scotland when he was a youngster."

"Um.  Have they seen anything of each other lately?"

"No.  Janet has no use for him.  She says he was always getting into
trouble as a boy."

"He doesn't seem to have lost the habit.  Is Janet a tall thin woman
who wears steel-rimmed glasses?"

"Yes.  You noticed her in the kitchen this morning, didn't you?  She
told me you went through that way."

"Has she been with you long?"

"Twenty-five years.  She came here as a sort of companion-maid to my
sister and me a few years before my father's death.  She was very fond
of Lucy, but she didn't care so much for Simon, so when I went East I
took her with me.  We've been together ever since."

"No need to ask, then, if you trust her."

"Trust her!  Trust Janet?"  Miss Ocky's voice was warm.  "I'd trust her
with my life!"

Creighton dropped the subject, but added another fragment to the data
he was compiling.  Janet, the nondescript lady, didn't care much for
Varr, and was acquainted with Charlie Maxon.  Important?  Um--too soon
to say.  He concentrated his attention once more on his search.

"Nothing," he finally announced briefly.  He rose as he spoke--he had
been on his hands and knees the better to examine the floor in front of
the desk--and shrugged his shoulders philosophically.  "Said I expected
as much, didn't I?  Now for that window in the living-room."

Krech had finished his story and Miss Ocky was looking at the detective
with considerable interest and some respect.

"That was clever of you to notice the shallowness of the footprints,"
she said.  "And your deductions from them and the note are quite
shrewd.  A small educated man instead of a large illiterate one?"

"Yes.  Not that I'd advise you to bet on it.  Quite often the brilliant
deduction falls by the wayside and leaves the obvious conclusion to jog
home a winner.  You had a good look at the fellow didn't you?  You got
the impression that he was tall?  How tall?"

"Oh, six feet perhaps.  It was dusk, you know, and he brushed by me
very quickly.  I was too scared to do much observing!"

"Uncomfortable experience," said Krech, "having a masked monk pop out
at you from a peaceful countryside.  What did you think about it?  Did
you know the fool legend?"

"N-no.  I learned about that next day from Sheila Graham.  I was
telling her my experience and she remembered the story and went and got
the book."

"She's the daughter of Billy Graham, the manager whom Varr had decided
to get rid of?"  Creighton's face was serious.

"How in the world did you know _that_!"  cried Miss Ocky.

"Gossip.  I love to listen to it.  Ever talk to a chap named Nelson, a
watchman at the tannery?  He's full of it."  It was a trick of Peter
Creighton's to sound most flippant when he was soberest inside, and
Krech, who knew it, fell to watching him sharply.  But the detective's
face was inscrutable.  "So Graham's daughter had a book containing the
legend of the monk, eh?  Just what was the trouble between him and Mr.
Varr?"

"Well--I suppose I may as well tell you," said Miss Ocky reluctantly.
"It wouldn't be right to keep anything back from you, especially as
you'd be bound to hear about it anyway.  The trouble between them was
mostly started by my brother-in-law, who objected to the interest his
son was showing in Sheila Graham.  They considered themselves engaged--"

"What?  Varr had a son?"  Creighton broke in on her abruptly,
unconsciously raising his voice in his surprise.  "Where is he?"

"His father drove him from the house!" cried a hoarse voice from the
door.  "I don't know where he is.  He ought to be with me now---_and I
don't know where he is_!"

Creighton wheeled swiftly toward the speaker, Krech shot out of his
chair as though a powerful spring had been released beneath him, and
Miss Ocky darted, birdlike, to the side of a slender figure which
swayed in the doorway, gripping the woodwork for support.  It was Lucy
Varr.

"Lucy!  What are you doing down here?"  Miss Ocky circled her sister's
slender waist with a gently compelling arm.  "Come with me!"

"I  rang and rang and nobody came.  I wanted water.  I was _so_
thirsty!"  She muttered the words feverishly and the brightness of her
big eyes told its own story of a tortured brain.  "I heard somebody
talking in here--"

"Come, Lucy!  I'll bring you the water."

"Was it you who was asking for my son?"  Her gaze passed over Krech,
whom she appeared vaguely to recognize, and fixed itself on the grave,
sympathetic face of the detective.  "You're Mr. Creighton, aren't you?
They tell me you have come to find out who killed my husband--"

"Lucy, dear!  Please--"

"I--I'm sure I wish you luck!"

"Thank you, Mrs. Varr," said Creighton quietly, choosing to ignore the
irony in her tone.  "I'll do my very best, I promise you."

His promise was made to her retreating figure as she finally permitted
her sister to lead her away.  Left alone, the two men exchanged a quick
glance and were silent for a minute.  Then Krech jerked his head toward
the door significantly.

"Could it be--her?" he whispered.

"Not grammatically!" retorted Creighton with a grin, much as if his
friend's query had freed him from a spell.  "Piffle, Krech.  If a woman
like that--high-strung, nervous--were to kill a man it would be in some
swift fit of passion.  Varr's death came as the climax of a deliberate
campaign of persecution.  She isn't capable of that."

"If you can tell me what any woman can or can't do--"

"Oh, I grant them an infinite capacity for surprising a man!  However,
this interesting little interlude isn't getting us anywhere.  Come into
the living-room.  I want a look at that window before daylight goes."

"The police have probably mucked that all up," said Mr. Krech gloomily.

"I heard one of the detectives tell Norvallis they had found nothing.
Anyway, if I don't miss my guess, they were so satisfied with something
they're keeping up their sleeve that I don't believe they paid more
than cursory attention to other details.  Just gave everything a
perfunctory once-over and let it go at that."

"What have they got, Creighton?  Do you know?"

"Charlie Maxon seems an attractive prospect," replied the detective.
They had gone to the window in the living-room and he was busily
engaged upon the same eager scrutiny that he had given the desk.  "They
may have discovered something that links him with the murder--that
business of taking plaster casts of footprints is very suggestive.
Maxon could have reached here after breaking jail in plenty of time to
knife Varr in keeping with the schedule as we know it.  He's an ugly
customer by reputation, and he certainly had no reason to love Simon
Varr."

"How did he get the dagger?  He didn't steal it, because the evening it
was stolen he was safe in the hoosgow."

"Correct, Krech, absolutely correct."  The detective was intently
studying the brass lock of the door through his powerful glass.  "Now
you've started thinking, persevere!  If Maxon committed the murder but
didn't steal the knife, what's the answer?"

"An accomplice!" cried Krech.  "A whole gang, perhaps!"

"Oh, don't be extravagant.  One accomplice will do for the time being."
Creighton dropped to his knees and transferred his interest to the
flooring of the piazza outside the window and the carpet within.  "_By
golly!_"

The phrase fairly exploded from his lips.  Krech, abandoning his
cogitations, came quickly to his side, eager to learn what this
exclamation portended.

Creighton, with his habitual care to miss nothing, had not contented
himself with exploring the surface of the veranda or the surface of the
heavy gray carpet that covered the floor of the room from edge to edge.
That finished, he had thrust his fingers between the carpet and the
wood of the window-sill, holding it back with one hand while he passed
his magnifying glass over the accumulation of dust and dirt and
sweepings that lay in the crack.  His pains were rewarded.  A tiny
scrap of something that glittered in its nest of dirt caught his eye,
but it was not until it lay on the tip of one finger beneath his glass
that he realized the importance of his treasure trove.  It was then he
exclaimed.

"What is it?" asked Krech, craning for a better look.

"See for yourself!"  Very carefully the detective pushed the object
from his finger on to one of his friend's.  "Don't drop it.  What do
_you_ think it is?  Here--take the glass."

"A chip of metal, I should say.  Steel.  Blue steel."

"Blue steel!  Where have you seen blue steel before to-day?"

"Gee Joseph!  That dagger!"

"Right.  Did you notice the nick in it near the point?"

"N-no.  They wouldn't let me really look at it."

"Well, there was one!  And this piece will fit that nick, or I'm a
dumb-bell!"  His eyes were dancing with delight.  "Know what this
means?"

"Y-yes.  When the fellow slipped back the catch of this window he
nicked the blade.  Probably never noticed it.  This piece fell to the
floor and has been there ever since."

"Fell to the floor--yes.  It isn't likely that it went neatly into the
crack.  It was swept there.  Ever stop to think that the detective's
best friend is the housemaid who scamps her work?  Bless their little
souls, they will sweep into cracks!  But that isn't what I had in mind
when I asked you if you knew what this means?"

"Maybe I could dope it out in time--"

"He opened this window with the dagger!  Don't you get it?"

"My brain isn't hitting on all sixteen cylinders--"

"Listen.  The assumption has been that he broke in here, took the
dagger from the table where it lay handy, and forced Varr's desk.  If
he got the dagger after he entered the house, why did he then force the
window with it?"

"Gee Joseph!  It's a blind!  He faked the breaking and entering to make
it appear an outside job!"

"Yes."  Creighton's face was solemn as he reclaimed his chip of steel
and added the obvious corollary to Krech's deduction.  "If it's not an
outside job it must be an inside one.  Somebody in this house took that
dagger and notebook."

"I'll bet it was--!"

"Hush!" whispered the detective sharply.  "Some one coming!"




_XVI: A Woman of Note_

At the warning sound of approaching footsteps, Creighton whipped an
envelope from his pocket and dropped into it the precious bit of blue
steel he had recovered from the crack beneath the French window; he
smoothed down the carpet with a quick sideways flirt of his foot,
thrust the envelope into his coat, and had barely time to hiss one
further admonition into Krech's attentive ear.

"Not a word of this to a soul!"

"My lips are sealed," declared the big man.

Miss Ocky entered the room to find two gentlemen engaged in
conversation close by an open window out of which they were looking
while their backs were tranquilly turned to the apartment.  When she
said, "Excuse me!" they pivoted about as one, and the synchronic
promptitude with which they uttered the same question did credit to
their bringing up.

"How is Mrs. Varr?"

"Much quieter--much better, thank you."  Miss Ocky lighted a cigarette
with the air of one who has earned it, and dropped wearily into a
chair.  "I was as much upset as you must have been when she turned up
there in the study.  Hardly necessary to make excuses for her, is it?
She is not very strong, and she has been through enough in the last two
days to wreck an Amazon."

"Doctor worried about her?" asked Krech.  "Is there anything Mrs. Bolt
or my wife can do?  I know that's the first thing they'll ask."

"Not a thing.  Please thank them both for me.  I'm not a bit diffident
about asking favors of people and they can be sure I'll call for help
if I need it.  No, the doctor isn't alarmed; he just wants her to sleep
as much as possible until the worst of the mental strain is over."

A faint clatter of silverware from the dining-room aroused Krech to the
passage of time.  He looked at his watch and started as if he had been
stung.

"Nearly seven!  I'm a ruined man!  Where on earth is Jason Bolt?  He
was to call for me long before this."

"That's true--you're stranded, aren't you?  I'd forgotten you came with
him."  Miss Ocky reflected briefly.  "I simply can't leave here myself
just now, but I'll have Janet take the car and drive you home."

"Janet?" inquired Creighton.  "Drives a car, does she?  Quite an
accomplished lady's-maid!"

"She's a remarkable person," said Miss Ocky.  "I'll tell you about her
some other time.  Now--about yourself!  Will you let me save you from
the horrors of the local hotel?"

"I was going to ask you if your invitation was still open," answered
the detective hesitantly.  "But under the circumstances--with your
sister ill--haven't you enough trouble on your hands?"

"This house runs itself, thank to Bates," she replied quickly.  She met
his eye frankly.  "You won't inconvenience us in the least, and I'd
really be grateful if you would stay.  So would my sister.  With only
old Bates in the house she is inclined to be nervous while--while that
man is still at large."

"It is very gracious of you to put it that way," he murmured.

"That's settled," she said briskly, and stood up.  "Now I'll go find
Janet."

"So Janet's a remarkable person, is she?" muttered Krech when Miss Ocky
had left the room.  "Hers was the name I was about to mention when you
stopped me.  Janet Mackay knows Charlie Maxon!"

"Easy!  Don't let your imagination run away with you.  What conceivable
motive could she have had to conspire against Varr's life?"

"I don't know."  Krech grinned.  "If I lay the foundation, it's up to
you to erect the edifice.  Brain-work, not manual labor, is my forte."
Then he added more seriously, "I've thought of something; instead of
the accomplice being actually a member of the household, mightn't he be
just some one who has the entrée--the run of the house?  Some one who
could carry off the situation if he had been discovered in the
living-room or study by the servants?"

"That's a good point, Krech; a very good point.  I'll inquire into that
possibility."

"So you're going to make this your headquarters?"

"Assuredly."  Creighton tapped his pocket.  "This decided it."

"Well--take care of yourself, won't you?"  There was genuine concern in
the big man's voice as he went on with specious flippancy.  "Miss
Copley left a dagger kicking around; let's hope she hasn't dropped an
automatic or a machine-gun here and there.  If Mr. Monk got the idea
that you knew too much--"

"All right."  Creighton reached out and gave Krech's arm an
affectionate squeeze.  "Don't worry; I'm an artist at taking care of
myself."

"I know a darn' sight better!" growled Krech, and the honking of a horn
from the driveway ended their talk.  "Good-by.  I'm going to pump Jason
Bolt and if I glean anything I'll let you know in the morning."

Creighton waved good-night to him from the veranda and stepped back
into the house to find the maid awaiting him in the hall.

"Your bag has gone up, sir.  Shall I show you your room?"

"Thank you.  By the way, what is your name?"

"Betty, sir.  Betty Blake."

"Very pretty name, too."  He motioned her to precede him up the stairs.
"Been with Mrs. Varr long?"

"About four months, sir."

"Are you a Hambleton girl?"

"Yes, sir, born and bred."

The room assigned to him was one of the best in the house.  It was next
to Miss Ocky's own, he was to discover later, and like hers it had a
small rounded balcony outside the tall windows.  He glanced about him
appreciatively.  He could rough it with any man, but he vastly
preferred to be comfortable.  Here he would be, if his eye didn't
deceive him.

"Native, eh?" he continued conversationally as the girl made to leave
him.  "Then you must know every one in these parts.  For instance--do
you know a young man called Maxon?"

"Charlie Maxon?"  She tossed her head.  "Yes, I know _him_!"  Her
accent was richly scornful.  "Pity they couldn't keep him in jail!"

There was a writing table with note paper on it in one corner of the
room, and as she finished speaking a scrap of crumpled paper on the
floor beneath it caught her eye.  With instinctive neatness she went
across the room and picked it up, steadying herself as she stooped by
resting her fingertips lightly on the pile of paper.

"Is there anything more, sir?"

"Thank you, no," replied Creighton absently.

When she had closed the door behind her he went over by the writing
table and stood looking down at the topmost sheet of paper.  The maid's
orderly spirit had given him a hint that he thought he might profitably
employ.  He picked up the paper and held it slantwise to the light of
the window while he peered at its surface.  Then he nodded contentedly.

He drew forth his pencil and made a neat number one at the top of the
sheet, which he then dropped in a drawer of the desk.  He found a clean
page in a small memo-book that he carried and made a careful entry, "1.
Betty Blake."

"I'll get 'em all before I finish," he promised himself.

He went downstairs a few minutes later to meet the butler on his way up
with the announcement that dinner was served; a welcome piece of news
to a man who had had a long day on sandwiches only.

"Just the two of us," Miss Ocky greeted him as he entered the
dining-room.  "I'll pay you the compliment of admitting that the
arrangement suits me perfectly.  A crowd would have been terrible, but
to have dined by myself would have been ghastly."

"Nothing could have pleased me better," said the detective as they
seated themselves.  "It has been growing increasingly clear to me that
I must look to you for a great deal of information.  Yours is the most
authoritative voice around here."

"I'll play oracle within reason."

"Um.  Don't let's start off with a reservation like that, Miss Copley.
You made a naïve, but very wise, remark this afternoon when you said
you might just as well tell me something, especially as I was bound to
find it out anyway.  Stick to that maxim.  It will save me time and you
trouble."

"Mmph!" said Miss Ocky.

"About there only being two of us for dinner," continued the detective,
blandly ignoring the sniff, "there's a matter I'd like to clear up.
Where is Mr. Varr's son?  Was the trouble between them so bitter that
it is to be perpetuated after death?"

"I couldn't bring myself to speak about that until we were by
ourselves," said Miss Ocky.  She looked up at Bates with a friendly
glance.  "I know you won't repeat anything, Bates!  The trouble between
Simon and his son grew out of Copley's attachment for Sheila Graham.  I
like her extremely, so I found myself in opposition to Simon.  I cast
myself in the role of the heavy fairy godmother and took a hand in
shaping the destinies of the young couple--a fond aunt has an
inalienable right to barge into her nephew's affairs, hasn't she?"

"Second only to a grandmother's," he assured her.

"I persuaded them to elope," confessed Miss Ocky.  "No date was set for
it that I heard of.  Yesterday Copley succeeded in finding a job on the
Hambleton _News_ as a reporter--and the editor, Mr. Barlow, when he
arrived here this morning to cover this story told me that the boy had
immediately celebrated his getting a job by asking for a two-week
vacation to attend to some personal business.  He left Hambleton last
night for parts unknown.  Meanwhile, Sheila Graham had gone to visit
friends in New York for a fortnight.  If you're a good detective, Mr.
Creighton, you may make the right deduction."

"He started off on a honeymoon the very day his father was murdered.
Rather--unpleasant coincidence."

"It struck me that way.  I've been keeping mum just on that account.
Norvallis was apparently satisfied with a statement that Copley is
temporarily absent and that we are trying to get in touch with him."

"Norvallis is a very amiable gentleman; he has his reasons for being
so, I think.  As for Copley--well, a good many newspapers will carry
the story of what happened last night and he will undoubtedly read it
by to-morrow morning--possibly this evening.  Then he will come home."

"Keeping his marriage--if there was one--dark, I trust.  With the
opposition--er--removed, I think it would be more suitable to have a
public ceremony after a decent interval."

"Um.  A matter of taste, perhaps.  Personally, I've seen so much
trouble caused by secret marriages that I'm inclined to eye them
doubtfully.  But--may I ask you a few questions about the less romantic
adventures of the young man?  Mrs. Varr declared this afternoon that
her husband had driven him from the house.  Was their
disagreement--violent?"

"You must make allowances for my sister's nervous condition," answered
Miss Ocky quickly.  Her perceptions were instantly alive to whither
this shift in the conversation might lead, and she resolved to limit
the information she gave him as much as possible to the facts he would
surely discover for himself.  "Simon and Copley talked over the
situation, night before last; Lucy naturally exaggerates the affair."

"Mr. Varr and his son quarreled.  Isn't that the plain truth?"

"Doesn't a quarrel depend somewhat on the natures of the two people
involved, Mr. Creighton?  Simon was fearfully obstinate, and Copley is
a little high-tempered--just to the extent that is becoming to a young
man with any spirit--and I suppose that what might be merely a normal
discussion between two such natures might--might seem like a quarrel to
other people.  Mightn't it?" she added, not very hopefully.

Despite himself, the detective was forced to grin at this ingenuous, or
ingenious, argument.

"They quarreled," he summed it up, regaining his gravity.  "If you will
recollect, Miss Copley, when you came into the sitting-room a while ago
you excused your sister's indisposition on the plea that she had been
through enough the last _two_ days to wreck an Amazon.  Why _two_ days,
unless it was the quarrel between her husband and her son that worried
her all of yesterday?"

"Oh, heavens!  You're worse than a dictaphone!"  Miss Ocky made a face
at him.  "There's no help for it--I must go into a silence."

"Please don't, until I've asked one more thing.  You can answer freely,
or the station master will.  If Copley went to town last night, what
trains were available?"

"Only one," she admitted slowly.  "There's a through train from the
West that stops at Hambleton for water--at midnight!"

"Ah," said Peter Creighton, then wished he hadn't.

A high-tempered youth--a pig-headed father--a balked romance--a
quarrel--a murder at eleven and a train away at midnight.  These facts
paraded through Creighton's brain and to a certain extent got ready to
parade right on out of it.  He could think all around a given subject,
as he had described the process to Jason Bolt, and he was no fool to
commit himself to half-baked hypotheses.  Any theory of Copley's guilt
could be countered with the same objection he made to Krech's hasty
indictment of Mrs. Varr; a boy like that might strike down a man in the
heat of passion but he would hardly set himself to calculated
murder--or if he did, he would certainly arrange a better finish than a
clumsy attempt at flight.

He became aware that Miss Copley was watching him anxiously while he
meditated.  He met her eyes--very nice eyes they were, he
reflected--and it was too bad they should reveal fear, as they had
since his monosyllabic exclamation.

"Are--are you suggesting--"

"Nothing, Miss Copley--nothing!  Frankly and honestly!  If you will
permit me to say so, I think you are trying to make a mountain out of
this molehill yourself.  I haven't a doubt in the world that your
nephew will turn up with every minute of last evening properly
accounted for."  He welcomed the slow reversion to normal of her
expression.  "Come, if I'm a dictaphone, let's pretend I'm turned off!
Shall we talk of something else than murder?  One might as well dine to
jazz!"

That brought a smile to her lips--a quavery, uncertain little smile but
an augury of better ones to come.

"With all my heart," she agreed.  "What are your conversational
preferences?"

"Anything but shop.  May I ask you a personal question?"

"Personal questions are always the most interesting."

"I've heard you addressed once or twice as 'Miss Ocky,' and I've been
wondering just what the abbreviation stands for?"

"Oh!  You've landed squarely on a sore spot, but no matter.  My father,
bless him, was one of the dearest men that ever lived, but now and then
he would get some particularly quaint idea into his head and proceed to
carry it out in spite of every opposition.  I arrived in this world on
a chilly autumn day and was duly presented to my father's gaze.  He was
quite inexperienced about babies and it's recorded of him that he
stared at me aghast and said: 'My gad, what a bleak-looking object!'
That inspired some by-standing lunatic to observe that I doubtless took
after the month, and my father promptly exclaimed: 'October!  What a
jolly fine name for her.  We'll call her October!'"  Miss Ocky sighed
resignedly.  "They let him get away with it.  I was christened October.
It has the sole merit of being distinctive!"

"My golly!"  Creighton had listened to the concluding phrases of her
anecdote with wonderment writ large on his face.  He carefully put his
knife and fork on his plate and leaned back in his chair while he
continued to regard her with a rapt expression.  "Are _you_ October
Copley?"

"Yes!" laughed the lady.

"_The_ October Copley?"

"I'm quite unique, I believe," said Miss Ocky cheerfully.

"Did _you_ write 'Thibetan Trails,' 'Passages from Persia' and those
bully Chinese things with the queer title?"

"'Chiliads of China.'  Yes, I wrote 'em.  Don't sit there and tell me
you've read them!"

"Read them--I've _loved_ them!  It's a wonder I didn't connect your
name with them at once.  My wits have been woolgathering.  But, hang
it!  Who could have expected to find an internationally famous writer
and traveler stuck away in this corner of the world?  Why haven't
seventeen or ninety people _told_ me who you were?"

She laughed at his eager interest.

"A prophet is without honor in his own country," she said.  "To my
family I'm just Ocky; to the natives of Hambleton I'm only 'that Copley
girl with the queer name who's come back from furrin parts'."

She laughed again, half surprised and half embarrassed, as he suddenly
rose from his chair, marched around the table, shook hands with her and
solemnly marched back again to his seat.

"Meeting a stray Miss Copley is one thing," he assured her.  "Meeting
October Copley is quite another matter."

It was impossible for her not to be touched by such sincere,
whole-hearted enthusiasm.  Her throat tightened queerly.  Bates, too,
an astonished spectator of the scene, was discreetly impressed.  A
stand-offishness that he had felt toward Peter Creighton, the
detective, was weakened in favor of a man who thus appreciated his own
Miss Ocky.  An artist in simple gestures, he testified to his new
approbation by refilling the wineglass beside Creighton's plate.

"Now, tell me what you are doing here.  I can't believe it is really
you sitting opposite me, there!  If any one had asked me ten minutes
ago where I supposed you might be, I would have answered that you were
probably hunting hippopotamusses in the Himalayas or--or--"

"Tigers in Africa!" suggested Miss Ocky.  "No, here I really am."
Creighton had already noticed that she was usually divided between two
moods, an amused, faintly mocking one, and another that had somehow an
undercurrent of sadness.  This last seemed to hold her as she added,
"Here to stay, I think.  My wanderings are done and now I must--settle
down."

"Another great light has just burst on me," exclaimed Creighton.
"Janet Mackay!  She must be the companion you refer to so often in your
travel books.  By golly, was it she who dove beneath an ice-pack and
brought you back to the air-hole through which you had fallen?"

"That was indeed Janet!  I repaid the favor later by valiantly dashing
into a burning hotel and releasing her from a beam that had dropped
across her--well, she'd call 'em limbs!  Regular movie stuff.  Yes,
Janet and I are now fearfully responsible for each other."

"There was no mention of the fire in any of your books."

"Mmph.  I'd be apt to bust into print with that, wouldn't I?  But I
don't mind informing you--just between us girls, as your friend Mr.
Krech would say--that you're in the presence of an honest-to-goodness
heroine!"

"I knew that," said Peter Creighton simply.

There followed for him a somewhat curious evening.  No detective worth
his salt will permit extraneous matters to thrust themselves between
his mind and the immediate problem with which it should be occupied,
and Creighton really had a very high sense of duty.  When they had
taken themselves out of the house and settled down in the cozy corner
of the big veranda, he punctiliously strove to concentrate on a dagger
and a notebook and a murder, but ever and anon, as he tried to post
himself on the manifold ramifications of the affair to date, the
conversation would persist in taking unexpected trips to the Orient.
His interest in this topic was so keen that he blamed these divagations
on himself, and since a clever woman is cleverer than the cleverest
man, it never once occurred to him that the guiding-reins of their talk
lay in a pair of slender, capable, sun-browned hands.  Miss Ocky
preferred almost any subject that evening to the one of paramount
importance.

He sat a while after she bade him good-night and left him, his thoughts
a medley of vague impressions, confused, half-formed, inchoate.  He
tried to fix his mind on Simon Varr and ended by surrendering it to the
vivid, vital personality of Miss Ocky.

When he went upstairs to his room the first object that caught his
attention was a slender volume, beautifully bound, that lay on his
dressing-table.  "The Mystery of Lhasa."  He had not heard of that one.
A glance at the title-page accounted for that.  Privately printed.  On
the flyleaf, inscribed in a bold, dashing hand, were the words, "For
Peter Creighton--a master of mysteries--from October Copley."

"That's mighty nice of her," he told himself, putting it down.  "Golly,
what a woman!  She has packed more life into each of her years than
most men get in their three-score-and-ten."

The hour was early for his metropolitan standards.  He thought of the
balcony outside his window, and forthwith carried a comfortable chair
to that cool retreat.  He had lighted a cigar and established himself
contentedly before a low voice challenged him from the darkness to the
right.

"So you have found your little veranda!"

"Hello, Miss Copley!  You got one too?"

"Yes.  I come out here nearly every evening for an hour before going to
bed.  I love to watch the stars."

"No dearth of them in these skies."

"If we could look beyond them we might read the Riddle of the Universe.
I think we could--I think so!"  Here was the undercurrent of sadness
again, sounding through an odd intensity of tone.  "Surely, there is
something beyond them.  There must be!  What do you think?"

"I know there is.  If you sat here long enough, Miss Copley, I believe
your doubts would be set at rest."

"What do you mean?  What is behind the stars?"

"The dawn," he told her seriously.  "These windows must face due East."
He mused briefly.  "They also command a partial view of that kitchen
garden, come to think of it!  You didn't happen to see or hear
any--last evening--"

"What a one-track mind!" lamented Miss Ocky.  "_No!_"

They talked until very late.




_XVII: An Arrest is Made_

At eleven o'clock the next morning, the ground-floor of the big house
was again invaded by a heterogeneous collection of people drawn thither
by the coroner's inquest into the death of Simon Varr.  Some were there
as witnesses or because they had a personal interest in the
proceedings, some because they were part of the legal machinery, and
many because they were driven by morbid curiosity.  The Coroner, an
alert, bewhiskered old gentleman named Merton, took possession of the
big living-room and had one end of it fenced off with chairs the better
to mark the dignified exclusiveness of his court.

As on the previous day, the end of the veranda around the corner from
the front of the house escaped the notice of the invading horde.
Creighton spent the early part of the morning there, after a solitary
breakfast, reading the morning paper attentively.  Barlow, the editor,
had covered the story of the murder with a competent pencil.  The
account was graphic, lucid and comprehensive, a credit to himself and
his paper.  When Creighton had finished its careful perusal he was
posted on many details of the case that sheer lack of time had
prevented him from learning the day before.  With a considerable degree
of satisfaction, however, he noted that he had unearthed a fair amount
of information that the industrious scribe had missed.

Only second in interest to the big story itself was the half-column on
an inner page devoted to the jail-breaking exploit of Mr. Charles
Maxon--which would certainly have been largely featured at any other
time.  Some lesser scribe on Barlow's staff had been assigned to this
minor item of news.  He had gotten hold of the unfortunate Moody, and
under the caption, "Der Jail Is Oudt" he had written a racy, humorous
account of a Lady-Fair with Knockout Drops, a Resourceful Romeo and a
hoodwinked Jailer.  It ended with the statement that Romeo and the Lady
were still missing, and that a ticket agent on night duty at the
railroad station had seen two muffled figures unostentatiously board
the last car of the midnight train without the formality of buying
tickets.

"That means they'll have had to pay on the train," mused Creighton,
"and of course the conductor will remember to what point they bought
transportation when the police get around to asking him.  Um.  Would a
murderer leave a trail as clear as that?  I think not!"

It still lacked half-an-hour of the time set for the inquest.
Creighton was smoking a cigarette and mentally digesting the
information gleaned from the newspaper when Jason Bolt, accompanied by
Krech and Miss Ocky, came swooping down upon him.

"Developments!" said Jason, his face wreathed in smiles.  "I've found
out what Norvallis has up his sleeve.  Want to know?"

"I certainly do," said Creighton.  "How did you find out?"

"Small-town stuff," declared Bolt cheerfully.  "You can't keep a thing
dark in the country.  Our local Chief of Police is sore as a pup
because Norvallis, when he gave the paper the story yesterday, failed
to give him credit for fixing the hour of the murder by the dry ground
beneath the body.  Steiner--that's the chief--came to see me this
morning at the office to make some inquiries about the fire the other
night.  He accepted a cigar, got to talking about his troubles--and
didn't hesitate to tell me the county officers' theory when I asked him
what it was."

"Charlie Maxon?" asked Creighton when Bolt paused for breath--and from
the corner of his eye saw Miss Ocky give a little start.

"You've guessed it," admitted Jason a trine disappointedly.  "I confess
I don't think much of their case, but Charlie Maxon is their choice.
He broke jail just after ten o'clock and came up here.  That is
definitely proved to their satisfaction, at least, by footprints
recognized as his in the soft earth beside Simon's body.  They were
identical with some he'd left when he came up here on an earlier
tomato-swiping raid.  Norvallis swore out a warrant yesterday afternoon
and started a couple of sleuths on the trail of Maxon and his lady
friend, and they were arrested early this morning in the village of
Chiswick, about fifty miles down the line.  What do you think of that?"

"What is the charge?"

"Indefinite.  They're to be held on suspicion of being concerned in the
murder.  That's why I say it sounds like a weak case."

"How do they trace the dagger to Maxon?"

"He is supposed to have an accomplice."  Bolt looked a little more
serious.  "Steiner was more cautious on that point--or else he was not
so much in the know.  There was a discharged clerk named Langhorn who
accompanied Billy Graham to this house on the night of the robbery.
Langhorn must have recognized the notebook in Simon's hand during that
interview, and it was common knowledge among the clerks in the tannery
that it contained valuable matter.  The police theory is that he took
advantage of Simon's absence at the fire to sneak back to the house,
enter the study and steal the book--using the dagger and carrying it
off with him afterward.  He was seen talking to a man on the evening of
the murder at the corner of an alley behind the lock-up.  The county
crowd think that man was Maxon, that Maxon was two-thirds drunk at
least, and that Langhorn gave him the knife and egged him on to kill
Simon.  That's the gist of it."

"Um.  Why should Langhorn flirt with the hangman?  Discharged clerks
don't necessarily revenge themselves to that extent!"

"He wouldn't tell me if he could--and I don't believe he can!"

"There is something I don't understand," broke in Miss Ocky, frowning
thoughtfully.  "Can a possibly innocent man be held just on suspicion
like that?  Surely, Norvallis must have strong proofs."

"I may be doing him an injustice," answered Creighton quietly, "but I
think I have discovered the reason for Mr. Norvallis' activities.  I
rather wondered why he was thrusting himself so eagerly into the
investigation instead of leaving it to the detectives.  Yesterday I saw
a poster on a fence by the tannery and learned that he is up for
County-Attorney at the coming State election!"  He caught a flicker of
comprehension in Jason's eye, but Miss Ocky and Krech looked blank.
"Don't you see?  Here's a murder--a notable murder--committed in his
county a few weeks before election.  He has to do something.  Maxon
obligingly implicates himself enough to warrant his being held.
Norvallis arrests him.  He can easily juggle things along until the
ballots have dropped in the box--meanwhile demonstrating that he's an
active, zealous and conscientious officer!"

"You've hit it," declared Bolt.  "He's that kind."

"But that's--_vile_!" cried Miss Ocky.

"We'll give him the benefit of one doubt," said Creighton.  "He
probably would not do that to a man he believed innocent; undoubtedly
he is convinced that Maxon is guilty and will fight tooth-and-nail to
convict."

"Well--is he right?" asked Bolt slowly.  A dull red flushed his cheeks.
"Did Maxon do it?"

"I'm confident that he did not," said Creighton.  A pressure of his arm
against his breast brought a crackle of paper and the comfortable
assurance that his chip from the blade of the dagger was safe.  "Don't
press me for reasons yet, Mr. Bolt."

"I won't."  Jason rose as Bates came around the corner to say the
inquest had opened.  "Take your time, sir, but get me that notebook!"

The proceedings went swiftly and smoothly from beginning to end.
Whether or not he was a particularly good coroner--and Creighton felt
some doubt of that--Merton was certainly expert in the technique of his
job.  He handled his witnesses capably, with deftness and dispatch,
extracting facts from them with the easy grace of a headwaiter pulling
corks, and each time a fact popped out he beamed benignly at his jury.

No mention was made of the police theory, and from the way Merton
neatly headed off one or two witnesses who came close to trespassing on
that forbidden ground, Creighton reckoned that Norvallis had persuaded
him to mark time "in the interests of justice."  The crowd that had
come for a thrill were rewarded by the tale of the black monk, most of
which was told by Miss Ocky.  Her soft, clear voice carried to every
ear, and her cool, matter-of-fact tones seemed rather to accentuate the
dramatic values of her testimony than otherwise.  It was the highlight
of the whole picture, more interesting even than the verdict with its
orthodox tag of "person or persons unknown."

"Norvallis hasn't shown his hand," murmured Jason Bolt, who was sitting
next to Creighton.

"It'll make a louder splash in the papers to-morrow," retorted the
detective cynically.

He had taken care to seat himself at the beginning of the inquest in
such a way that he could watch the faces of the spectators who had come
to this macabre entertainment.  There was so much to the case that was
hopelessly dark to him that he dared miss no opportunity to seek
something or somebody who might inject even a single ray of light into
the murk.  He knew that the crowd at any inquest was quite likely to
include the very person or persons unknown mentioned in the verdict.
He watched the crowd here with a sharp eye for any one who might
display a deeper interest than that of the casual ambulance-chaser
brand.

He spotted just one among those present who seemed worthy of closer
attention.  This was a strikingly handsome blond man, middle-aged and
well-dressed, who occupied an inconspicuous seat in the farthest corner
of the long room.  He had about him an air of strained intensity as he
leaned forward to follow every word of the testimony, particularly when
Miss Ocky was giving hers, and he tugged nervously and continuously at
a close-cropped mustache.  Creighton could see that his face was
haggard and bore lines of worry--and he could see that an unmistakable
look of relief came into his eyes as the jury returned its open verdict.

"Interesting," said the detective to himself, and touched Bolt on the
arm as the man hurried from the room at the conclusion of the
proceedings.  "Who is that fair-haired chap just going out?"

"His name is Leslie Sherwood," answered Jason promptly.  "He's a native
of these parts but he has been out in the great world making lots of
money.  He has just returned and opened up the old Sherwood place,
which has been closed since his father's death a few months ago.  Why?"

Creighton was spared a reply by the appearance of a dapper, sharp
little old gentleman who came up and greeted Bolt by his first name.

"Hello, Judge!"  Jason turned with a gesture of his hand.  "I want you
to meet Mr. Peter Creighton, of New York.  This is Judge Taylor, Mr.
Creighton, who has always handled our legal affairs and managed somehow
to keep us out of jail!  Judge, Creighton is here to investigate that
robbery of the other evening when Simon's notebook was stolen."

"_And_ the dagger that killed him!" added Taylor significantly.  "Glad
to meet you, Mr. Creighton.  I trust your inquiry will be successful."
He jerked his head backward.  "What did you think of this inquest?"

"Nicely stage-managed," said the detective, and an appreciative twinkle
lit the lawyer's eyes.  "May I have a chat with you sometime, Judge?"

"Whenever you please.  Jason will show you my office."

"Hello!  Who is this?"  Creighton was facing the door from the hall, to
which the other two men had their backs, and he was the first of them
to notice a tall, prepossessing young man who hurried into the room.
Behind him came Miss Ocky, looking pleased, and after her Krech,
hunting for the detective from whom he had become separated.  "Is it--?"

"Copley!" cried Jason Bolt and Judge Taylor with one voice.  They
greeted the newcomer warmly, but with the subdued sympathy suitable to
the occasion.  "When did you learn about this?" added Bolt.

"This morning's papers.  I came as fast as I could."  He spun around
toward Miss Ocky.  "My mother--?"

"Sleeping," answered his aunt.  "It has been a shock, but you have no
need to worry about her.  Don't think of waking her up; I know you must
want to go to her, but wait."

"This is a terrible business," said the young man to Bolt and the
lawyer.  He was yet unaware of Creighton, who had withdrawn slightly
into the background.  "I only know what I've read in the papers.  As I
came in just now I heard somebody say the inquest had drawn a blank.
Is that so?"

"Yes.  It is a complicated affair, Copley," answered Bolt.  "It will
take some time to tell you everything that has happened--"

"We'll go into it later, then.  Just tell me now if everything possible
is being done to identify the man who killed my father.  That is the
most important business before us.  Have the police any clues?"

"I believe so, but they are saying little.  On our own account, I have
engaged this gentleman here--Mr. Creighton--to conduct an independent
inquiry.  Creighton, this is Mr. Varr's son, of whom you have heard."

Copley sent a keen look at the detective, then held out his hand.

"Glad to meet you--and very glad that Mr. Bolt has engaged your
services.  It is the very thing I would have wished.  I have no
confidence in the local authorities."

"That appears to make it unanimous," said Creighton, grinning.
"Really, I'm beginning to wonder if these county fellows can be as
stupid as they're reputed."  He glanced at Jason Bolt.  "Suppose I take
Mr. Varr into the study here and give him a résumé of events to date?
Somebody must, and I know the details better than any one else,
perhaps."

There was a chorus of relieved approval from Bolt, Taylor and Miss Ocky
and a quick nod of assent from Copley.

"I must have a talk with you, too, Copley, as soon as possible," added
Jason Bolt.  "It's hard to have to intrude business--"

"Oh!" interrupted the young man, and suddenly ran his fingers through
his hair with a distraught gesture.  "I'm in the deuce of a jam--!
Aunt Ocky, when is the funeral?"

"We were waiting to hear from you.  Now that you're here--shall we say
to-morrow noon?"

"Very well.  After that I must catch the one-thirty to New York."  He
shrugged his shoulders at Bolt's disappointed grunt.  "It can't be
helped, sir!  And I'll be busy every minute until I leave.  Are you
sure that you need me after all?"  He looked at the old lawyer who was
eyeing him thoughtfully.  "Judge Taylor, you had charge of my father's
will, didn't you?  Would it be improper for you to tell me whether or
not I've inherited his interest in the tannery?"

"I'll risk the impropriety under the circumstances," said Taylor
slowly, breaking a little silence that followed the question.  "Yes,
you have inherited a controlling interest without any restriction."  He
hesitated cautiously.  "I'm assuming that no other will exists--I
cannot believe there is any."

"In that case--you and I are partners, Mr. Bolt."  Copley held out his
hand rather bashfully.  "You'll have a fearful lot to teach me, but
you'll find me willing to learn."  He continued more incisively.  "I
believe the first thing to do is to get that strike settled and the men
to work.  They'll listen to you, Mr. Bolt, if you ask them to return
pending our decision to raise wages and improve conditions.  Another
thing--can you persuade Graham to stay with us?"

"I believe so--now," said Bolt slowly.

"The tannery must remain closed to-morrow, the day of the funeral.  I'd
like to see it open up the morning after at the usual hour."

"It will," said Jason flatly.  "Leave it to me."

"That's what I want to do, for a fortnight anyway.  After that you will
find me ready to pull my weight in the boat."  The young man turned to
the others.  "Aunt Ocky, you'll let me know, won't you, as soon as my
mother wakes up?  Come on, Mr. Creighton; I'm anxious to hear all you
can tell me."  He walked off to the study without waiting to see if the
detective followed.

Creighton did not, for the moment.  Bolt and Krech were leaving, and so
was Judge Taylor.  The detective had a few words with his friend as
they followed the other two along the hall to the piazza, while Miss
Ocky went up to her sister's room.

"What did you think of him?" asked Krech.

"Haven't thought much yet."

"He ought to be a pleasant change for Jason.  He'll be open to reason,
yet he'll have ideas of his own.  Did you notice how he snapped into
the business of getting work started again?"

"I noticed it."

"An up-and-coming lad," said Krech.  "He couldn't have done it better
if he'd been expecting the job."

Creighton glanced at the speaker quickly, but the big man's face was as
ingenuous as a child's.  They dropped the subject as they came up with
the others.

When he had bidden them _au revoir_, the detective went to the small
study, where he found Copley Varr restlessly pacing the short fairway
between the door and his father's desk.  The young man welcomed him
with a gesture of relief.

"Thought you were never coming," he said, though not rudely.  "If I
can't see my mother yet, I'm in a hurry to--to attend to some other
matters."

"Is an interview with William Graham one of them?" asked Creighton
quietly as they sat down.  He caught the sharp look that Copley sent
him.  "While digging into the history of this case it was inevitable
that I should discover something of your private affairs.  I will ask
you to believe that I do not violate confidences--even though I have to
force them at times."

"That's all right.  You're a detective, aren't you?"

"I try to be!" smiled Creighton.

"Well, it's no use employing a detective and then cramping his style by
refusing him information.  I understand that."

"Good.  We'll get along beautifully.  Will you tell me, please, why you
are obliged to return to New York?  Is the reason--Miss Graham?"

"Not any more."  For the first time since he had entered the house,
Copley smiled a little.  "It is Mrs. Varr, now.  We were married
yesterday morning in New York."  The smile vanished abruptly.  "And my
father--scarcely cold!  I won't forget the shock I got from the papers
this morning if I live to be a hundred."

"Got a shock, did you?" repeated Creighton to himself, yet the boy's
words had rung true.  "If you're ready, Mr. Varr, I'll give you the
story of what happened up to your father's death.  I'll be brief."

At that, it was a lengthy narrative.  It took more than an hour to
relate, an hour in which Copley Varr did not once take his eyes from
the detective's face.  His gaze was expressionless; Creighton,
returning it with interest, strove vainly to pierce that inscrutable
veil to see what lay behind.

"And there is no definite due to the murderer?" asked, Copley when
Creighton finished.  "Is the Maxon theory sound?"

"I think not.  As for clues--well, such indications as I have turned up
are too vague to be termed that."

"Do you suspect any one?"

"That question is out of order, Mr. Varr."

"Oh.  Will you tell me then, in a general way, where those indications
you mention seem to point?"

"In a general way, yes."  Creighton meditated.  "They point to a person
who hated your father, who sympathized with the striking tanners, who
was wealthy enough to supply them with money, either from sympathy or
to further his grudge, a person of some education, familiar with local
history and imaginative enough to adapt the costume of a legendary monk
to a perfect disguise.  Last, a person who was sufficiently familiar
with this house to stage a burglary as bold as it was successful."

Copley Varr was pale as this hypothetical portrait was limned.  His
eyes now avoided the detective's.

"That description might fit a--a number of people," he said.

"Oh, yes.  It's very vague.  Now, I can ask a question that you
mustn't, do _you_ suspect any one?"

"N-no."

"Come! are you weakening already about giving me information?"

"Suspicion--if I had any--is not fact!"

"Quibbles won't get us anywhere.  I won't press you further to voice
your suspicion--right now.  In the meantime, I'll plod along with my
investigation on the obvious lines."

"Obvious?   I suppose they are to you, Mr. Creighton, but I do not see
a single point of attack.  Will you tell me what you plan to do, or is
that also taboo?"

"I'm going to make a list of all the people that description might fit
and then eliminate them one by one as circumstances dictate.  I suppose
competent alibis will let most of 'em out.  Yes, I guess I'll have
quite a fine assortment of alibis at the end."  The detective was
speaking easily, good-humoredly, and his voice was elaborately casual
as he added:

"By the way, where were you the night of the burglary from ten to
twelve?"

Copley Varr started violently and his face crimsoned.  For a long
minute he did not speak but sat staring angrily at his inquisitor.  He
clenched his hands as though ready to leap on the detective.  Then,
slowly, his fingers relaxed, the color faded from his cheeks and the
anger from his eyes.  Creighton watched the metamorphosis with
approval; if he could get the best of his temper like that, would he
have been likely to lose it to the extent of committing murder?
Improbable!

"I was in the editorial rooms of the _News_ from ten-thirty until
quarter to twelve, when I left to catch the midnight train to New York.
At least three men connected with the paper will bear me out."

"That's bully!" said Creighton.  "The crowd on my list will be in luck
if they do half as well.  One thing more, Mr. Varr, and then I'm off to
real work.  Was William Graham in the habit of coming to this house?"

Again Copley jumped, but this time with the air of shrinking from a
blow rather than delivering one.  His voice, when it came, was hoarse.

"Don't ask me that--now!"

"Um.  Yes, it's rather a tough question--new father-in-law, new bride
and all that!  You needn't answer it, Mr. Varr!"

"Plainer than you have already, my son!" he added to himself as he left
the room.  "William Graham--to the bar!"

Creighton was light on his feet and invariably wore rubber-soled
shoes--not, as he had been obliged to explain to Krech aforetime,
because he was trying to be the complete pussy-footed sleuth, but
because he really preferred them to leather.  The result, however,
whether designed or not, was to make him as soundless in his movements
as a panther.

He slipped noiselessly along the hall to the front door, his thoughts
busy with what he had just learned, his immediate intention to go to
town for the talk he had promised himself with Judge Taylor.  Lawyers
often could throw light on an affair of this kind if they chose to;
what if there were some secret, unsuspected page in Simon Varr's life--?

As he put on his hat and stepped out of the front door, he heard the
low hum of voices from the cozy corner at the end of the piazza.  He
wondered who it might be, and curiosity turned his steps in that
direction.  Instead of turning the corner, however, he halted abruptly
when he heard his own name spoken by unmistakable accents.

"Where is Mr. Creighton, do you know?"

"He's in the study with Master Copley.  Do you wish to speak to him,
Miss Ocky?"

"No.  Has he had any conversation with you yet, Bates?"

"No, Miss Ocky; nothing special."

"He probably will, though.  It struck me, Bates, that you might
inadvertently mention our little talk of the other day if I didn't warn
you.  I don't think that would be advisable."

"Nor do I, Miss Ocky!  I was only afraid you might let it out yourself!"

"It would be a pity to put notions in his head," continued Miss Ocky
calmly.  "I must say, Mr. Creighton seems to be unusually sensible, but
you can never tell which way a detective will jump."

"They're worse'n cats!" agreed the old butler.




_XVIII: Some Old Men Are Out_

There was a tinkle of silver and china suggestive of the butler picking
up a tray and preparing to depart, so Creighton fled from the vicinage
as softly as the furry felines to which Bates had spitefully compared
him.  A smile played around the corners of his mouth.  Utterly
shameless, he reminded himself that if listeners hear no good of
themselves, they also occasionally hear much that is valuable.  So
Bates and Miss Ocky were in conspiracy to conceal from him some
conversation they had had!  Um.  It would be funny if he couldn't pry
the truth out of one of them; mentally, he girded up his loins for the
fray.

The immediate effect of what he had overheard was an alteration in his
plans for the balance of the afternoon.  He wanted to see Judge Taylor
for more than one reason, but his brief essay in eavesdropping had
served to remind him of a chore neglected nearer home.  The servants.
He must question them, painstakingly and at length, on the chance that
one or more of them might have heard or noticed something that would
bring him a step closer to the truth.

Copley Varr had gone upstairs, summoned to his mother's bedside by
Janet Mackay who was temporarily in attendance on the stricken Lucy.
That left the study clear for Creighton who immediately possessed
himself of it and touched the bell for Bates.  The old man appeared
presently, gave an attentive ear to the detective's brief statement of
his intentions, and answered on behalf of himself and the staff that
all would be glad to assist Mr. Creighton in every possible way.

"The main essential is perfect frankness," said the detective.

"Yes, indeed, sir, I quite understand that," said the butler, a trifle
too promptly.  "It's wrong to hold anything back."

"I'll begin with the cook.  I had a few words with her yesterday, just
enough to learn she's nobody's fool.  She's good-hearted, too--you can
tell it by the layer of fat on the ribs of that Angora I've seen
about."  Creighton's eyes were laughing behind the shell-rimmed
glasses.  "Did it ever occur to you, Bates, that you can learn a lot
about the cook by looking at the cat?"

"No, sir, it never did," said Bates, smiling faintly.

"It never did to me, either, until just this minute," admitted the
detective frankly, "but I dare say there's a lot in it.  Anyway, ask
her to come here, please, and tell her I won't keep her long from her
work."

Thus he played upon the sensibilities of his witnesses after a fashion
whose worth he had demonstrated frequently in the past.  He had put
Bates a little more at his ease and to that extent weakened his
defenses if it became necessary to startle him into speaking the truth,
and he had sent a bouquet of flattering phrases to the cook which he
confidently counted on Bates to deliver with his summons.  That the
butler had indeed done so was apparent the moment the cook appeared,
her fat red face wreathed in smiles.  A cross, recalcitrant woman who
had sorely tried the patience of Mr. Norvallis the day before was an
angel of sweetness as she responded to Creighton's inquisition.

Unfortunately, she did not have anything of value to offer in repayment
for his studied politeness.  Hers was the most prosaic of lives.  She
rose in the morning, cooked all day and went to bed, to rise and cook
again.  She knew nothing of what went on in the front part of the
house, and Bates was the most close-mouthed butler she had ever worked
with, he never opened his head about what he heard in the dining-room.

That let her out, and Creighton dismissed her with a request that she
send in Betty Blake.

When she had recovered from a preliminary attack of nervousness, the
pretty young housemaid unexpectedly produced information that gave
Creighton furiously to think, for he reawakened an idea that had been
present, but dormant, in his brain since his talk with Copley.  It
reminded him of a chance remark made by Jason Bolt to the effect that
Langhorn had accompanied Graham when the latter came to see Varr, for
Betty described how in passing through the hall on her way to bed she
had seen the tannery manager "quarreling with Mr. Varr in his study."

"Sure they were quarreling, Betty?"

"Oh, yes, sir.  They were both angry and excited."

"That was the night of the fire?  The night of the robbery?"

"Yes, sir."

"You were on your way to bed--do you know what time it was?"

"Just past ten, sir,--or maybe half-past."

"That's near enough."

After a few more questions he let her go, telling her to ask Janet
Mackay to join him in the study at her first opportunity.  While he
waited for the "tall, gaunt nondescript" to appear he contemplated the
case of William Graham, and sitting in Varr's chair he came slowly to
the same dark suspicions that Varr had entertained.

"Graham saw the notebook here, and knew what it was.  He could use what
was in it--none better.  According to the watchman, Nelson, Graham
sympathized with the strikers even if he ranked with the bosses.  He
was a bit the worse for liquor when he was here that evening, in the
mood to think of some wild act and perhaps drunk enough to carry out
the thought.  He had time to slip down and set that fire, then come
back when it was under way and sneak into the house.  Granting that he
used the dagger because it was handy, why did he carry it away with
him?  Was he thinking of murder already?  Was he cool enough to figure
that a weapon taken from Varr's own house would not readily be traced
to him?  Can't answer these questions--now!"  Creighton lighted a
cigarette and wrinkled his brow.  "Graham has plenty of intelligence,
from all accounts.  He is clever enough to have thought of an effective
disguise, and he probably knew the legend of the monk, since his
daughter showed it to Miss Copley in a book belonging to them.  Um.  Is
he the man I'm looking for?"

He did not have time for further reflection before the entrance of Miss
Janet Mackay, once of Aberdeen, now a citizen of the world and the
devoted henchwoman of Miss October Copley.  She inclined her head
stiffly in reply to his pleasant greeting, refused a chair, and
remained standing in front of him, hands folded across her flat
stomach, her cold eyes fixed on him through her cheap, steel
spectacles.  She was taller and gaunter and more angular than ever.
Creighton chuckled inwardly.  If Miss Copley was October, then this was
January, or at best late December!

It did not take him long to discover that he had drawn another perfect
blank.  Trying to extract information from Janet Mackay was about as
profitable as trying to squeeze water from a handful of Sahara sand.
She knew nothing, and said less.  After ten minutes of fruitless effort
he gave it up.

"It's clear you know nothing!"

"I know the world is well rid of a selfish deevil."

"Tut, tut!  Have you no respect for the dead?"

"Not a whit for him, dead or alive."

"How is Mrs. Varr?"

"Resting easier."

"Is her son with her still?"

"He went off somewhere an hour ago."

"That's all, then.  Thank you."

She stalked away, head in air, stiff as any ramrod.

"Now for Bates," muttered the detective, and touched the bell.  "I'll
swear he's got something on his mind!"

In this surmise he was perfectly correct.  The old butler did have
something that was troubling him--a matter so grave and serious that
they did not finish discussing it until the study was dusk and sounds
from the dining-room indicated that Betty Blake was helpfully setting
the table in the unduly prolonged absence of its regular attendant.
When their talk was ended, it was the detective who wore a perplexed
expression, while Bates had lost the troubled, almost haunted look that
had been in his eyes since the death of Simon Varr.

Creighton hurried to his room to prepare for dinner, and when he
glanced from his window he observed for the first time that the weather
was about to exhibit itself in a petulant, ill-humored mood.  Black
storm-clouds were rolling up, a chill, gusty wind was rattling the
windows and a heavy spat of rain dashed against the glass as he turned
away.  It would be a nasty night.

Miss Ocky remarked on the fact when she joined him in the dining-room.
She looked unhappy.

"I hate cold," she told him.  "Had enough of it in my life.  I am going
to have a fire lighted in the living-room.  If you want to talk to me
this evening you'll have to put up with having your toes toasted."

He assured her that toasted toes were his favorite delicacy.  Then he
nodded to a third place set at the table and raised his eyebrows.

"For Copley, but he hasn't turned up."

"He may be dining with his new father-in-law," suggested the detective.
"Or with Jason Bolt, talking business."

She did not pursue the subject, but later, when they were seated before
a crackling fire in the living-room, she attacked him briskly.

"I haven't talked with either you or him since your interview in the
library.  Was--was it satisfactory?  Please tell me."

"With all the pleasure in the world.  The interview was
satisfactory--and I think I know what you mean by that!  He accounted
for his movements on the night before last with unimpeachable accuracy."

"Thank heaven!" said Miss Ocky.  "I don't mean that I had any suspicion
of him, but I'm glad if he has cleared himself in your eyes."

"He has, perfectly."

"I wish I knew what your plan of campaign is to be!  You half promised
to let me see just how a detective works, you know.  What are you going
to do first?"

"Suppose I don't know myself?"  He paused to light her cigarette and
one for himself, then added deliberately: "You can't always tell which
way a detective will jump; they're worse'n cats."

"Oh!" cried Miss Ocky, and choked on a puff of smoke.  "Eavesdropper!"
she gasped.

"I didn't go for to do it.  But if you _will_ have these little
intimate chats on a piazza without looking around the corner--!  Now,
you can tell me what it was all about."

"I'll tell you first that it's a mistake to take overheard remarks too
seriously."  Miss Ocky, recovered from smoke and emotion, smiled at the
fire.  "Once, when I was a little girl of seven, I got an awful scare
that way--right in this very room, on a wild stormy night like this!  I
had come in to say good night to my father and mother, who were sitting
before a fire as we are now.  Just as I left the room, I heard my
mother say to him, 'The old man is out to-night!'  Unless you were a
nervous, high-strung brat yourself, you can't imagine the effect of
that on me.  I crept off to bed shivering, and lay awake half the
night.  Every time the wind shook my windows, I pictured some
monstrous, hoary-headed creature trying to get in and gobble me up!"
She laughed a little.  "It gives me a grue to think of it even yet.  I
discovered the explanation of the phrase the next day.  Can you guess
it?"

"No.  Another local legend, perhaps?"

"Nothing half so thrilling."  She pointed to a high shelf above the
mantelpiece.  "There is the answer!"

Creighton followed the direction of her finger and smiled.  On the
shelf stood one of those miniature Swiss chalets so popular in
drawing-rooms a generation ago.  Two little figurines, a young woman
and an old man, operating on barometric principles, emerged from the
front door in turn as the weather indications were fair or stormy.  At
this moment the old man was well out.

"Enough to scare any child to death," he admitted.  "Now--"

"But tame when explained, like lots of overheard things.  Once when I
was staying with a Chinese family in Pekin--"

"Where did you get the idea," inquired Creighton mildly, "that I was
fond of red-herring?  As a matter-of-fact, I've always hated it."

"Mmph!" said Miss Ocky, and made a face at him.  "Well, what do you
want to know?"

"You are probably aware that I had a long talk with Bates this
afternoon.  He told me much that was interesting--but I'd like _your_
version of that conversation which you felt shouldn't be repeated to
me."

"I wish I'd kept still about it," sighed Miss Ocky repentantly.  "Now
you'll probably magnify it out of all proportion.  You see, I've known
old Bates ever since I was a youngster, and we've always been good
friends.  He got in the habit years ago of bringing his troubles to me
and talking them over--'blowing off steam,' he always called it!  That
was how we happened to have that talk a few days ago.  Simon had been
unusually querulous even for him--and he could be very trying at times.
Bates had suffered a long while in silence, and when he got a chance to
air his grievance to me he--he blew off quite a lot of steam first and
last!  He chiefly resented Simon's attitude toward Lucy, and I couldn't
blame him there.  One thing led to another, and that's how we came
finally to agree that the world would be a brighter little planet if
Simon no longer lived on it."  Miss Ocky shrugged her shoulders.  "The
sort of thing that means nothing at the time but sounds like the very
devil after a man is found murdered!"

"Yes, it does," answered Creighton gravely.  "I had no idea you two had
been contemplating the possible death of Simon Varr.  That is not at
all a pleasant bit of news."

"You--you had no idea!  You had no--!"  Miss Ocky sat up very straight.
"Didn't Bates tell you that?" she demanded crisply.

"No.  He told me much, but he wouldn't tell me the subject of your
conversation with him because he'd promised you he wouldn't.  He was
adamant.  That's why I've had to get it out of you."

"Oh!"  She slumped again into her chair.  "You--you _creature_!"

"I know," he said apologetically.  "But what's a man to do if people
hold out on him?"

"I suppose," said Miss Ocky in a small voice, "this is a judgment on me
for wondering how a detective works!"

"Possibly.  Did he make any threats?"

"_No!_" said Miss Ocky.

"Um.  Would you tell me if he did?"

"N-no," said the lady.

"It makes a fellow long for the days of the Spanish Inquisition," said
Creighton, addressing the fireplace.  He added darkly, "There are
several persons around that I could enjoy putting on a cozy little
rack!"

"It's no use being bloodthirsty," she informed him.  "As for Bates--!
Oh, I do wish you'd stop getting ideas into your head!"

"I can't.  It's the sort of head that gets 'em!"

"Well, I wish you'd draw the line at Bates!  Why, I've known him all my
life!"

"There is always some one to say that about any criminal.  Always some
one to say it isn't possible.  The awful thing is, it is possible."

"But--Bates!  How could any one associate the idea of murder with that
gentle, harmless old man?  Ridiculous!"

"He was devoted to your father because Mr. Copley stood by him when he
didn't know where to turn.  He had been in trouble.  Did you know that?"

"Vaguely--from Bates himself.  Why?  What trouble was it?"

"Starvation.  He had difficulty finding work because no one wished to
employ a man who had just been pardoned out of a penitentiary where he
was serving a life sentence for murder."

There was a brief silence.

"It can't be!" she whispered at length.  "Not Bates!  It can't be
_true_!"

"He was married in those days, and the other man was guilty of breaking
up the home.  Extenuating circumstances, you see.  He was lucky enough
to have a lawyer who didn't lose interest when the prison swallowed
him, and he brought the matter to the attention of a new Governor who
pardoned Bates after he had served five years.  Your father happened on
him when he was near the end of his rope, gave him sanctuary and helped
him bury the past.  That is his story."

"How did he come to tell you?"

"I persuaded him to.  I've noticed ever since I've been in the house
that he was shaky, nervous--_worried_.  Three times out of five, when
you see a servant in that condition following a mysterious crime, you
can look for the explanation in a shady past.  I tackled him from that
basis.  He didn't need much urging--in fact, he told me he had half
made up his mind to come to me with the story of his own accord.  I
believe him.  He had been in mortal terror lest the police discover
it."  Creighton paused in order to study her serious, thoughtful face.
"He asked me to tell you this."

"He did!"

"He seems devoted to you.  He had wanted to tell you himself, but could
never quite find the courage.  He has wanted you to know the truth
about him, but has never been able to forget the way others used to
receive it.  He has taken some hard knocks."

"Poor soul.  Poor lonely soul!"  Her voice was tender.

"I thought you'd feel that way about it!  You'll find an opportunity to
make him understand, I suppose?  Probably he won't want to talk much
about it, but you--you could give him a friendly pat on the arm or--or
something like that, couldn't you?"

Miss Ocky suddenly turned and looked at him with eyes that were shining
through unshed tears.

"You're a queer man!  You can sit there suspecting him of murder and
still want me to be kind to him!"

"Have I said anything about suspecting him?" demanded the detective
with almost a touch of asperity.

"You accused me of suspecting Copley last evening and I had to remind
you that he'd probably turn up with a perfectly good alibi--and he did!
If there's a pessimist in human nature sitting around here, it isn't I!"

"Mmph.  All right, little sunshine!"

"I don't care anything about suspicion.  I want proof.  Until I get it,
I try to preserve an open mind."

"Oh.  Well, that's an improvement over Mr. Norvallis, I must admit!"
Miss Ocky turned her eyes back to the fire.  "What you've told me about
Bates has given me quite a--a shock, Mr. Creighton.  I won't drag any
more red-herrings around, but can't we _please_ talk of something else?"

He cheerfully and promptly consented.  They talked a while on every
subject under the sun except the death of Simon Varr, and they were
both a trifle disconcerted when a wild shrieking of brakes and a heavy
step on the veranda announced the arrival of Herman Krech, who would
tolerate no other topic until he left at eleven.

It was just short of midnight when Creighton, sound asleep, was roused
by a discreet but persistent tapping on his door.  He rolled out of
bed, struck a match, opened the door and discovered Copley Varr,
grinning broadly.

"I've got my father-in-law's blessing!" he announced.

"I congratulate you."  The detective blinked.  "Excuse me, but I was
with the angels!  Did you call me back just to tell me this?"

"No.  I thought you ought to know that we were a pair of nuts this
noon.  Mr. Graham was holding pat hands in a poker game during the fire
and robbery, and he was presiding at a lodge-meeting in Hambleton the
night--the night before last!"

"With umpty-umph fellow-lodgers to prove it.  Um.  Touch 'em and they
vanish!"

"What?"

"I mean, I'd like to find a prospect that would stay put for a while at
least.  As it is now, the moment I look sideways at any one he promptly
trots out an alibi."

"Like I did to-day!  I see.  Trying for a detective, eh?"

"Very trying," said Peter Creighton.  "Good night!"

He shut the door, and presently rejoined the angels.




_XIX: Among Those Present_

After that midnight report from Copley Varr, ten days passed without
the occurrence of a single distinctive event.  They were not empty
days, however, for Peter Creighton, who continued patiently to cast
hither and yon very much like an Indian brave seeking the trail of an
enemy warrior.

The full scope of his investigation was not apparent to the naked eye,
as Krech, who was chafing at the lack of developments and inclined to
accuse his friend of masterly inactivity, discovered one afternoon.
They were taking a stroll in the twilight at the detective's
insistence, and met a roughly-dressed individual with a cap on the back
of his head and a short pipe stuck in his mouth.  He was loitering by
the side of the road, and to Krech's surprise, Creighton excused
himself and joined the man for a brief chat.

"Who's your rough-neck pal?" he demanded curiously as the detective
came back and suggested a return home.  "His face is familiar but I
can't just place him."

"You once bought a painting from him when he was posing as an artist!"
Creighton chuckled.  "He reminded me of it just now; said you're the
only connoisseur who ever really appreciated his work!"

"Gee Joseph!  One of your men!"

"Fellow named Latimer."

"What is he doing around here?"

"Covering the tannery end of this affair.  Latimer's an artist in more
ways than one.  When I told him what I wanted, he got two books on
modern methods in tanning from the New York Public Library, studied
them on the train coming up, and landed a job as easy as you please
when Graham and Bolt started to replace the old hands who had left.
Snappy work!"

"Gosh.  And I thought you were investigating this case single-handed!
You're a foxy guy at times, Creighton.  Has Latimer learned anything
useful?"

"Not to me, I'm sorry to say.  The few facts he has turned up seem
merely to darken the outlook for Charlie Maxon, that unfortunate
prisoner-pent.  He appears to be quite as bad an egg as Mr. Norvallis
believes."

"Do you suppose Norvallis is making any progress with _his_ case?"
inquired Krech.

"He's sitting pretty with the voters!" said Creighton shortly.  "By the
way, neither Bolt nor Graham knows who Latimer is.  Don't tell 'em."

"I won't," promised the big man.

He did, however, after the fashion of husbands, tell his wife that
evening after dinner.  They were standing together on the front steps
of their host's house, having been persuaded with no great difficulty
to lengthen their stay by at least another week, and Krech had just
lighted a cigar to keep him company while he strolled over to the Varr
home.

"You might have known Peter Creighton is never as idle as he looks,"
commented Jean Krech, when she had listened to the tale of Latimer.
"He probably has a dozen more irons in the fire that you don't dream
of.  I suppose you're going over there now?"

"Uh-huh.  There's always a chance he may have some news."

"Well, it's all right for you to drop in and ask," said Jean calmly.
"But--don't linger, melove, don't linger!"

"Huh?  What do you mean, don't linger?  Why not?"

"You blind old goose!  Has it ever struck you that Creighton is a
rather lonely man?"

"Lonely?"  Then the significance of her question suddenly hit him
between the eyes.  "Gee Joseph!  Are you trying to promote a romance
between him and Miss Ocky?"

"Precious little promotion is required," she corrected him.  "It's as
plain as the nose on your face how things are going."  She laughed when
her husband in his bewilderment reached up and felt of the promontory
indicated.  "Yes, it's very plain!"

"But they've only known each other a week or so!"

"What of it?  They're old enough to know their own minds--both in the
early forties.  Neither of them has ever had a love-affair as far as we
know; probably it hits them harder and quicker when they're like that!"

"Maybe you're right."  Krech reflected deeply, and then nodded his
head.  "Suits me!  I like her immensely, and of course he'd be a whole
lot happier if he were married.  Any man is."

"Oh, _thank_ you!" cried his beautiful wife softly.  She slipped a hand
beneath his elbow and gave his massive arm an affectionate squeeze
while her blue eyes twinkled up at his.  "Is um itty-witty baby happy,
then?"

"Shut up," commanded Mr. Krech with intense dignity.  "Don't go cooing
at me--not where any one might hear you, anyway!"

An unprejudiced observer of the trend of events at the house on the
hill must have admitted that Mrs. Krech had considerable grounds for
her romantic suspicions.  Twice during the ten days aforementioned
Creighton was obliged to go to New York and spend half a day on
business that would not be denied, and each time he returned bearing
books and candy and a vast quantity of assorted and exotic fruits for
which Miss Ocky had expressed a casual longing and which the marts of
Hambleton could not provide.  On the first occasion he pretended they
were for Lucy Varr, still confined to her room, but on the second he
abandoned pretense.

Then there was the incident of the picnic, sponsored by Miss Ocky.
They took their lunch and plunged into the wilderness of hills that lay
to the north of Hambleton, their destination the cave that was reputed
to have sheltered the legendary monk.  It was Miss Ocky's suggestion
that in the haunts of the old monk they might come upon some traces of
the new, if that imaginative imitator had carried his masquerade to the
extent of using his predecessor's quarters, and Creighton, without the
flutter of an eyelash, agreed that nothing was more likely.  They found
the cave--or some cave--but nothing else.  Their disappointment weighed
lightly upon them, and the detective enjoyed the day with all the
artless abandon of a schoolboy playing hooky.

Even more significant than the picnic was the _pilau_.  Miss Ocky had
described this supposedly delectable dish to Creighton at some length,
and the next day was impelled to possess herself of the kitchen and
compose a _pilau_ such as she swore appeared daily on the tables of the
first epicures of Constantinople.  However that might be, affairs are
approaching a crisis when a woman is seized with a desire to
demonstrate her culinary accomplishments to a man.

The _pilau_ was an amazing dish.  At table with them during those days
was a very pale, very thin young man with gold pince-nez, fair hair and
a painfully self-effacing manner, who had been quartered on the house
by Judge Taylor for the purpose of documenting a vast accumulation of
papers in Simon Varr's study.  He took a mouthful of the pilau, started
slightly, and took a second to make sure his senses had not deceived
him about the first.  Ten minutes later, the closest approach to any
emotion that he ever revealed was visible on his face as Creighton sent
back his plate for a third helping.

If Miss Ocky noticed his tactless expression of awe--and she rarely
missed anything so obvious--it probably did nothing to raise the young
man in her esteem.  She frankly disliked him.

"That Merrill!" she grumbled to Creighton when they were by themselves
after dinner.  "A perfect imposition on the part of Judge Taylor!  Of
course I couldn't very well refuse under the circumstances, but I'll be
glad when we lose him!"

"He must have nearly finished his work," Creighton consoled her.
"After all, he's harmless.  Why does he annoy you?"

"I don't know," was the conclusively feminine reply.  "He just does."

On the afternoon of the eleventh day after the death of Simon Varr,
Creighton had a chat with Jason Bolt in the office of the tannery that
was in no-wise remarkable except for the odd timeliness of the
detective's farewell observation.  Jason had asked him if he was
satisfied with the progress made to date or whether he was discouraged
by the present lull which so closely resembled stagnation.  Could he
say when the mystery might take some definite turn toward solution?

"Ask me when the millennium is coming and be done with it," said
Creighton rather plaintively, wondering why so many people seemed to
credit detectives with oracular powers.  "If Norvallis has the right
pig by the ear, Maxon may break down, turn State's evidence and hang
his accomplice.  That's one possibility.  Another--we may as well face
it--is that this case will go to swell the great army of unsolved
mysteries."  He hesitated, then added, "There's a third possibility, of
course."

"What is it?"

"The chance that a break will come from some totally unexpected quarter
when we've all but given up hope.  I've seen that happen a score of
times.  There's no predicting it--no counting on it.  But when it
comes--then look out!  A case that has been placid and smooth as a mill
pond will suddenly develop the characteristics of a maelstrom!"  He
smiled encouragement at the troubled Jason.  "If one starts in this
case, we may reasonably expect that its gurgitations will yield us that
missing notebook if nothing more."

He was on foot that afternoon by choice, for he had long held that a
daily walk is the best exercise for a man whose profession does not in
itself provide him with much physical activity.  He preferred it to
gymnasium stuff, too; a man can think deeply while walking with perfect
safety, if he avoids traffic, whereas the hospitals are full of
misguided gentlemen who have committed the error of thinking deeply on
some other subject while engaged, say, in "skinning the cat."

He had much to make him thoughtful these days.  He was not at all
satisfied with the situation in this Varr case, though he refrained
from revealing his pessimism to others, and was reluctantly coming to
fear that Norvallis had indeed gotten the jump on him--and jumped in
the right direction.  The possibility irritated him.  He wished to
clear up this murder himself more than he had ever wished for anything
in his life.  Wasn't Miss Ocky waiting confidently for him to do just
that?

The intrusion of her name into his thoughts turned them into a new
channel.  He knew now that before he dropped his personal supervision
of this case, before he left Hambleton for New York to attend to
matters which were pressing there, he would have to ask Miss October
Copley one of the most important questions he had ever asked in the
course of a career devoted mostly to inquisitions.  The prospect gave
him a shivery feeling up and down his spine!

He walked briskly up the short-cut through the woods and came out at
the end of the kitchen garden, now associated with a grimmer business
than the growing of vegetables.  It was due to his swift pace that he
was in the open, in plain view, before he noticed two figures seated on
the big granite bowlder near the tomato-patch.  He would have retreated
to the obscurity of the trees and watched that interview if Miss Ocky
had not spied him and risen instantly from her seat on the rock.

"Come here!" she called.  "The very man we want!"

He walked over to them, and Miss Ocky's companion, a tall, handsome,
fair-haired man, stood up to acknowledge the impending introduction.
He looked pale and worn, more haggard even than that morning at the
inquest.

"Mr. Creighton--Mr. Leslie Sherwood," said Miss Ocky quickly.  "You
haven't met each other yet, have you?"

"No, I haven't _met_ Mr. Sherwood," acknowledged the detective,
accenting the verb very slightly.

"But you've been on my track!" said Sherwood, smiling rather nervously.
"My valet was shrewd enough to suspect the man who scraped an
acquaintance with him and showed so much interest in discovering my
whereabouts on the night of Simon Varr's murder!  He followed his new
acquaintance one afternoon and saw him report to you."

"You appear to be more fortunate than I in the intelligence of your
followers," said Creighton rather glumly.  "I'm glad, though, to have
this matter brought into the open."  He glanced at Miss Ocky and back
to Sherwood.  "May I speak frankly, or shall we adjourn to the house by
our two selves?"

"I have nothing to conceal from Miss Copley," answered Sherwood,
flushing slightly.  "As a matter of fact, I've just been making a full
statement to her of my actions that evening and she had just advised me
strongly to consult you when you suddenly appeared."

"Excellent advice.  I'll explain my curiosity first, though.  During
the course of my investigation I've had to poke up a lot of gossip and
more or less ancient history, and some of it related to you.  According
to my information you were once--attentive--to Miss Lucy Copley.  You
left, and she married Simon Varr.  You returned, and Simon Varr, who
had not proved a kind husband, is presently murdered.  I had already
noted your agitation at the inquest, and without entertaining definite
views, I still thought it advisable to learn what I could about you."

"Quite naturally," admitted Sherwood with a certain urbanity, though
his color deepened.  "I can see now that you had some reason to regard
me askance.  However, the fact that you are already so well posted in
my affairs has its consoling virtues--it makes it easier for me to tell
you more."  He hesitated, looked toward Miss Ocky as if for
encouragement, received it in a short nod and added slowly, "I may as
well begin with a circumstance that would probably have crystallized
your suspicions of me if you had learned it for yourself."

"What was that?" asked the detective a bit impatiently.

"I was present at the murder," said Sherwood.




_XX: H. Antaeus Krech_

Miss Ocky, who had heard the story already, sat down on the rock and
calmly waited its continuance, but Creighton's eyes narrowed.

"You were present!  At the murder!"

"In the background only, I assure you," amended Sherwood, and plunged
rather desperately into his account.  "It is a habit of mine to grab my
hat and stick and take a short walk every evening before going to bed,
and that was how I came to be out that night.  I had no special
objective, and--and because old memories had been stirred by my return
I almost unconsciously cut across the fields near my house and headed
for that path which leads to this garden.  I used to do that twenty-two
years ago when--when there used to be some one to meet me right by this
rock!  Somehow, I felt as if I wanted to--to look at a certain lighted
window before I turned in.  I don't expect you to understand--"

"I do, however!  What time was all this?"

"Half-past ten, roughly.  When I got here, the only light burning was
in Simon's study--otherwise the house was in darkness, which seemed to
me an ironic commentary on my foolish gesture!  The study light went
out almost immediately, but I lingered on.  I sat down on a fallen log
in the deep shadow of those trees--there, to the right of the path--and
began to think back to old times.  One discovery I made was that I
hated Simon Varr more than ever after all these years.  Damaging
confession, I suppose?

"Twenty or thirty minutes must have passed.  Then I heard a cautious
step on the trail--and nearly fell off my log when a figure in the garb
of a monk glided into the open.  Rather weird!  Sounds silly here, of
course, but for a moment my hair stood on end.  I had a notion that I
was seeing a ghost!

"Before I recovered my wits, it--it happened!  I had supposed Simon had
gone to bed when his light went out, but now he appeared from around
the corner of the house.  It was obvious that he was stalking the monk.
It was like watching a scene in a melodrama, and I couldn't have moved
hand or foot to save my life.  All of a sudden, Varr rushed him.  I
thought the fellow would run, but instead of that he waited.  When
Simon got close, the monk appeared to raise a sort of mask he wore.  I
heard Simon cry out something in a surprised voice, and then I saw a
flash of steel as the monk threw up his arm and brought it down.  Simon
dropped to the ground and lay on his back--and the monk glided off down
that trail before I realized that I had seen a murder!"

"Why didn't you chase him--holler--do _something_!" cried Miss Ocky.

"Couldn't seem to budge," said Sherwood briefly.  He looked a little
hurt.  "If you think it was just cowardice you're jolly well mistaken!
I had no sensation of fear at any time.  You've heard the expression,
'rooted with amazement'?  Well, I was it!

"I was still in that condition three minutes later, perhaps, when I
heard another, heavier step on the trail.  A man appeared, and from the
way he walked I could tell he had been drinking.  He staggered toward
the body, but he was staring at the house and shaking his fist at it.
He reeled off the cement path and almost stumbled over Simon before he
saw him.  He gave a cry, and stooped to look closer--then turned and
bolted for dear life and vanished down the trail.  He had been scared
sober!

"I began to get back my senses.  The first thing I thought of was my
own position and what I should do.  If I were called on to account for
my presence there it would involve the mention of Lucy's name if I told
the truth--and to save my neck I couldn't think of a plausible lie!
There was none to explain my presence in Varr's kitchen garden at
eleven o'clock at night!

"I felt under no obligation to give the alarm--it never once occurred
to me that the second man wasn't tearing hell-for-leather to the
police-station with his story!  I did, however, feel that I could not
leave Simon lying there with a knife in him while there was a
possibility of his being still alive.  It took all the nerve I had, but
I walked out and took a careful look at him.  I knew enough about
anatomy to see at once that he had been stabbed through the heart and
must have died instantly.  Then I lost no time in getting away--"

"You kept to this cement path?"

"Yes; I had sense enough to leave no tracks in that soft earth.  I got
home without meeting any one, and I hoped I would never be drawn into
the case.

"It gave me a jolt when I found the crime had not been reported by that
second man.  The inquest reassured me when it seemed as if everybody
was at a loss to know who had committed the murder.  They could remain
at a loss for all of me, so long as I wasn't brought into the case--and
Lucy!  Then, the next morning, the papers had the news of Maxon's
arrest!  I haven't slept much since!"

"I'm hardly surprised," said Creighton dryly.  "Your story does one
thing to the Queen's taste--it corroborates Maxon's description of his
movements that evening.  He was drunk when he broke jail, he had an
hour or so to kill before meeting Drusilla Jones, and he staggered up
here with the tipsy notion of wrecking the garden to spite old Varr.
He was sobered by what he found, as you noticed, but even then didn't
have sense enough to see that his best bet was to go straight to the
police.  He claims he never stopped to think how black appearances
against him would be.  Would you be able to swear that he was the man
you saw here after the murder?"

"Yes.  I went to court when he was examined and remanded and I
recognized him beyond a shadow of doubt."

"And I'm to understand you've kept silent simply out of consideration
for Mrs. Varr?"

"That weighs a good deal with me," said Sherwood quietly.  "I haven't
enjoyed these past nine days, Mr. Creighton.  When I couldn't stand it
any longer, I came to Miss Copley to tell her of my difficulty."

"And I advised him to talk with you and be guided by your
instructions," threw in Miss Ocky.

"What had I better do?" asked Sherwood hopelessly.

"Do!  There's a man in the county jail with an ugly charge hanging over
him that a word from you will lift--and you ask me what to do!"
Creighton was scandalized.  "Go to Norvallis--instantly!  Tell him the
truth and let him decide how much publicity must attend the liberation
of Maxon.  I don't think he will insist upon much!"

"You're right, Mr. Creighton--but not helpful."

"Helpful!  What did you expect?" snorted the detective indignantly.
"Did you think I'd encourage you to let Maxon rot in jail just to humor
your quixotic notions about gossip and a woman's name?  I sympathize
with your difficulty, but that's as far as I can go.  There are two
things I've never done and never expect to do knowingly--let an
innocent man suffer unjustly or a guilty one escape!"

"At this point there was loud applause from the gallery!" murmured Miss
Ocky in her soft, amused drawl, and brought him to earth.  "Go on,
Leslie, and do your duty.  It can't be helped."

"Very well," said Mr. Sherwood unhappily, and got off the rock.
"Nothing more you want to ask me, is there?"

"N-no," answered the detective, a bit subdued by Miss Ocky's rebuke.
"Yes--one thing.  What did this confounded monk look like?"

"Well, I can't help you much there.  I got the impression that he wore
a mask--as Miss Copley did when she saw him on the trail.  He was
dressed from head to foot in black.  He even wore black gloves; it was
an odd thing that made me notice that.  Have you ever seen a man
straighten up from some completed task and stand looking down at it,
nodding his head and rubbing his hands together as if to say, 'Well,
there's a good job over and done with'?  That's what this fellow did as
he stood above Simon--"

"_Oh!_" gasped Miss Ocky, and collapsed limply on the bowlder, her face
ashen.  "Oh!"

"What is it?" snapped Creighton, wheeling upon her.  "What is the
matter?"

"It's all so ghastly--so--so cold-blooded!" she managed to stammer.
"Don't mind me.  I'm all right."

"Um," said Creighton, eyeing her doubtfully.  "You come into the house
and get a rest before dinner!  Good-day, Mr. Sherwood!"

He carried his point without much difficulty.  He hovered over Miss
Ocky until he had her safely in the house and on her way to her room,
and for once her militant spirit seemed burned out.  He reproached
himself bitterly for having let her listen to Sherwood, though nobody
could have foreseen that the noodle-pated idiot would start
embroidering his story with graphically gruesome tidbits!  Why hadn't
he kept his fat head shut?  Serve him right if Norvallis jumped _him_
next and put him in the jug for political prestige!  For a few minutes
Creighton was almost cheerful as he pondered that possibility.

Fortunately for his peace of mind, Miss Ocky reappeared for dinner and
impressed him as having entirely regained her composure.  She was her
usual gently mocking, always slightly cynical and amusing self.  As the
swift conversation flashed back and forth between them--past the
apparently unconscious person of young Mr. Merrill--he gradually
recovered his own equanimity and was quite himself again by the time he
and Miss Ocky settled to coffee and cigarettes in the cozy corner of
the veranda.

"Almost time for Mr. Krech to make his evening call," she suggested.
"They dine earlier at the Bolts' than we do here."

"Queer thing about Krech," mused Creighton.  "I've never seen him take
so little interest in a case as he does in this.  Usually he is at my
heels from morning until night, spraying questions the way a
machine-gun sprays bullets.  Now he just blows in--and presently blows
out."

"Oh!" said Miss Ocky.  She sat up straight, scratched her chin
meditatively with one slim forefinger, and darted him a look that he
missed.  "Mmph.  Y-yes, that is queer."

"Of course he's devoted to his wife," continued the detective, "and I
suppose that distracts a man from the pursuit of a mere hobby."

"Briefly," said Miss Ocky.  "Briefly!"

"A charming woman ought not to be cynical--"  Creighton broke off and
raised his hand.  "He's coming now; you can hear that car of Bolt's six
miles on a quiet night!  Shall we tell him about Leslie Sherwood?--the
poor chap hasn't had anything so nourishing for a week."

"Swear him to secrecy," stipulated Miss Ocky.

Thus, when the big man appeared and dropped into a chair, he was duly
pledged to discretion and informed of the fact that an eyewitness of
the murder had turned up.

"My gosh!" he exclaimed when the details had been told.  "Why, that
just naturally blows Norvallis clean out of water!  What'll he do if he
loses Mr. Vote-getter Maxon?"

"Pinch Sherwood," chuckled Creighton.  "That ought to net him even
handsomer returns."

"Oh--_no_!" cried Miss Ocky, and turned white.  "Oh, I think it is
simply disgraceful that such things can happen in a civilized country!
Bad enough to be the subject of gossip and suspected of a crime, but to
be actually imprisoned on mere suspicion--"

"I was only joking," cut in the detective hastily.  "Norvallis will
make no such stupid blunder.  I'm sorry to say there is a wide
difference between what can be done to a mere workingman and what may
be done to a country gentleman of position."

"So much the worse!" snapped Miss Ocky unappeased.

"This lets out Charlie Maxon," muttered Krech, and regarded his friend
morosely.  "Seems to me, Creighton, that every time this case takes one
step forward, it slides back two.  Jason Bolt is getting fearfully down
in the mouth.  When this news reaches him it will be the finishing
touch."

"I had a talk with him this afternoon," said the detective, and flicked
his cigarette over the veranda rail.  "Reminded him that Rome wasn't
built in a day and that murderers aren't always caught in a night, that
the darkest hour is just before the dawn, and dropped a few other
comforting thoughts in similar vein.  I also mentioned that one never
knew in a case of this kind when something might happen--"

"_It's happening now!_"

Krech hissed the words in a fierce whisper.  His eyes had automatically
followed the detective's glowing cigarette and had been attracted by
something farther off, barely visible through the deepening dusk.
Almost before Miss Ocky and Creighton could sense the meaning of his
words, he had sprung to his feet and vaulted the veranda railing.
Thanks to a downhill slope of the ground at this point the piazza floor
was a full nine feet from the grass lawn, and they heard a hearty grunt
as Krech alighted.  Then he recovered his footing and sped with
extraordinary swiftness for so large a man across the sward in the
direction of that woods that edged it.

"What is it?" gasped Miss Ocky.  "Oh--what is it?"

"The monk!" cried Creighton.  "The monk!"

His glance, darting ahead of the speeding Krech, had discerned an
unmistakable figure outlined against a clump of white birch as though
the monk had deliberately chosen a background against which he would be
most conspicuous to the group on the piazza.  He was standing there
motionless, apparently indifferent to the rushing menace of Krech, and
through the detective's brain, searing it like a flame, shot the memory
of something Sherwood had said, "I thought the fellow would run, but
instead of that he waited!"  He was waiting now!

"Krech!" cried the detective.  "_Careful--careful!_"

His hands were on the rail of the veranda.  It had not taken two
seconds for him to size the situation and shout his warning, and those
same seconds were occupied in getting out of his chair and dashing to
the rail.  He had one leg over this when two hands like steel clamps
circled his right arm and gripped him fiercely.

"Please--oh, _please_!" stammered a frightened voice.

"_Ocky!_" he gasped in furious protest.  "_Leggo!_"

He wrenched himself free and went sprawling over the rail, a wordless
prayer in his heart that no broken legs or sprained ankles were to be
his portion.  He landed unhurt in a providential flowerbed, and
struggled again to his feet to discover that both the monk and Krech
had vanished.

There was a little-used trail which commenced near the birch-trees and
ran sharply downhill to the small house that Miss Ocky had donated to
her nephew and his bride.  Creighton knew of its existence, and never
doubted now that the monk had disappeared into it at the last moment
with the impetuous Krech in full pursuit.  He drew an electric torch
from his hip-pocket as he raced for the dark entrance to the path,
anxiety for his friend the paramount force that speeded his flying feet.

"Why did he try to jump him like that?" he thought.  "If he had only
used his head a bit!  He could have sauntered into the house, out the
back door, crept through the woods and taken the fellow in the rear.
He has all the courage of a mad bull--and about as much sense."

This unkind summary of Krech's character was no sooner complete than
Creighton himself was in the trail, plunging headlong down its sharp
declivity with quite as much recklessness as his friend had shown, save
the advantage of his flash.  He played its powerful beam ahead of him
as he ran and leaped, until twenty yards from the entrance he suddenly
dug his heels hard into the rubble of the path to halt his wild career
as the light showed him the body of a man lying face downward in the
trail.  Its bulk alone left no doubt of identity.

"_Hell!_" snapped the detective, and the one vicious word was the
epitome of all that he felt.

With desperate haste he jammed the torch into a crotch of a small tree
so that its rays illuminated the scene, then dropped to his knees
beside the prone body of his friend, exerted all his strength and
rolled it over on its back.  His eager fingers, pressing, prodding,
explored the still form throughout its length.

"No wounds--no broken bones," was his first relieved diagnosis.  Then
"Hello--here we are!"  An angry red abrasion on the big man's forehead
had caught his attention.  He touched it, and smiled as it elicited a
groan from the victim that sounded to Creighton like celestial music.
"A crack on the head--knocked him out!" he muttered, then raised his
voice.  "I say, Krech--come to, old man, come to!"

The adjuration seemed to penetrate Mr. Krech's dazed faculties.  His
eyes opened, blinked once or twice, opened again and stared tranquilly
up into Creighton's.  His lips moved and words issued.

"A fall like that," he observed calmly, "would have killed an ordinary
man."

"Thank heaven!" ejaculated the detective fervently.  "Are you much
hurt?  What happened?"

"Tripped--came down with a dirty wallop and cracked my head on
something awfully hard."  He raised himself cautiously to a sitting
position and glanced about him.  "That chunk of granite there--doesn't
it look to you as if it were freshly broken?"

"I guess it was only this big root!" said Creighton, and laughed aloud
in his relief.  Then his mirth abruptly gave way to surprise.  "Hello,"
he said.  "Hello--hello--hello!"

He had been looking around too, and now he picked up a loose end of
stout wire that was attached at one extremity to a sapling.  There
could be no question as to what it was doing there.  Until Krech's shin
had snapped it, it had been stretched taut across the trail a foot
above the ground.

"Gee Joseph!" exclaimed the big man, staring at the simple apparatus of
destruction.  "Clever little hellion, ain't he?"  He stood up, moved
his arms and legs tentatively and gave himself a shake.

"All right?" asked Creighton quickly.

"Never felt better in my life.  Little shaking-up like that--good for a
man.  Who was the ancient johnnie that used to bounce up from the earth
a bit stronger for every time he hit it?"

"Antaeus," suggested the detective absently.

"Uh-huh.  H. Antaeus Krech--that's me."  He added with more appropriate
seriousness, "What became of our little playmate?"

"Search me," replied Creighton, still thoughtful.  "I'm trying to
figure out what was back of all this.  It was a prearranged trap, of
course.  He showed himself deliberately, invited us to chase him, then
arranged this wire to insure his get-away.  But--why?"

"I can give you a good guess, Peter, my boy," said Krech slowly.  "I
think I have inadvertently saved your life."

"Huh?  What's that?"

"Suppose you are getting too close to the truth of who killed Simon
Varr--or suppose the murderer thinks you are, which comes to the same
thing.  He doesn't care for the idea--not a-tall.  So he has a happy
inspiration and plots this scenario as you have described it--only to
draw an anticlimax.  You were supposed to do the chasing.  Naturally he
couldn't foresee that your guardian angel, the unfortunate me, would
come galloping down here and spring his trap.

"What if it had been you who was slumbering peacefully in the middle of
the path instead of me?  Would you ever have awakened again?  Or would
you now be sitting somewhere on a cloud talking it all over with Simon?
How's that for a theory?"

"You think he'd have stuck a knife in me?  I must admit there is a
nasty air of plausibility about your sketch."  The detective mused a
moment.  "There's one consolation if it's true; it's mighty
complimentary--almost flattering--to my ability!"

He stood up and rescued his torch from its resting-place in the tree.
As he took it down, its beam was deflected briefly along the trail, and
in that instant he uttered a quick exclamation.

"Look there!" he snapped.  "What's that?"




_XXI: Twilight_

Krech came to attention at the detective's exclamation and his eyes
followed the ray of light from the torch as Creighton directed it to a
point on the ground scarcely two yards from their feet.  An oblong,
flat package wrapped in brown paper lay in the trail.  They dove for it
together and Creighton secured it, properly enough, since the
flash-light revealed his name on the face of it, scrawled in the same
uncouth writing that they had seen before on the anonymous
communication of the monk to Simon Varr.

"What's in it?" demanded Krech, and added a trifle anxiously, "It
doesn't tick, does it?"

"That cropper you came evidently hasn't hurt your imagination,"
chuckled the detective as he loosened the coarse string about the
package.  "No, it isn't a bomb.  It's--well, by golly, will you look at
what it is!"

Very gingerly, holding it in the tips of his fingers, he lifted a red
leather notebook from its nest of brown wrappings and showed it to
Krech.  The big man nearly dropped the torch which he had taken from
his friend.

"Varr's notebook!" he cried.  "It must be!"

"It is," confirmed Creighton, who had lifted one cover with the tip of
a finger nail and glanced at the contents of a page.  "Now, isn't this
lovely!  Who says we can't recover loot?  The thief may have to hand it
to us on a tray, but it's only results that count!  Say, Krech--there
goes your melodramatic theory of a plot to bump me off."

"I suppose so."

"He lured me down this trail so I'd find it, and to make sure I didn't
miss it, he strung that wire where it would throw me with my face
almost on the darn thing!  You'd have seen it if you hadn't been
knocked silly, and I'd have seen it if I'd been thinking of anything
but you."

"He went to a lot of trouble that he could have spared himself for all
of me!" grunted Krech, feeling his forehead.  "I must look like the
happy end of a barroom brawl.  Why didn't he mail it?"

"By golly, I don't know.  That's a mighty pertinent question, Mr.
Krech.  We'll get the answer when we get the crook, I expect.  I'm not
so fearfully surprised at getting back this notebook; did it ever
strike you that there might be another explanation of its disappearance
other than simple theft?"

"N-no.  If there's another reason, I missed it."

"The dagger wasn't used to further the looting of Varr's desk.  Just
the contrary is the truth, I believe.  The notebook was stolen to cover
the theft of the dagger."

"Gee Joseph!" Krech whistled softly.  "That checks up with the theory
of an inside job!  Creighton--_who_?"

"That's something I hope to find out pretty soon," replied the
detective gravely.  "Come on back to the house--and, listen!  We lost
sight of the monk.  We hunted a while until you tripped and hurt your
head, then we gave up the search and came home.  Get it?  Not another
word!"

"Right," said the big man obediently.

There was no one on the veranda when they emerged from the woods.  Two
figures moved in the lamp-lit hall as they entered the house.  Bates
came up to greet them nervously, and young Merrill lurked in the offing
looking curious.

"Is everything all right, sir?" asked the butler timidly.

"Perfectly all right.  Where is Miss Copley?"

"Retired, sir.  She left word for you that she would not be down again
this evening."

The news that she had left a message for him was welcome.  He had been
troubled by the recollection of the cavalier fashion in which he had
shaken off her hand on his arm, and he was uncomfortably certain that
in his haste he had addressed her, as he thought of her, by her family
nickname.

"Go tap on her door, please, Bates, and tell her that I am back with
nothing to report.  Wait--take Mr. Krech up with you and show him my
room.  He has a forehead he wants to bathe."

The butler went off, and Krech, after a mild protest, accompanied him.
Creighton, when they were out of sight, beckoned Merrill to follow and
went swiftly into the living-room.

"Find out at once if any one has been absent from the house during the
past hour.  Let me know."

"Done it already, sir.  Thought you'd want it.  Only one person I
haven't had my eye on."

"_Who?_"

"Janet Mackay, sir.  She went to town immediately after dinner to a
movie."

"_Janet Mackay_!  There is only one motion-picture theater?"

"Yes, sir."

"Go there at once.  Check up on her.  She's a regular patron--the
ticket-girl should be able to tell you if she's been there.  When you
come back, signal to me, yes or no.  Understand?  _Beat it_!"

When Krech came down again he found Creighton sitting on the veranda,
smoking a cigar and apparently more in the mood to think than to talk.
It was nearly ten o'clock when a step sounded on the porch and Merrill
sauntered into view.

"Pardon!" he said promptly, and vanished again.

But he had obeyed his instructions and sent Creighton a sign that
started the detective's heart to thumping.  Janet Mackay had not been
to the theater.  Here was a coil with collateral complications that
were not pleasant to contemplate.  His heart stopped thumping and made
a dive for his boots as he wondered what Miss Ocky would say when she
learned of his interest in Janet.

"I'm going to New York on the midnight," he said abruptly.  "Will you
run me to the station on your way home?"

"Sure.  Unexpected, isn't it?  What are you going for?"

"Mostly on account of this notebook."  Creighton tapped the side-pocket
of his coat in which he had placed his treasure, rewrapped and tied.
"It must go to the chap in Brooklyn who does my finger-print work, and
I don't care to trust it to the mail.  I've another reason for going
which I don't propose to tell you."

"_Sus domesticus_!" cried Mr. Krech proudly, then obligingly translated
for his astonished companion.  "Pig!"

"Oh.  Well, if you feel so deeply about it I suppose I might toss you a
hint.  I'm going to New York to give something a chance to happen that
might not happen if I stayed here.  I'll be back to-morrow evening,
late--which reminds me that I'd better catch young Merrill and leave a
message for Miss Ocky.  Bates has probably gone to bed."

He spent the night at his apartment in the city and surprised his staff
by entering his office the next morning at nine sharp--surprised them
pleasantly, it may be added, for they had come to be loyal friends no
less than faithful helpers.  He exchanged cheerful greetings with a
very pretty young woman who left her typewriter and accompanied him
into his private room.

"Something didding, Rose, I do believe."  He seated himself at his
handsome, flat-top desk.  "Send Jimmy here.  Get Kitty Doyle on the
wire, tell her to pack a bag and stand by the telephone in case I need
her."

A minute later he was smiling at the homely face of Jimmy Horton, his
chief of staff.

"Got that notebook, Jimmy!"  He slapped the brown package on his desk.
"The story will have to wait.  I want you to take this over to Martin
yourself.  Leave it there.  Ask him to make every effort to bring out
such prints as there may be on the covers.  If he finds any, tell him
to compare them with the assortment I sent him from Hambleton last week
and see if any of them check.  He is to telephone me his findings here,
or wire them to me at Hambleton if I've gone back.  Understand?"

"Perfectly.  Does he mail you the book?"

"No.  When he's through with it, you go back and get it.  Be careful of
it, Jimmy.  If it comes to a choice of losing that book or losing your
life, you hang on to the book."

"I get you!" grinned Jimmy.  "Doesn't the recovery of this notebook
technically end your commission?  We're up to our ears in work here.
Why are you going back to Hambleton?"

"Because--because I darn well choose to!"  Creighton writhed inwardly
as he felt his cheeks growing hot.  "On your way, young man--you ought
to be under the East River by this time!"

Nevertheless, a certain compunction helped him to put the Varr case,
and even Miss Ocky, out of his mind for the balance of the morning
while he laboriously worked through an accumulation of other matters
that had been waiting for his personal attention.  At one o'clock he
went to the basement of the building for a hurried lunch in the
rathskeller, leaving word of his whereabouts with Rose.

It was well that he did so.  With the coffee came an extension
telephone that was plugged in at his elbow, and a distant voice spoke
clearly in his ear.

"Merrill speaking.  I'm telephoning from the railroad station.  You
guessed right, sir.  The woman has just left for New York.  Seemed a
bit low in her mind--been crying and was still sniffling.  She's
wearing a dark-gray cloth dress--black oxfords--small black hat with a
green feather--black fur neck-piece--brown leather suit-case--  What's
that, sir?  No, sir!"  Mr. Merrill's voice was gently reproachful.
"She's not wearing the suit-case; she's carrying it.  Yes, sir.  I
thought she acted rather queer--nervous, unhappy and fidgety."

"And no doubt she is!  Thank you, Merrill.  Good work!"

Creighton hung up the receiver, shook his head at the waiter who came
for the instrument, then called an uptown number.  A woman's voice
answered--bright, alert, faintly tinged with a soft brogue.

"Miss Doyle speaking."

"Hello, Kitty!  Did you pack that bag?  Good.  I want you to meet the
train from Hambleton arriving four-thirty.  Janet Mackay is on it.  You
can't miss her--listen!"  He rattled off Merrill's description of the
woman's dress.  "Shadow her, Kitty; follow her to Kamchatka if you have
to.  Keep your eyes and ears open.  Use your own judgment in regard to
scraping up an acquaintance if an opportunity offers.  She's dour, and
probably a bit suspicious.  I can give you one useful tip about
her--she talks in her sleep.  _Huh_!  That will be all from you, Miss
Doyle; it doesn't matter how I know.  Wire me any news as you get it to
Hambleton.  Have you plenty of money?"

"Couple of hundred, I'll telegraph if I need more."

"Right.  Whatever happens, Kitty--stay with her!"

"Like a Siamese twin," the bright voice assured him.  "Is there
anything special I'm to try and find out?"

"Well, you know the nature of this case."  Creighton hesitated.  "A
confession would be very useful--if you could get it!"

"Crumbs!" gasped Miss Doyle.  "Did _she_ do it?"

"I have no definite proof--yet.  There's just enough evidence to
warrant our taking a warm interest in her.  This sudden departure from
Hambleton may be--flight!"

"Oh-ho.  And she chose her time while you were here, thus avoiding any
embarrassing farewell scene with you!  Quite so.  Leave her to me, Mr.
Creighton.  I'll wire you from Liverpool or Buenos Aires or Paris--"

"Or Hoboken or Harlem!" he corrected her.

"Much more likely."

He sent away the telephone, ordered fresh coffee, lighted a cigarette
and glanced at his watch.  Two courses were open to him.  He could put
in the afternoon at the office and thereby clear up a lot of stuff for
Rose and Jimmy, returning late to Hambleton as he had planned, or he
could catch a train that would get him there just in time for dinner.
Um.

He caught the train that was to get him there just in time for dinner.
Bates, meeting him in the hall and relieving him of his bag, dashed his
hopes forthwith.

"I'm afraid we weren't expecting you, sir," said the butler
apologetically.  "Miss Ocky is dining at Mrs. Bolt's.  I'll have
something ready for you in about half-an-hour, sir.  Will that be all
right, sir?"

"Fine, Bates; thank you."

"A judgment on me for my sins of omission!" he told himself
philosophically.  "I should have stayed on the job at the office."

He went and put his head in at the dining-room door, where Merrill had
just commenced his solitary dinner.  The young man signaled to him
instantly that he had a communication to make.  Bates had vanished to
the upper floor with his bag, and when Creighton had assured himself
that there was no one in the pantry, he stepped quickly to Merrill's
side.

"I wanted to tell you that Miss Copley and the Mackay woman had a long
talk in Miss Copley's room very late last night--or early this morning,
rather.  It was nearly four o'clock when Janet went to bed.  They were
talking about something very--well, _fiercely_.  Almost quarreling.  I
couldn't make out the words.  That's all, sir; I should really have
reported this to you over the wire."

"So you should, my boy, so you should," muttered Creighton absently.
"No harm done this time, fortunately."

He slipped away before the butler should return, and went out to the
veranda to wait until something had been prepared for him.  He was glad
of the brief opportunity to be alone with his thoughts.

Merrill's latest bit of information was disturbing in the extreme--so
disturbing that he had to force his mind to consider a possibility from
which it shrank aghast.  The two women had "talked fiercely."  They had
"almost quarreled."  _What about_?  A hypothetical answer came to him
so ugly that it chilled him to the bone.

Granted that Janet Mackay, from motives yet obscure, had killed Simon
Varr, had Miss Ocky somehow learned the truth and become an accessory
after the crime?  Swayed by her dislike of Simon and her friendship for
her companion of a score of years, had she condoned a crime and helped
a murderess to escape?  What was that she had once said?  "Janet and I
are fearfully responsible for each other!"

_Oof_!  He took out his handkerchief and vigorously rubbed at the moist
palms of his hands.

He had sat in this very same spot the night before and worried over
Miss Ocky's probable reaction to a theory of Janet's guilt, but he had
not dreamed of anything so terrible as this.  Ocky an accessory!
Finished with his palms, he shifted the handkerchief to his brow.

An unwelcome memory stirred in him of the scene the evening before when
he had leaped the piazza rail in pursuit of the monk.  He could feel
again her grip on his arm.  Had she known that the black figure was
Janet and sought to restrain him lest he catch her?  Obvious!  And he
had ascribed that action to timidity or even--blatant ass!--to fear for
his safety.  Fear!  As if October Copley knew the meaning of the word
either for herself or any one else!  "Afraid for his safety?"  His
cheeks were red as he spared a mirthless laugh for an egotistical idiot.

"Dinner is served, sir," announced Bates, appearing in his silent
fashion around the corner of the house.  "It is not very elaborate, I'm
afraid, sir."

"It will be ample," Creighton assured him, and added a trifle bitterly,
"I don't seem to have much appetite this evening."




_XXII: A Cry in the Night_

During the progress of that mournful meal his discomfort was vastly
increased by the sudden reflection that he was now confronted with a
most disagreeable necessity.  He bit his lip and frowned, strongly
tempted deliberately to sidestep a task so uncongenial.

No--he couldn't shirk it!  Come what might, he would see this through
and force himself to act in every respect as he would have acted were
Ocky not involved.  She was clean and straight herself, even if
misguided loyalty to Janet had caused her momentarily to swerve from
the narrow path of rectitude, and it would be no compliment to her if
he were to scamp his job.  Antagonists they might be in this contest of
wits, but she was too sporting ever to want him to do aught but play
the game for all that was in him.

"What time will Miss Copley be back?" he asked the butler.

"She said about ten, sir."

That would give him ample time for what he proposed to do.  The dreary
dinner ended, he went upstairs as though going to his room, but he did
not get quite so far.  The hall was empty.  The house was still.  He
knew there was small chance of any one interrupting him while he worked.

Softly, he turned the knob of Miss Ocky's door, slipped inside and
closed it again behind him.  He crossed the room and drew the curtains
of the French window before taking his torch from his pocket.

Then, tight-lipped, he set to work.

An hour passed before his search, swift, silent and sure, approached
its end.  He had found nothing to incriminate Janet Mackay, nothing to
connect her departure with any guilty knowledge thereof on the part of
Miss Ocky.  He smiled contentedly at the result, exulting in his
failure, then sobered suddenly as the light from his torch, playing
over her desk, discovered to him a neat, leather-bound book with the
word "Diary" stamped in gold across its top cover.

A diary!  Why in thunder did people keep 'em?  Ocky had got the habit
from keeping notes for her books, he supposed.  Silly things, always
getting their owners into trouble!  He glared at the innocent book a
full minute before he reluctantly opened it and sought the entries for
the past few weeks.  There were not many, thank goodness; she was not a
faithful diarist.  He scanned them rapidly, gathering courage as it
grew plain that there was nothing here the whole world might not read.
Then he caught his breath and stood transfixed as one entry, dated
three days back, sped its message to his brain.

"The usual talk with P. C. last night from balcony to balcony.  He is
amusing and very entertaining--amazingly kind and sympathetic despite
his profession, which must tend to harden a man--though he will not
admit it!"  So much was in her bold, firm writing, but underneath a
line had been added in fainter, more uncertain script.  "Why couldn't
we have met twenty years ago!"

Creighton shut the book quickly, flicked off his torch, stood
motionless in the dark.  His breast was a chaos of wild, conflicting
emotions.  There was rejoicing at what he had found, loathing for the
way he had found it, terror of the problems it portended.  That
regretful line in her diary revealed some feeling for him, he felt
sure, but what would become of that newborn sentiment when she learned
that he had--

The raucous blare of a motor-horn from the direction of the driveway
cut sharply through his abstraction.  He leaped for the door and gained
the hall in safety, then sauntered downstairs to find not one arrival
but two.  Miss Ocky had returned ahead of schedule, and a messenger on
a motorcycle had come with a telegram.

"Telegram for Creighton."

"Right here."  He scrawled a signature in the book, opened the wire and
read it by his flash-light.  "No answer."

He read it again as the boy putt-putted off into the darkness.


"_We leave for Montreal to-night.  Cheers.  Can I have one on you?
Address General Delivery, Montreal.  K. Doyle._"


He struck a match and held it to the corner of the yellow sheet.  By
the time it was burned and the charred fragments crunched beneath his
heel, Miss Ocky had garaged the car and come around to the front steps.

"Hello," she said, rather wearily.  "Never dreamed you'd be back
already!"

"Couldn't stay away," he said lightly.  "Have a nice time at the Bolts?"

"Rotten," answered Miss Ocky tersely.  "My own fault--I've been low in
my mind all day."  She pulled off her driving gloves and waved with
them toward the veranda.  "Come and give me a cigarette."

"What has been worrying you?" he asked her quietly when they were
settled in the cozy corner.  "Anything serious?"

"Janet has gone.  I shall miss her--terribly--after all these years.
She insisted, though, and I had no right to refuse her."

"But she will miss you, too, surely."

"Possibly."

"She's going home to Scotland, I suppose?"

"N-no."  Miss Ocky hesitated, then added calmly, "She is going to a
sister in New Orleans."

"Oh," said Creighton, and it seemed to him that some one else must have
uttered the word, so far away did it sound.  "Very nice for her."

"Let's--forget her," suggested Miss Ocky.

There was no talk from balcony to balcony that night.  Miss Ocky begged
off on the plea of fatigue, and it was fairly evident that the plea was
perfectly honest.  She acted as if she were tired, she looked so, and
Creighton, grimly comparing the fiction of New Orleans with the fact of
Montreal, could no longer doubt that she had every reason to be tired,
mentally and physically.

He was none too fit himself when he came down to breakfast the next
morning after a miserable night's rest.  He could scarcely eat
anything.  He rose from the table finally and sped into the front hall
at the sound of a motorcycle, and when he accepted two wires from a
messenger and dismissed him, his powers of resistance were pitifully
inadequate to withstand the greatest shock he was ever to receive in
all his life.

The first was a night-letter from Martin, the finger-print expert.


"_Numerous prints on cover of took.  Freshest superimposed on others
are one of thumb top cover four of finger tips on bottom, made by
number eight in collection you sent me.  Characteristics distinctive.
No possibility of error.  Martin._"


Number eight of the collection he had made!  Made since the death of
Simon Varr, then, and by some one in the household!  Here was a
tangible clue to the truth at last!

He took his memorandum book from his pocket and turned its pages with
fingers that trembled slightly until he found the list that he had
started with Betty Blake.  Swiftly, his eyes went to number eight.

"No. 8.  October Copley."  That was the entry.

A full minute passed before he stooped and recovered the memorandum
book which had slipped from his grasp, together with the second
telegram.  He shook his head impatiently in an effort to clear it of
the stupor which numbed his brain.

Why should he be affected like this? he demanded angrily of himself.
What was there here that couldn't be explained in the light of facts
already known?  It was no news to him now that Ocky was aiding Janet to
escape the consequences of her crime, and it was plain enough what must
have happened.  She had found the notebook in Janet's possession,
handled it cautiously and left those prints, then insisted upon its
return to its rightful owners.  That was all.  His heart began to pound
less violently, and presently he was opening the second telegram, which
he saw at once was a straight wire from Kitty Doyle filed early that
morning.


"_Same compartment in sleeper.  She had lower berth.  Was very
restless.  Talked several times.  Could only hear one sentence,
repeated frequently.  Miss Ocky, why did you do it, why did you do it?
She wired Hotel Beauclerc Montreal for reservation.  K. Doyle._"


"Miss Ocky, why did you do it, why did you do it?"

For a few moments that sentence written in letters of fire danced madly
before his eyes.  Then it cleared away and left him gazing at the
peaceful woods beyond the patch of velvet lawn.  His face was
expressionless, but his lips moved slowly.

"That's it.  That's it, of course.  It's been there all the time.  I
knew it.  I was just afraid to face it.  Now--I've got to."

He was standing on the veranda, but he had an odd sense that his brain
had detached itself from his body and was floating high in the air,
whence it had a comprehensive, bird's-eye view of the whole situation.
The chief actors in the drama were there, and as his brain watched them
they dissolved briefly into mist, then reformed slowly into a sort of
allegorical tableau.

There was Miss Ocky, arrayed in the somber robes of a monk, a stained
dagger held loosely in her fingers, an illusive, faintly mocking smile
on her lips.  There was a great figure in white, a bandage about its
eyes, leaning negligently on a long, two-edged sword, its calm,
sightless face turned toward the woman in black.  There was Janet
Mackay, gaunt and ugly, interposing her thin body between the two, a
pitifully inadequate shield.  They all appeared to be waiting for
something, and presently it was evident that the attention of the two
women was centered on the figure of a funny little man whose troubled
eyes peered out from behind a huge pair of shell-rimmed glasses as he
stood beside the goddess, hesitant, his hand stretched out to loose the
bandage from the eyes of Justice.

The vision faded until only the funny little man was left.  The watcher
on high saw him turn and enter the house, calm and composed, putting
two telegrams and a notebook into his pocket as he walked the length of
the hall and into the pantry.  His voice was placid when he spoke.

"Bates, fix me up a couple of sandwiches and a flask of black coffee.
I've been a bit seedy lately and I'm going to try the effects of a long
walk.  I may not be back until quite late."

"Yes, sir.  I'll have them in a few minutes, sir."

After an interminable wait of centuries, a neat package was forthcoming
and he was at length able to leave the house and plunge into the woods,
his destination the little cave in the hills where he and Miss Ocky had
shared their picnic lunch.  There he could be alone, secure from
interruption, while two little devils, devised for the torment of man,
donned the gloves and staged in the squared circle of his heart the
age-old battle between love and duty.

It was a memorable fight, that.  Love went down for the count of nine
more than once, but more often it was the ugly little demon of duty
that the end of a round left hanging on the ropes.  Not until dusk had
fallen was the referee able to hold up the arm of the victor.

It was ten o'clock when he limped wearily into the quiet house and
slipped noiselessly to his room.  His first glance was for his desk,
where telegrams might be found if any had come.  There were none, but a
large white envelope, sealed but unaddressed, lay on the blotting-pad.
He took it up and ripped it open.  Two letters, stamped and ready for
mailing, fell on the desk.  He stared at them indifferently, then
picked them up and thrust them in his pocket.

He sat down, determined to act while his decision was fresh, and drew
writing materials toward him.  It was a very simple note that he
intended to write, and it was just that when he finally finished it,
but six false starts lay in the trash-basket beside his desk.  He read
over the completed product.


"_My dear Mr. Bolt--Pressure of business recalls me to New York early
to-morrow morning before I can have an opportunity to see you.  I am
happy to say that Mr. Varr's notebook has been recovered, under
circumstances which I hereby authorize Mr. Krech to describe to you.  I
will send it to you by messenger.  I regret that I cannot name the
thief, whose identity, in my opinion, will never be learned.  I shall
look forward to seeing you when I again visit Hambleton, which I hope
to do after a short period of work and rest.  Sincerely yours, Peter
Creighton._"


He stood up, holding the open letter in his hand.  His head was heavy.
Hardly conscious of what he was doing, he went to the French windows,
pulled them open and stepped out on the balcony.  Instantly, a low
voice challenged him from the darkness.

"Mr. Creighton!  I'm so glad!  I thought you must be lost!  I've been
waiting here--!  Please, will you do something for me?"

"I'm always ready for that, Miss Copley."

"I want you to come here.  The door of my room is unlocked."  The low
voice grew even fainter.  "I--I am very ill," said Miss Ocky.




_XXIII: The Darkest Hour_

Everything else faded from his mind at the emergency suggested by her
last words.

He was with her in five seconds.  In that time she had retreated from
the balcony and was lying back in a deep, upholstered armchair near the
open window, a soft woolen lap-robe over her knees and tucked about her
feet.  He leaned over her anxiously.

"You are ill?  What is it?" he questioned her swiftly.  "Let me go for
the doctor!"

"No--please!  It isn't a case for a doctor--yet.  I must talk to you
first."  There was a straight-backed chair close by, as though she had
placed it there for him, and she waved him to it.  She did not continue
until he had reluctantly seated himself on its edge, bending forward to
watch her face in the dim light from a single lamp across the room.
"I--there is something I must tell you.  Do you remember saying one
evening that a detective must occasionally be a father-confessor as
well as--"

"Stop!"  He interrupted her, aghast, his tortured nerves rebelling
against this unexpected, fresh flagellation.  "I want no confession
from you--I won't listen--!"

"Please!  You must let me have my way in this; I have a good reason for
insisting on that."  Her voice was low, quiet and determined.  "I want
to tell you that your search is ended.  It was I who--"

"Don't say it!" he broke in hoarsely.  "I know it already!"

"You--_what_?"  Her eyes were large, incredulous.  "You know that it
was I who--who killed Simon Varr?"  Amazed, she saw him nod his head,
and flinched from the gesture as if it were a blow.  "How did you learn
that?"

"A score of things pointed to it from the first," he answered
miserably.  "I would have seen the truth long since if--if something
else had not blinded me to it.  This morning my eyes were finally
opened--" he fumbled in his pocket with shaking fingers--"by these!"

Miss Ocky took the two telegrams, held them shoulder-high to the light,
and read them wonderingly.  She exclaimed sharply over the one from
Kitty Doyle.

"'K. Doyle'!  Who is that?"

"A clever woman detective accompanying Janet Mackay--not to New
Orleans, but to Montreal!  I already knew her destination before you
attempted to mislead me."

"A detective following Janet!"  Her tone was a vigorous protest.  "Oh,
you must call her back!  It isn't fair to Janet!  Promise me you will
call her back!"

"I will, at once.  Kitty Doyle's usefulness there--is ended!"

She had raised herself slightly in her eagerness; now she relaxed again
with a sigh of relief.  Creighton, a dull ache in his heart, waited for
her to resume the conversation.  He would not take the lead.

"So Janet talked in her sleep!"  To his horror, Miss Ocky was speaking
in her amused, faintly mocking accents as though nothing mattered less
than this gruesome discussion of how she came to be exposed.  "In a
Pullman, too; how very indiscreet!  I should have foreseen that and
made her stick to day coaches.  I knew her failing!"

"It was a paragraph in one of your books that revealed it to me,"
contributed Creighton gloomily.  "You once described a bad night you
spent due to your companion talking in her sleep.  That enabled me to
give my operative a tip."

"In one of my own books!  The irony of fate, that!  Please, Mr.
Creighton, tell me why you happened to have Janet shadowed in the first
place.  What had she done to deserve this delicate attention?  Is it
possible that you suspected _her_?"

"I most certainly did."  Chin cupped in both hands, his eyes fixed on
the floor at his feet, he morosely supplied her with the salient
features of the case as he had come upon them, from the discovery of
the steel chip that pointed to an inside job to the moment when he
learned that only Janet was missing from the house on the occasion of
the monk's final appearance.  "Then it developed that she hadn't been
at the theater, as she was supposed to be.  I argued from the return of
the notebook that the case was drawing to a climax, so I went to New
York to see if she would take advantage of my absence to slip away.
When she did, it seemed pretty conclusive evidence of her guilt.  I put
Kitty Doyle on her track.  Until this morning, the worst I thought of
you was that your friendship for Janet had led you to condone her
crime."

"Whereas the truth is exactly the reverse!  Her friendship and my
crime!"  She gave a little shiver.  "That chip from the
dagger--interesting!  It really started you on the right track, didn't
it?  I never knew I'd nicked the blade.  Mmph.  Extraordinary what
trifles may affect our destinies!  Funny, don't you think?"

Each word she uttered in that whimsical tone was like a needle pricking
his heart.  He threw out his hands protestingly, suddenly groaning the
very phrase that Janet had used in her troubled dreams.

"Miss Ocky, why did you do it?  Why did you do it?"

"Yes, I must tell you about that."  Her reply was cool, matter-of-fact,
and he did not see that she winced at the pain in his voice.  "After
all, I can plead extenuating circumstances.  I'll make it short as
possible; you can ask questions later if you wish.  Meanwhile, please
don't interrupt me or I'll lose track of my story.

"I had been away from here twenty-two years.  When I came back ten
weeks ago I discovered a situation that I had never dreamed existed.
Lucy's letters had never been especially happy or cheerful, but neither
had they contained anything to give me even an inkling of the truth.  I
did not know she was married to a human vampire, a sort of--of
spiritual leech!  Words can't tell you the difference between the Lucy
I left and the Lucy I returned to!  It hurt me--oh, it hurt me!

"You won't put down all that I say about Simon to personal prejudice
because you have heard enough about him from others to realize how mean
and selfish and--and psychically cruel he could be.  He never beat
Lucy, but that was simply because he specialized in a more refined type
of cruelty--and if you want to know which of the two hurts a woman
most, there are plenty of unfortunate wives who can tell you!

"Simon owed everything he had in the world to Lucy, for it was the
money she brought to their marriage that enabled him to start his own
tannery and gave him the opportunity to develop new processes that
proved lucrative.  Father disapproved of the match, but did not
actively oppose it, and when he died shortly after, Simon's feet were
on the road to fortune.  Remember that, please!

"When I came home, I found he had completely broken Lucy's spirit and
was deliberately trying to accomplish the same result in the case of
his son.  He had all but succeeded, too.  Money seems to be the answer
to practically every problem in this country to-day, so I was able to
come to the boy's rescue.  I told you one evening how I decided to put
him on his feet, promote his elopement with Sheila Graham, who will
make him an excellent wife--and incidentally put a spoke in Simon's
wheel!

"I began to study my brother-in-law, and the more I learned about him
the more shocked and fascinated I became.  Satisfied with the lion's
share of the income from the tannery, he refused to develop the
business so that Jason's modicum might increase to reasonable
proportions.  He had always hated Jason since the panic of 1907 when he
had to borrow money from him and give him a small interest in the
business.

"He hated his manager, Graham, too, because he was beginning to be
troublesome.  Graham felt that his long and faithful services deserved
some greater reward than a small raise in salary, and the one thing
Simon could not bear to do was to reward a man according to his
deserts!  He decided to discharge Graham--but that did not prevent him
from threatening Copley with the ruin of Sheila's father if he did not
discontinue his attentions to the girl!  Pretty?

"I was interested in the working conditions at the tannery, conditions
that were unsanitary, primitive--obscene!  I met the Maxon person in a
grocery, as I told you, but it was before the strike, not after.  He
told me things, and even with a liberal discount for exaggeration, they
were pretty bad.

"It was then I decided to take a hand in Simon's family and business
affairs!  I have a queer sense of humor at times, and it rather amused
me to think of myself as a deputy of Destiny!  And--and it just so
happened that I was in a position to play fast and loose with no regard
for possible consequences to myself.

"I opened my campaign by promoting that strike!  I persuaded Maxon, a
born agitator, to talk the men into doing it, and I provided him with
money so they should not be broken by hardship.  Afterwards I found he
hypothecated this fund and spent it on a dance-hall girl, so I was
obliged to send more money later, in a letter signed by the monk, to a
more responsible treasurer!  I was a little shocked when Maxon was
accused of murder, but my spirit rejoiced at the thought of him in
jail!  _Snake_!

"The strike only brought out Simon's worst qualities of stubbornness
and vindictiveness.  He ordered a closed shop, and suspended a lot of
innocent, needy clerks without pay.  Except that it goaded him to fury,
a pleasant achievement to contemplate, I had to write off my strike as
a flash in the pan.

"I chanced to discover that Simon's heel of Achilles was his fear of
death, so my next scheme was a pious plot to frighten him into behaving
like a human being and a good citizen.  I had known the legend of the
monk all my life, of course, and it was while telling it to Janet one
day that I was struck with the idea of employing it to my own
ends--though I afterwards pretended to Simon that I first heard of it
from Sheila Graham.

"The next time I went to New York I purchased the costume and a pair of
large boots from a theatrical supply store.  I made a mask myself, and
wired the cowl to stay up so that it would give the impression of a
tall man.  The large boots, of course, were to give a wrong idea of the
man's size in case I left tracks.

"Sometimes I kept the outfit in the bottom of a trunk in that closet,
there, but more often it was hidden in a cubbyhole of my little house
down the hill.  There is a very ancient and disreputable typewriter in
the attic, there, too, and I used that to write my messages on.  I
concealed that, by the way, under a loose piece of flooring just as a
precaution, though I did not think then that a police case would ever
grow out of what I was doing!

"I set the first fire in the tannery, and it fizzled out.  Then I wrote
my first note to Simon and waylaid him in the trail.  I slipped off the
disguise in the woods, ran to overtake him and pretended I, too, had
seen a 'ghost'.  The next day I brought him that historical book and
read him the legend, and I had real hopes of humanizing him when I saw
how scared he was!

"I followed up this jolt by firing the tannery again, hoping that its
destruction would necessitate the building of modern and proper
quarters for the men to work in.  I was nearly caught that time--Simon
had the cunning to order his watchman to make double rounds!

"That night brought things to a sudden head.  I had escaped from the
tannery yard, run up into the woods and shed my disguise, and came back
to stand on the hill and watch the fire.

"It was than that Leslie Sherwood spoke to me and made no bones about
expressing his hatred of Simon Varr.  I was curious to know why he was
so bitter, and I had a sneaking notion that it might have something to
do with the way Leslie had suddenly deserted Hambleton and abandoned my
sister to his only admitted rival.  It did!  I asked him to tell me the
story back of it and he willingly complied.

"It appears that Simon clerked for a time in a local bank of which
Leslie's father was the president, and while there had discovered old
Mr. Sherwood guilty of serious defalcations.  Sherwood was too deeply
involved to extricate himself short of stupendous good luck and years
of effort, so Simon cunningly stored away his knowledge against a day
when it might come in useful.  Blackmail.

"The occasion arrived quickly.  Lucy was obviously attached to Leslie,
if not secretly engaged to him.  Simon went to Leslie and told him he
must withdraw with no word of explanation to Lucy under penalty of
having his father exposed as a thief!  Leslie was knocked galley-west,
of course.  He went to his father, found that Simon had told the truth,
had a row with the old gentleman and departed forthwith, stricken to
his soul.

"I don't criticize Leslie for acting that way.  He was obeying the
queer standards of behavior we have set up in the West.  Actually, it
never once occurred to him that to kill a blackmailer of that type
rather than permit him to ruin a woman's life might be a very righteous
deed!  I see you wince, Mr. Creighton!  Please remember I have lived in
the East long enough to imbibe some of its philosophy.  I don't
consider one human life so much more important than the happiness of
many other people!

"Simon's death warrant was nearly signed that night, though he was to
have one more chance.  I left Leslie and came home, and I won't even
try to describe my feelings when I realized how that monster had used
his power to sneak into this house and destroy Lucy's happiness!

"The dagger on the table caught my eye and I remembered its
inscription.  'I Bring Peace'.  Suggestive--very suggestive; I thought
of the peace it would bring to a number of persons if any one had the
courage to--to play Destiny.  I thought of Leslie's expression when he
told me he still loved Lucy devotedly, and of hers when she heard the
news of his return.  There were two more people who would find
happiness if Simon were removed.

"I took the dagger, but of course that was dangerous by itself, so I
slipped into the study, pried up the roll-top cover of Simon's desk and
pouched a notebook that looked as if it must be valuable.  Then I had
still another idea--it seemed a good one then!  The house was still,
except for Bates snoring in the pantry.  I went out on the piazza and
forced the lock of one of the living-room windows with the dagger.
Mmph!  Wish I'd noticed that nick!  I thought I was only leaving
evidence of a burglary!

"The next evening I had a snappy talk with Simon.  I told him that the
death of old Sherwood--who succeeded in rehabilitating his fortunes
before he died--had taken that particular curse off Leslie, and that
Leslie had told me everything.  Simon merely asked me what I was going
to do about it.  I suggested divorce--his last chance!--and he turned
it down.  Just from meanness and malice, he turned it down.  Blame me
for anything you please, but don't sympathize with Simon; he asked for
it!

"I knew a detective was coming on the morrow and I wasn't anxious to
take more chances than I had to.  The hour was striking--!

"Don't look at me like that!  I won't go on with that part of it!
Harrowing and gruesome, and not at all important.

"I'm afraid I didn't take either the police or you very seriously.
More fool I!  As I examined my position it seemed to me that I had left
absolutely no clue, that I was secure from every suspicion.  Mmph.  I
forgot Janet!

"She and I never had secrets from each other until this affair of Simon
Varr.  I had discussed him with her and she understood just what a blot
on society he was, but I had not confessed to playing Destiny!  After
the murder, however, she learned of the monk who had been threatening
Simon.  She knew I detested him, she knew all my points of view, and
her old mind began to work.  Janet's mind is like the mills of the
gods; it grinds slowly but exceeding fine.

"She watched me, questioned me slyly, and presently began a search for
proof of her suspicions.  She found the notebook in the back of one of
my bureau drawers, and then she found the disguise in the house below
the hill.  She knew the truth!

"She has a Scotch conscience, which appears to be a terrible
affliction!  She was horrified at her discovery, almost sickened, but
her loyalty to me rose above every other consideration.  If she had
only come to me--!  But she didn't; she elected to follow certain
impulses of her own conception.

"The most important thing, according to her strict notions, was that
the stolen property should be returned to its rightful owners.  In
wondering how best to do that, she evolved the crazy scheme of
appearing in the monk's costume some time when I was with you.  She
could leave the notebook for you to find and at the same time provide
me with a perfect and impervious alibi in case suspicion was ever
directed my way!

"You know how it worked out.  It's a miracle she didn't kill poor Mr.
Krech!  He looked very cunning in his bandage this evening!

"Of course, Janet gave herself away to me!  When she came home late
that night I had it out with her--and sent her away!  I admired her
loyalty and spirit, but she was entirely too dangerous to have around!
I think Scotch consciences jump at odd angles like cats and detectives!

"That brings the story to date, Mr. Creighton.  You know everything
else, and the next move is yours."  She leaned back and regarded him
quietly, her little mocking smile on her lips.  "What is the usual
procedure?  Do you make the arrest yourself?  Or do you call the
police?  What a triumph you will enjoy over Norvallis!"

He did not reply in words.  The answer lay on the floor beside his
foot, where he had dropped the note to Jason Bolt which he had brought
with him in his hurried dash to her side.  He picked it up and gave it
to her.

When she had read it, she let it drop in her lap.  There was no mockery
in her expression at that moment, though she could not forego a
whimsical little taunt.

"That isn't practicing what you preach, Mr. Creighton!"

"I--I could not find the strength," he muttered hoarsely.

She made no verbal response to that, but her eyes blessed him.  After a
moment she forced one uncertain question from trembling lips.

"Will you tell me wh-why?"

"Yes.  I've a confession to make, too, Miss Ocky."  He nerved himself
to this ordeal.  "I--I searched your room last evening while you were
at the Bolts.  Looking for proof against Janet.  Will you forgive me?"
He waited for her quick nod.  "I found nothing, but I did see your
diary on that desk--and glanced at it."

"Ah!" said Miss Ocky, her cheeks stained a deep crimson.

"I found something there that interested me--made me--happy!  A line
wishing we had met twenty years ago.  Will you tell me what you meant
by that?  I'm afraid to trust my own interpretation."  He paused, but
she remained silent.  "Anyway, I echo the wish!  But twenty years is
not a lifetime.  If you tell me what I want to hear, we can still have
many years--to forget Simon and think only of our own happiness--"

"Oh, stop!  Stop!"  She flung out a hand imploringly and drew back from
him, her face ashen.  "Oh, what a fool I've been--what a wicked little
fool!  I saw this coming--I never should have let it happen--oh, I
should have hit you over the head--k-killed you, too!--anything but let
this go on!  But I d-didn't have the s-trength either!  I wanted my bit
of happiness--I wanted to be cared for like--like that by some
one--by--by _you_ above all!  And now--and now--!"  She broke off on a
sob.

"But, Ocky!  What is it, dear?  We have the future--"

"That's just what we haven't got!" she gasped.  "Oh, don't you
understand?  Haven't you guessed why I have done all these things, why
I was able to play Destiny without fear of the consequences to myself,
why I called you in to-night to hear my confession?"  She drew a
sobbing breath, "I told you I was very ill.  Peter, I--I'm _dying_!"

Softly though it was spoken, the word crashed upon his ears like a
thunderclap.  He sprang to his feet, shaken and bewildered.

"Ocky!  What are you saying?  Are you telling me the truth?  What is
the matter with you?"

"Yes.  It's the truth.  Sit down--please!  Don't get silly ideas into
your head about a doctor.  Give me credit for some sense!"  She managed
to smile, and gallantly pitched her voice to a note of lightness.  "As
for what's the matter--well, we needn't wander off into pathology, need
we?  I think we'll dispense with an ante-post-mortem, if there is such
an animal!  I contrived to tie some of my little innards into bowknots
once when I was h-hunting hippopotamusses in the Himalayas, I guess.

"Months afterwards, I came down with a pain--a pain such as I could not
have believed a human being could experience and survive, I went to a
doctor in Paris, and he told me there was no hope.  A few months later
I had a second attack.  When I was able to travel, I went to a new man
in Rome.  He said the next attack would be the--last.

"Then I came home.  I wanted to see Lucy again, and if this stupid
business of dying had to be gone through I wanted to do it here in this
old house.  I wanted a few weeks or months of peace and quiet and
h-happiness."  Her voice broke, then steadied again.  "Golly--what a
fizzle!"  She shivered.  "This afternoon I got my--notice!  How I
wished you were here!  I came up to my room, burned that diary--you
snooped just in time, Peter!--and wrote two letters.  I didn't dare
leave the house to mail them.  I might have dropped in the--_ah_!"

Swift as a flash of lightning it had come.  Beyond that one moan she
fought silently, lips tight, one hand clutching at her side, through
seconds that seemed eternities to the man watching helplessly.  At last
the spasm passed and speech returned to her.

"That's--just a preliminary twinge!" she whispered between her teeth.
"Peter--there's something beyond the stars!  You believe that, don't
you?"

"My dear--my dear!"

"That's all right, then."  She looked at him long.  "I wonder if you'll
ever forgive me for hurting you like this.  Try, won't you, Peter?"
Her eyes were luminous with unshed tears.  "Will you get me a glass
of--water.  On the table by my bed."  She waited as he eagerly fetched
it, grateful that he could do even this much.  "Thanks.  Now, a
handkerchief--over there on the bureau."  Again she waited, this time
until he was across the room by her dressing-table.  Then she raised
the glass and spoke softly.  "I'm glad I took this from _your_
hands--Peter!"

She had not thought him capable of such quickness.  Not a drop had
passed her lips before he was upon her with the leap of a frightened
deer.  A vicious sweep of his hand sent the glass from her fingers out
the window and through the moonlit night, to fall harmless on the lawn.

"Ocky--what were you doing?" he demanded almost furiously.

"Peter--what have you _done_?" she retorted.  "That was all I had--all
I had!  Oh, that was a cruel of you!  Why do you want me to suffer?
Could you not let me die in peace?"

"You aren't going to die!" he cried.  "Listen--how long will it be
before another of those attacks comes on?"

"I--don't know.  Several hours, p-perhaps."  She stared at him
open-eyed.  "Wh-what are you going to do?"

"Local doctor, for temporary relief.  To-morrow, the best
diagnosticians--and surgeons if necessary--in New York."  He was alert,
now, coolly capable, free of the stupor of grief and despair.  His face
was grimly defiant as he added, "We'll see how much those gentlemen in
Rome and Paris really know!"

"Oh--it's useless, Peter.  And--and I _can't_ live!  They'll h-hang me!
Peter, there's something I haven't told you.  I hadn't stopped to think
until lately that an unsolved crime leaves so much ugly suspicion in
its wake!  Innocent people--suspected all their lives!  I couldn't die
with that on my soul so--so this afternoon I wrote a full confession
and mailed it to Norvallis--"

"Oh--_that_!" he said contemptuously.  He reached into his pocket,
plucked forth two letters and dropped them in her lap.  "There!"

"Peter!"  She stared at them.  "Where on earth--?  I couldn't go to
town s-so I gave them to young Merrill to post.  And he--he--"

"Is one of my men, introduced by Judge Taylor at my request!  I'm glad
you picked him, Ocky!  He placed them on my desk, as in duty bound."
He hesitated, eyeing her dubiously.  "I'm going for that
doctor--Joliffe, the chap your sister has had.  I liked his looks.
First, though, I suppose I'll have to rouse Bates to mount guard over
you!"

"No-no--not that!  Whatever happens, let that be our secret!"

"You must promise me not to do anything foolish while I'm gone."  He
took one of her hands and clasped it tightly in both of his.  "Ocky,
keep your nerve, dear!  I'm going to get you out of this--get you out
_somehow_!  Leave it to me, dear, and stop worrying.  Now, promise me!"

"There's another thing, Peter; I ought to tell you while we have this
opportunity to talk.  Mr. Krech knows I--I did it!"

"Krech!  _Krech_!  How in thunder--"

"I don't know, but he does.  It would have been funny last n-night if
it hadn't been so tragic!  He got me alone for a few minutes and began
to drop hints; said you were practically certain of the criminal and
that if he were the murderer he would do almost anything desperate to
prevent himself from being caught, only he admitted he couldn't think
of anything!"

"Will wonders never cease!  However, we needn't bother our heads about
Krech--I'd trust him with my life.  Can't waste any more time on him
now.  Promise me, Ocky!"

"It's--no--use--"

"_Promise me!_"

"I--I promise, Peter!"

He bent and kissed her almost fiercely--and was gone.




_XXIV: Beyond the Stars_

The next two hours for Peter Creighton were more like a nightmare than
a nightmare itself.  First he aroused Bates and startled the old man
with the news of Miss Ocky's illness, and ordered him to call Lucy Varr
and suggest that she go immediately to her sister.  He could not bear
the thought of Ocky sitting there alone with hideous memories of the
past and fearful doubts of the future.  Then he ran to the garage,
jumped in the car and drove madly through the night to the home of
Doctor Joliffe.  The physician was an elderly and experienced man
long-practiced in the art of turning out promptly for these midnight
emergencies, and he was pulling on his trousers almost before the
door-bell had ceased to ring, but to the anguished gaze of the
detective he resembled nothing more than a languid snail with white
whiskers.  It seemed as if they would never get back to the house.

They finally did, and Joliffe took competent charge of the situation.
Creighton, banished peremptorily, went into his room, extinguished the
lamp, and sat down on the edge of his bed in the dark to await a
verdict from the doctor.  At each side of him his fingers gripped the
corner of the mattress tensely.

He had not waited thus above fifteen minutes when he heard a familiar,
heavy tread in the hall outside.  His door was unceremoniously flung
open and the space filled by a huge form.

"Creighton--you in here?"

"Hello, Krech.  What are you doing here at this hour?"

"Haven't been sleeping well lately.  Got up to smoke a cigar, looked
out my bedroom window and saw this house lighted up.  What's doing?"

"Miss Copley is seriously ill--perhaps--dying."

"The deuce!" ejaculated Krech, startled.  He fumbled in his pocket,
produced a match and struck it.  "Mind if I light the lamp?"  But the
flickering flame of the match showed him a face so white and drawn that
he caught his breath in sudden realization of the truth.  He abandoned
his idea of lighting the lamp and fumbled his way to a chair near the
foot of the bed.  "So--you _know_!" he said quietly.

"Yes," admitted the detective wearily.  "But how did _you_?"

"I tumbled to it the night you went to New York," answered Krech, his
voice anything but happy.  "I didn't go home after I left you at the
station.  Came back here.  You hinted something might happen if you
went away and gave it a chance, and I didn't see why it shouldn't
happen right away.  I hoped the monk would turn up again; had a notion
that my head would feel better if I could once get my hands on that
wire-stretching humorist.

"I kept carefully out of sight in the woods and settled down at a point
where I could watch both the kitchen garden and the spot where we'd
last seen the monk.  I waited three hours.  If patience and
perseverance make a good detective I was the best in the world that
night.

"The reason I waited so long was that I was interested in a lighted
window--Miss Ocky's.  She was keeping pretty late hours, talking to
Janet Mackay, I recognized her tall, thin shadow as it occasionally
fell on the blinds, and you know I had already suggested that there was
something dubious about Janet because of her acquaintance with Charlie
Maxon.

"That light didn't go out until three in the morning.  A few minutes
later I saw some one slip out the back door of the house and hurry
across the garden to the trail.  Janet!  It was brilliant moonlight,
you'll remember, and I recognized her at once.

"I followed her, keeping a cautious distance behind.  Lost her once
when she vanished from the trail into the woods, but she came back a
minute or two later with a bundle under her arm that she had retrieved
from some hiding-place.  After that she took a bypath leading downhill
in the direction of that poisonous little brook which runs through
those meadows after passing the tannery.

"I watched her as she knelt down on the bank of the stream, weighted
her bundle with a couple of rocks and hove it as far out as she could
into the water.  She stood watching the bubbles break above the spot
where it disappeared, then turned and marched away erect as a grenadier
and calm as a cucumber.

"I let her go, of course.  My interest was centered in that stuff she
had sunk, and I scurried around until I found a long pole.  Then I
started dredging operations that would have been a credit to De Lesseps
himself--and brought ashore that bundle.

"You've guessed what it was.  The monk's disguise, complete even to the
shoes!

"You were gone, or I'd have brought the reeking mess to you.  I
couldn't smuggle it into Bolt's house without embarrassing
explanations--after a dip in that brook, those clothes advertised their
presence to a distance of a hundred yards.  Finally, I threw them back
into the water, making careful note of the exact location, and went off
to where I had left Jason's car.

"I was pretty well pleased with myself as I drove home.  It seemed to
me that I had solved the mystery of who killed Simon Varr, and it
didn't injure my self-esteem any to think I had nailed the crime on the
very person I had first suspected.  Great work!  I finally appeared
before Jean all covered with mud and medals.

"It was when we were talking it over that the same awful idea came to
us both.  The more we thought it out, the less plausible seemed the
theory of Janet's guilt.  A sharper wit than hers had planned the
murder.  I told Jean about the long interview with Miss Ocky before
Janet went out to destroy the evidence, and Jean groaned.  It grew
plain as a pike-staff that Janet was at worst an accomplice, and more
probably only an accessory after the crime.

"Her abrupt departure the next day appeared to clinch this hypothesis.
She--she would not betray her mistress and friend, but the shock of the
discovery she must have made had proved too much for her.  We figured
she had either left voluntarily to--to pacify her own conscience, or at
Miss Ocky's insistence because she was too dangerous to have around.
And--and that's all, Creighton!"

It wasn't all, as no one knew better than the detective himself.  There
was something yet that had to be brought into the light and discussed.
Moved to the very depths of his being, he reached out in the dark and
dropped a hand gently on the big man's knee.

"Why didn't you tell me this at once, Krech?"

"I knew you'd ask that!  Well, it was because Jean had some notion--and
I did, for that matter--that if you learned the truth you'd--you'd get
an awful jolt.  We have both come to like Miss Ocky immensely, and I
needn't tell you how we feel toward you!  When it came to a choice of
hurting you or condoning a crime we--we didn't hesitate long.  Jean
said if I ever let out a peep about what I'd seen that night, she'd
divorce me--and, honestly, Creighton, I think she _meant_ it!"

Some emotions do not lend themselves readily to verbal expression.
Peter Creighton was silent, but there was eloquence in the tightening
of his hand on Krech's knee.  The big man spoke again, mournfully.

"Do you remember that afternoon at the tannery when I said I'd like
just for once to find out something before you did?  Well, I got my
wish the other night--and I'd have given an arm to alter the meaning of
what I'd found!"

"Thank you, Krech.  You and Jean are two of the best friends a man ever
had."  The detective paused a moment, collecting his thoughts.  "I
expect you'd like to know how I stumbled on to the truth--?  All right."

Though he was scarcely conscious of it, the telling of that story
brought him some measure of relief.  It eased the ordeal of waiting for
news from the next room.  He was forced to concentrate his thoughts on
what he was saying to the exclusion of anxieties and fears, and shortly
his chief concern was the clear presentation of his narrative.

He deemed it advisable that Krech, since he knew so much, should know
all.  The single incident he left untold was his dashing of the lethal
glass from Ocky's lips--that, as she had stipulated, should remain
their own secret.

"You always manage to fool me, Creighton," said his friend as the
detective ended.  "I never guessed Merrill was your man, and I never
dreamed that you knew about Janet's flight in time to wish Kitty Doyle
on her.  Jean and I would have bet any amount of money that you weren't
within a hundred miles of the truth."

"Your bet would have been safe twenty-four hours ago."

"Now the question is--"

Creighton suddenly sprang into activity.  A door had opened and shut
softly close at hand, a light footfall sounded from the hall, and the
detective leaped to fling back his door as a set of bony knuckles was
extended to rap on it.

Krech did not leave his chair, but his ears were strained to their
limit.  He caught various illuminating phrases from a brisk, capable
little person with flowing white whiskers.

"Resting now ...  Opiates ...  Careful examination ...  Curious case
...  Similar one ...  Medical text books ...  To-morrow ...
MacNaughton ...  Billy MacNaughton ...  Best Man ...  Know Him? ...
Fine fellow ...  Exquisite touch with the knife ...  I will telegraph
...  No complications ...  No reason for excessive alarm ...  Very
simple ...  Expert surgeon ...  Splendid constitution ...  Strong as a
Shetland pony ...  Better go to bed yourself ...  Good-night ...
Tut-tut, don't mention it ...  _Good_-night!"

Creighton shut the door quietly, turned and lighted the lamp.  Krech
saw that much of the trouble had gone from his face--much, but not all.

"You heard what he said, Krech?"

"She's going to pull through?"

"He thinks so."

"That's good news.  At least--I suppose it is."

"Huh?  What in thunder do you _mean_?"

Krech deliberately lighted a fresh cigar before he answered, eyeing his
friend steadily as he spoke.

"If she recovers, what will you do?" he asked calmly.  "Hand her over
to the police--as you should?"

Creighton stared at him.  Then he suddenly swore--crisply, concisely,
and without passion.

"That's all right, then!" said the big man with satisfaction.  "I'll
tell Jean just what you have said.  In the event of your learning the
truth, we felt some concern as to whether or not you'd be--be--"

"_What?_"

"Well--human!"

"Um."  The detective gave a little laugh that was totally devoid of
mirth.  "Yes, I'm going to be--human!  I fought that battle all day
yesterday!  I find that Ocky means more to me than--than honor, to put
it bluntly and melodramatically."

"Cheers!" cried the unscrupulous Mr. Krech.  "Loud cheers!"

"I came to another decision," continued Creighton seriously, "one that
is dictated by common decency if nothing else.  This is my last case.
My shingle is coming down forthwith.  I haven't met the acid test.
I've quit under fire.  I'm a deserter from the ranks.  I'm--_through_!"
He shook his head as Krech started to protest.  "No.  Whatever happens,
that is definitely settled."

"Whatever happens," repeated the big man musingly, the phrase recalling
him to certain practical considerations.  "Let's see.  Jean and I know
the truth; we're mum.  Janet knows it; she's safe.  How about Kitty
Doyle?  That young lady is sharper than a serpent's tooth, as I
remember her!  Suppose she tumbles to It?  Will she join the conspiracy
of silence?"

"I believe Kitty is a friend of mine," said Creighton, and added
simply, "I'm singularly fortunate in my friends, Krech."

The next moment he jumped nervously as some one rapped gently on his
door.  He glanced at the big man appealingly, and sat down again on the
edge of his bed.

"All right," grinned Krech.  "Leave it to me!"

"A telegram for Mr. Creighton, sir," said Bates, as the door was opened
to him.  "The boy just brought it this minute."

"That must be something from Kitty now," muttered Creighton when the
butler had gone.  "Open it and read it, will you?  My nerve has gone to
pieces!"  He shifted uneasily.  "Hurry up!"

"Yes, it's from Kitty," confirmed Krech, opening the envelope and
glancing at the signature on the message.  "A long one, too.  Here
goes!"  He held the paper under the lamp and began to read, casually at
first, then rapidly as the import of the dispatch quickened his pulse.


"_Arrived hotel.  Secured room adjoining Janet.  Bed early.  Was
restless, talkative.  Unable distinguish words.  Picked lock
communicating door.  Listened by bed.  Incoherent.  Suddenly awoke.
Surprised me.  I used own judgment as instructed.  Made best of bad
situation.  Accused her of murder.  Threatened her with police.
Terrible scene.  Frantic denials followed by complete collapse.  Full
confession.  Made lengthy synopsis.  Obtained signature.  Abruptly she
seemed to go mad.  Raved wildly.  On point summoning assistance when
violently attacked.  Threw me in corner.  Threw bureau on top of me.
Before interference possible ran to open window.  Jumped out.  Six
stories.  Death instantaneous.  Wire instructions.  K. Doyle._"


"Gee Joseph!" gasped Krech, and handed the telegram to the detective,
who had sprung to his elbow long since and peered over his shoulder.
The big man walked back to his chair and dropped into it limply.  "I'm
all unstarched!" he said plaintively.  "Save my sanity and tell me what
it's all about!  How many people killed Simon Varr?"

"One!" answered Creighton grimly, but his eyes were shining.  "Janet
Mackay!  And Ocky--Ocky thought she was dying--!  She tried to shield
Janet by assuming the guilt!  Merciful Heaven, what a thing to do!  No
wonder she insisted on my recalling Kitty Doyle at once!  Threatened to
turn her sacrifice into a wasted gesture, Kitty did--and, by golly,
Kitty _has_!  But it wasn't wasted as far as we're concerned--we can
always appreciate it!  It was fine, Krech--fine!"

"But foolish," grunted Krech.  "Think of the unhappiness she would have
caused every one who is fond of her if she'd been allowed to roll up
her reputation into a ball and kick it away!"

"Don't you suppose that thought hurt her?" cried Creighton.  "If laying
down your life for a friend exemplifies the greater love, what of a
woman who lays down her reputation?  Isn't that even finer?"

"Y-yes.  Perhaps you're right.  But--she condoned a crime."

"Uh-huh.  And I think you and I are in a nice position to criticize
her, aren't we?  Perhaps Jean might help us there!"

Creighton, carried out of himself by a _denouement_ almost beyond
belief, was close to laughter.  Mr. Krech was not.  He left his chair
and began to saunter uncertainly around the room, pausing finally at
the desk and staring down at its blotter, his back turned to his
companion.  A more neutral observer than the other, he thought he could
see a question arising that had not yet occurred to the
less-unprejudiced detective.  But Creighton would stumble upon it
eventually--far better to thrash it out now.

"Why did Janet kill Simon Varr?" he opened the subject.

"Why--why--" Creighton stammered, at a loss for a moment, but recovered
himself swiftly as an answer came.  "Don't you understand that?  Her
motive was the one Ocky professed!  She was playing Destiny!  She knew
all about Varr--they discussed him at length--and she had always had a
distaste for the man since the old days in this house.  When Ocky told
her the story of the monk, it was she who conceived the idea of the
masquerade.  It was she who knew Maxon's propensity for mischief-making
and selected him as a deputy.  It was she who threatened Simon, fired
the tannery--but why go on?  The two women are simply interchangeable,
and Ocky had only to repeat in her own person the confession she forced
from Janet--"

"Why was she so long suspecting Janet?"

"Huh?  Well--if a murder is committed are you apt to suspect a person
you've known as well as you know yourself for twenty-five years?  I've
been wondering what first directed Ocky's suspicion to her companion,
and I think I have the answer.  The other day when Sherwood was
describing the actions of the monk at the time of the murder, Ocky
suddenly revealed a tremendous lot of emotion; depend upon it,
something he said then must have given her a clue to the truth.  And
the incident of the fingerprints on the notebook--change one woman for
the other and that is explained!  It was not the cautious Janet that
found the book in Ocky's bureau--it was the heedless Ocky who found it
somewhere among Janet's things and never stopped to think that she was
leaving prints when she picked it up!"

"But--this playing Destiny, as you call it.  Ocky could do that without
fear of the consequences, since she believed her days to be numbered,
but could Janet?"

"Why not?" Creighton's voice was still confident but he had begun to
look askance at his friend as he caught a hint of something more
serious behind this inquisition.  "Haven't we an explanation for that
in Kitty's telegram?  She says 'Janet seemed to go mad'.  Isn't that
the whole story after all?  Janet was unbalanced; she pondered the
cussedness of Varr; she fell victim to an obsession.  She began to
picture herself as a scourge of the unrighteous--she probably read up
on Jael and Charlotte Corday and women like that.  Her brain cracked.
I'm not romancing, either.  History is full of cold-blooded murders
committed from motives of altruism.  Common enough, both the cause and
effect.  Anyway, we have Janet's full confession coming to us--"  He
broke off short at an involuntary movement on the part of his
friend--and abruptly a fear crept into his eyes.  "_Krech_--what are
you thinking of?"

"The same thing you are, Creighton."

"Put it into words!" commanded the detective fiercely.

"You've done it yourself.  You have pointed out that the two women are
interchangeable.  So they are--even to the point where each makes what
is tantamount to a dying statement!  Ocky's confession was convincing
when you heard it, wasn't it?  Janet's will be equally so when it
arrives.  Creighton--which are we to believe?"

"That's it!" whispered Creighton.  "That's it!"

The big man came back slowly from the desk.  They stared at each other
blankly.  The light had gone from the detective's eyes, the new born
life from his limbs.  He felt weak and beaten as he contemplated this
fresh perplexity.  He moistened his lips before he could speak.

"It--it seems to resolve itself into a problem in psychology," he said
wearily.  "No definite, tangible proof either way.  Janet was perhaps
the more likely of the two to commit murder--I know something of that
dour Scotch temperament and its slow-burning fire that suddenly
explodes into flame.  She traveled with Ocky and imbibed her own share
of Oriental fatalism.  On the other hand, Ocky was far the cleverer of
the two, there's no denying that.  Hers would be the brain more apt to
conceive the masquerade of the monk, the promotion of the strike, the
concoction of that note with its queer phrases--'stiff-necked son of
Belial', 'thunderbolts of wrath'--all that stuff.  Yet again, those are
just the expressions Janet might use if she were afflicted with a
semi-religious mania!  But Ocky was better equipped mentally to carry
the scheme through, that took a cool head, and Janet, from Kitty's
account, was rather of the emotional, high-strung, hysterical type.
Oh--!"  Creighton raised his two hands and dropped them despairingly.
"Krech--I'm just going around in circles!"

"There's no other place _to_ go," declared the big man morosely.  "But
I disagree with your last description of Janet.  She may have been
hysterical in Montreal but she was cool enough the last time I saw her.
The way she marched down to that brook with evidence of a first degree
murder under her arm!  And the way she stood watching the bubbles,
nodding her head and rubbing her hands together as if to say, 'Well,
_that's_ a good job done!'--  _Creighton_!  What is it?"

The detective did not reply.  Perhaps he could not trust his voice,
perhaps he wished to enjoy in silence the wave of happiness and
exquisite relief that flooded his breast.  He rose abruptly, and
further to conceal his emotion he walked to the French window and flung
it open.

The night was gone.  The eastern sky was a blaze of crimson glory.
Some of its radiance was reflected from his face as he draw a deep
breath of the fresh morning air.

"Hullo," he said huskily.  "It--it's dawn!"




THE END