THE SAMUEL BUTLER COLLECTION
AT SAINT JOHN'S COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE


A Catalogue and a Commentary

BY
HENRY FESTING JONES
AND
A. T. BARTHOLOMEW

CAMBRIDGE
W. HEFFER & SONS LTD.
1921

   It seems to me, the more I think of it, that the true life of anyone
   is not the one they live in themselves, and of which they are
   themselves conscious, but the life they live in the hearts of others.
   Our bodies and brains are but the tools with which we work to make our
   true life, which is not in the tool-box and tools we ignorantly
   mistake for ourselves, but in the work we do with them; and this work,
   if it be truly done, lives more in others than in ourselves.

S. BUTLER, 1895.

[THIS EDITION IS LIMITED TO 750 COPIES]




Preface


The Butler Collection was not all given to St. John's at once.  I sent up
some pictures and some books in 1917; and at intervals I have sent more,
always keeping a list of what has gone.  Now that I have no more to send
seems the proper time for a Catalogue to be issued, and it is made from
the lists which I kept, and which were in part printed in _The Eagle_,
put in order by A. T. Bartholomew and annotated by myself.  I am
responsible for the notes and am the person intended when "I" and "me"
occur.  Bartholomew is responsible for the classification, for verifying,
for checking, and for the bibliographical part.

In time the collection will no doubt increase as new editions or
translations of Butler's books appear and as further books are published
referring to him.  All such I intend to include in the collection; and I
hope that other Butlerians will see fit to make additions to it.

I think that the notes give all necessary explanations; but I may perhaps
say here that many of the pictures were made before Butler contemplated
writing such a book as _Alps and Sanctuaries_.  When he was preparing
that book he went to the places therein described and made on the spot
many black and white drawings for reproduction; but he found that this
method would take too long, so he made others of the black and white
drawings from oil and water-colour sketches which he had done previously,
and this is why some of the pictures are dated many years before the book
was published.

Among the books, under _Alps and Sanctuaries_ (p. 18), is Streatfeild's
copy of that work; and under _The Way of All Flesh_ (p. 21) is his copy
of that book.  Both these copies are said to have been "purchased."  I
bought them from the dealer to whom Streatfeild sold them when his health
broke down and he moved from his rooms.  I have no doubt that he would
have given them to me if I had asked for them, but he was not in a
condition to be troubled about business.

St. John's College has contributed 30 pounds towards the expenses of
printing and publishing this catalogue.  I offer them my most cordial
thanks for their generosity.  I am also deeply indebted to them for
finding space in which to house the collection.  I shrank from the
responsibility of keeping it myself.  I remembered also that an
individual dies; even a family may become extinct; but St. John's
College, we hope, will enjoy as near an approach to immortality as can be
attained on this transient globe.  I am sure that Butler would be pleased
if he could know that during that period this collection will be
preserved and will be accessible to all who wish to visit it.

H. F. J.

120, MAIDA VALE, W. 9,
_December_, 1920.




Contents


I.  PICTURES, SKETCHES AND DRAWINGS BY OR RELATING TO SAMUEL BUTLER . . .
1

II.  BOOKS AND MUSIC WRITTEN BY BUTLER . . . 15

III.  BOOKS, ETC., ABOUT BUTLER . . . 24

IV.  BOOKS, ETC., RELATING TO BUTLER AND HIS SUBJECTS . . . 28

V.  BOOKS, FORMERLY THE PROPERTY OF SAMUEL BUTLER . . . 32

VI.  ATLASES AND MAPS, FORMERLY THE PROPERTY OF SAMUEL BUTLER . . . 39

VII.  MUSIC, FORMERLY THE PROPERTY OF SAMUEL BUTLER . . . 41

VIII.  MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS, FORMERLY THE PROPERTY OF OR RELATING TO
SAMUEL BUTLER . . . 44

IX.  PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS, FORMERLY THE PROPERTY OF OR RELATING TO
SAMUEL BUTLER . . . 47

X.  PORTRAITS, FORMERLY THE PROPERTY OF OR RELATING TO SAMUEL BUTLER . . .
49

XI.  EFFECTS, FORMERLY THE PERSONAL PROPERTY OF SAMUEL BUTLER . . . 51




Illustrations


SAMUEL BUTLER.  ABOUT 1866 . . . _Frontispiece_

From a photograph taken by his sister, Mrs. Bridges, in the garden at
Langar soon after his return from New Zealand.

FACSIMILE OF POST-CARD FROM S. BUTLER TO H. F. JONES, FLORENCE, SEPT. 3,
1892 . . . _face p._ 23

Butler was staying in Florence on his way home from his first visit to
Sicily.  The old Greek painting referred to is reproduced as the
frontispiece to _The Authoress of the Odyssey_ (1897).  Mlle. V. is Mlle.
Vaillant, as to whom see _the Memoir_.  The "nose" belonged to the editor
of a Swiss paper whom I had met at Fusio.

SAMUEL BUTLER WHEN AN UNDERGRADUATE AT CAMBRIDGE.  ABOUT 1858 . . . _face
p._ 52

This is taken from a photographic group of Butler and three friends.  The
friends are omitted, as I have failed to identify them.




I.  PICTURES, SKETCHES AND DRAWINGS
BY OR RELATING TO SAMUEL BUTLER


By his will Butler bequeathed his pictures, sketches, and studies to his
executors to be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as they might think
best, the proceeds (if any) to fall into residue.  They were not sold:
some were given to Shrewsbury School; some to the British Museum; one, an
unfinished sketch of the back of the house in which Keats died on the
Piazza di Spagna, Rome, to the Keats and Shelley Memorial there; many
were distributed among his friends, Alfred Cathie taking fifteen and I
taking all that were left over.  Alfred lives in Canal Road, Mile End,
and, this being on the route of the German air-raids, he was anxious to
put his pictures in a place of safety.  Accordingly it was arranged
between us in 1917 that I should buy them from him.  When he heard that I
was giving them to St. John's, he desired that I should not buy all,
because he wished to give two of them himself to the College.
Accordingly, I bought only thirteen, and the remaining two, viz. no. 28,
Leatherhead Church, and no. 59, Chiavenna, 1887, were given to St. John's
College by Alfred.

There are but few sketches or pictures by Butler between 1888 and 1896.
This is because his sketching was interrupted by his having to take up
photography for the preparation of _Ex Voto_.  Almost before this book
was published (1888) he had plunged into _The Life and Letters of Dr.
Butler_, and in 1892 he added to his absorbing occupations the problem of
the _Odyssey_.  Thus he had little leisure or energy for the labour of
painting; and this labour was always great.  He could not leave his
outline until he had got it right, and there was a perpetual chase after
the changing shadows.  And when he had got the outline it was so
constantly disappearing under the colour that he took to making "a
careful outline on a separate sheet of paper"; this was to be kept, after
he had traced the drawing on to the paper which was to receive the
colour, and to be referred to continually while he proceeded.  When he
met with the camera lucida, which he bought in Paris, and which is among
the objects given to St. John's, he thought his difficulties were solved
and wrote to Miss Savage, 9 October, 1882: "I have got a new toy, a
camera lucida, which does all the drawing for me, and am so pleased with
it that I am wanting to use it continually."  To which in 1901 he added
this note: "What a lot of time I wasted over that camera lucida, to be
sure!"  It did all the drawing for him, but it distorted the perspective
so that the outlines of the many sketches which he produced with its help
were a disappointment.

The camera lucida having failed, his hopes were next fixed upon
photography, which, by rapidly and correctly recording anything he felt a
desire to sketch, was to give him something from which he could
afterwards construct a picture.  So he took an immense number of snap-
shots, of which many are at St. John's, but he never did anything with
them.  Nos. 62 and 63, which were done by Sadler from Butler's
photographs, show how he would have proceeded if he had not had too many
other things to do.

It was not until 1896, when _The Life of Dr. Butler_ appeared, that he
was able to return seriously to sketching, and by that time he was over
sixty and too old to be burdened with the paraphernalia necessary for
oils; he therefore confined himself to water-colours.

Some of the pictures in this list were included in the list in _The
Eagle_, vol. xxxix., no. 175, March 1918, and the remainder in the
succeeding number, June 1918.  In making the present catalogue I have
corrected such errors and misprints as I noticed in _The Eagle_, and I
have re-arranged and renumbered the items so as to make them run in
chronological order.  I have also amplified some of the notes.  I have
placed the sketches and drawings in order of date because to examine them
in that order helps the spectator to realise the progress made by Butler
in his artistic studies.



SAMUEL BUTLER


1.  Black and white outline sketch: Civita Vecchia, 1854.

Butler went abroad with his family, his second visit to Italy, for the
winter of 1853-4.  They travelled through Switzerland to Rome and Naples,
starting in August 1853, and Butler thus missed the half-year at school.
I am sorry that I have not found any more finished drawing made by him on
this occasion.



DOUGLAS YEOMAN BLAKISTON


2.  Pencil drawing: Samuel Butler, 1854.

Reproduced in the _Memoir_, ch. iii.  On the back of this drawing is the
beginning of a water-colour sketch.  It was in a book with others
mentioned in the _Memoir_ as having been given to Shrewsbury School (I.
44).  I have no doubt that the sketch on the back is by Butler, and
represents part of the Rectory house at Langar.

The Rev. D. Y. Blakiston was born in 1832.  He studied art at the Royal
Academy Schools especially under W. Dobson, R.A.  From about 1850 to 1865
he painted in London and at St. Leonard's, and exhibited at the Royal
Academy.  About 1865 he entered at Downing College, took Orders in 1869,
and was presented to the living of East Grinstead in 1871, which he held
till his retirement soon after 1908.  He died in 1914.  Throughout his
life he made a practise of sketching his friends.  I suppose he must have
met and sketched Butler on some occasion when Butler was in London
staying with his cousins the Worsleys.  The artist's son, the Rev. H. E.
D. Blakiston, when President of Trinity College, Oxford, gave me a
cutting from _The East Grinstead Observer_ containing a full obituary of
him.  It is among the papers at St. John's College, and is referred to in
the Postscript to the Preface to my _Memoir_ of Butler.



HENRY FESTING JONES


3.  My first attempt at a drawing in pencil and ink of Butler's
Homestead, Mesopotamia, New Zealand.

I did it in 1910 or thereabouts from a faded photograph taken about 1863
and lent to Butler by J. D. Enys.  _Also_ Emery Walker's reproduction of
my first attempt which was not used in the _Memoir_.

4.  My second attempt, which was reproduced in the _Memoir_.



SAMUEL BUTLER


5.  Water-colour: A view in Cambridge.

Probably done when Butler was an undergraduate, and given to St. John's
some years ago.  I found it in the book wherein I found Blakiston's
drawing (no. 2).

6.  Oil Painting: Family Prayers.

On the ceiling he wrote "I did this in 1864, and if I had gone on doing
things out of my own head instead of making studies I should have been
all right."  (_Memoir_, I. 115.)  Reproduced in the _Memoir_, ch. xxiv.,
and referred to, ch. viii.

7.  Oil Painting: His own head.

"He painted at home as well as at Heatherley's, and by way of a cheap
model hung up a looking-glass near the window of his painting room and
made many studies of his own head.  He gave some of them away and
destroyed and painted over others, but after his death we found a number
in his rooms--some of the earlier ones very curious" (_Memoir_, ch.
viii.).  This is one of the earlier ones.  It is inscribed, "S.B., Feb.
18, 1865."  We found also a still more curious one which was given to
Gogin, who was interested in it as being the work of an untaught student.
See also no. 36.



JOHN LEECH


8.  Five pencil drawings on one card.

John Leech died in 1864, the year in which Butler returned from New
Zealand.  There was a sale of his drawings by his sisters, and I remember
going to see them as a boy, but I do not remember when; it was, no doubt,
soon after the artist's death.  The house was in Radnor Place, Bayswater.
His sisters afterwards kept a small girls' school, and my sister Lilian
went there.  I have placed these Leech drawings here in order of date on
the assumption that Butler bought them at the sale.  He had another
drawing by Leech, which used to hang in his chambers, and was given to
his cousin, Reginald Worsley.



SAMUEL BUTLER


9.  Oil Painting: Interior of Butler's sitting-room, 15, Clifford's Inn.

There is something written in pencil on the panelling in the left-hand
bottom corner.  I believe the words to be "Corner of my room, Augt. 1865,
S.B."  Reproduced in the _Memoir_, ch. xv.

Here are shown Butler's books, including Bradshaw's Guide and Whitaker's
Almanack, of which he speaks somewhere as being indispensable.  I admit
that I cannot identify them, but he used to keep them among the books in
these shelves.  I do not think he ever possessed that equally
indispensable book the Post Office Directory.  But he had more books than
those shown in this painting.  Between his sitting-room and his painting-
room was a short passage in which was a cupboard, and this contained the
rest.  I do not remember how many there were, but not enough to
invalidate the statement he made to Robert Bridges (_Memoir_ II. 320), "I
have, I verily believe, the smallest library of any man in London who is
by way of being literary."

10.  Water-colour: Dieppe, The Castle, 1866.

Butler was at Dieppe with Pauli in 1866.  (_Memoir_, ch. viii.)

11.  Small water-colour drawing: Dieppe, 1866.

This is in the portfolio of miscellaneous drawings, etc., by Butler,
Gogin, and Sadler, no. 81.

12.  Oil Painting: Two heads done as a study at Heatherley's.

I showed this to Gaetano Meo, and he remembered that the man was
Calorossi, a model, whose brother went to Paris and became known as the
proprietor of a studio there.  The woman, he said, was Maria, another
model.  The background is Dieppe.  I suppose that Butler did this study
in the autumn of 1866, using nos. 10 and 11, the water-colours of Dieppe,
or some other sketch made on the spot, for the background.  The idea was
to make portraits of two heads with a landscape background in the manner
of Giovanni Bellini.

13.  Drawing of a cast of the Antinous as Hermes.

Inscribed "Samuel Butler for probationership, December 28th 1868."  Done,
I suppose, at South Kensington.

14.  Drawing of a hand and foot.

Probably also done at South Kensington.

15.  Black and white drawing of a fir tree.

This, I suspect, was made while Butler was under the influence of
Ruskin's _Elements of Drawing_--say about 1870.  He threw off that
influence later.

16.  Four water-colour notes in one frame.

One is inscribed "S.B." and another "Kingston, near Lewes."  I suppose
that they are all on the South Downs, and they are all early--say 1870.



JAMES FERGUSON


17.  Crayon drawing: Butler playing Handel, 1870 (?).

Reproduced in the _Memoir_ (I. ix.).  Ferguson was a fellow art-student
with Butler.



SAMUEL BUTLER


18.  Oil Painting: The Valle di Sambucco, above Fusio.

The sambucco or sambuco is the elder tree.  Butler, writing of this
valley (_Alps and Sanctuaries_, ch. xxvi.; new ed. ch. xxv.), says:
"Here, even in summer, the evening air will be crisp, and the dew will
form as soon as the sun goes off; but the mountains at one end of it will
keep the last rays of the sun.  It is then the valley is at its best,
especially if the goats and cattle are coming together to be milked."

19.  Water-colour: The Rocca Borromeo, Angera, Lago Maggiore.  Entrance
to the Castle.  1871.

The birthplace of S. Carlo Borromeo.  It was over this gateway as well as
over the gateway of Fenis (no. 53), that he told me there ought to be a
fresco of Fortune with her Wheel (_Memoir_, ch. xx.)  The Rocca Borromeo,
Angera, and Arona are mentioned in _Alps and Sanctuaries_, ch. xxiv. (new
edn., ch. xxiii.), and several times in the _Memoir_, _e.g._ ch. ix.,
xvi.

20.  Water-colour: The Rocca Borromeo.  A Room in the Castle.  1871.

I am not sure whether or not this is the room in which S. Carlo Borromeo
was born.  One view of that room is in _Alps and Sanctuaries_ ch. xxiv.
(new edition, ch. xxiii).  This may be the same room looking towards the
left and showing a piece of window-seat and shutter.

21.  Water-colour: Amsteg.  1871.

22.  Water-colour: Fobello.  A Christening.  1871.

This was to have been a picture for the Academy, but he did not finish
it.  Here are shown women with short skirts and leggings.  They dress
like this so that they can climb into the ash trees and pull off the
leaves which they throw down upon the grass to be mixed up with the hay.
(_Memoir_, ch. ix.)

23.  Oil Painting: Varallo-Sesia.  The Washing Place.  1871.

"Butler made three oil sketches at Varallo all the same size, about
16x20.  One is the washing place outside the town."  (_Diary of a
Journey_, p. 16).  The other two were both done in the Piazza on the
Sacro Monte.  One was given to the Municipio of Varallo-Sesia; the other
to the Avvocato Francesco Negri of Casale-Monferrato.

24.  Oil Painting: Monte Bisbino, near Como.  1876.

_Alps and Sanctuaries_, ch. xxi.  The white sanctuary on the summit
shines like a diamond in some lights.

25.  Oil Painting: From S. Nicolao, Mendrisio.  1876.

_Alps and Sanctuaries_, ch. xxi.



GEORGE McCULLOCH


26.  Two lots of studies of women, about 1876.

McCulloch was a friend and fellow art-student of Butler's, and is
mentioned in the _Memoir_, "an admirable draughtsman."



SAMUEL BUTLER


27.  Oil sketch: Low wall and grass in front, snowy mountains behind.  It
must be a view in the Leventina Valley.

28.  Water-colour inscribed "S.B.": Leatherhead Church.

Butler was particularly pleased with the dormer windows, an unusual
feature in a church roof.  This must have been done somewhere about 1877,
but there is no evidence.  This is one of the pictures given by Alfred.

29.  Oil Painting: Montreal, Canada, from the Mountain, about 1877.

30.  Oil Painting: Calpiogna, Val Leventina.  1877.

Evening, looking down the valley.

31.  Oil Painting: Three sketches on one panel, scenes in the Val
Leventina.

They are near Faido, but I cannot further identify them.

32.  Oil Painting: Calonico.

_Alps and Sanctuaries_, ch. v.

33.  Oil Painting: Tengia.

_Alps and Sanctuaries_, ch. iv.

34.  Oil Painting: Prato.

Other views of Prato appear in _Alps and Sanctuaries_, ch. iii.

35.  Oil Painting: Lago Tom, Piora, Val Leventina.  1877.

Ch. vi. in _Alps and Sanctuaries_ is headed "Piora."  "Piora in fact is a
fine breezy upland valley of singular beauty, and with a sweet atmosphere
of cow about it."  Butler thought he knew what went on in Piora and, as
he proceeds through the valley, he says: "Here I heard that there were
people, and the people were not so much asleep as the simple peasantry of
these upland valleys are expected to be by nine o'clock in the evening.
For now was the time when they had moved up from Ronco, Altanca, and
other villages in some numbers to cut the hay, and were living for a
fortnight or three weeks in the chalets upon the Lago di Cadagna.  As I
have said, there is a chapel, but I doubt whether it is attended during
this season with the regularity with which the parish churches of Ronco,
Altanca, etc., are attended during the rest of the year.  The young
people, I am sure, like these annual visits to the high places, and will
be hardly weaned from them.  Happily the hay will always be there, and
will have to be cut by someone, and the old people will send the young
ones."

The foregoing passage throws light upon that other passage in _Life and
Habit_, ch. ii., about S. Paul, which concludes thus: "But the true
grace, with her groves and high places, and troops of young men and
maidens crowned with flowers, and singing of love and youth and wine--the
true grace he drove out into the wilderness--high up, it may be, into
Piora, and into such-like places.  Happy they who harboured her in her
ill report."

After Ernest has received Alethea's money, and while he and Edward
Overton are returning from Christina's funeral, in ch. lxxxiv. of _The
Way of All Flesh_, he tells his godfather his plans for spending the next
year or two.  He has formed a general impression that the most vigorous
and amiable of known nations--the modern Italians, the old Greeks and
Romans, and the South Sea Islanders--have not been purists.  He wants to
find out what such people do; they are the practical authorities on the
question--What is best for man?

"Let us," he says, "settle the fact first and fight about the moral
tendencies afterwards."

"In fact," said I laughingly, "you mean to have high old times."

"Neither higher nor lower," was the answer, "than those people whom I can
find to have been the best in all ages."

Accordingly Ernest left England and visited "almost all parts of the
world, but only staying in those places where he found the inhabitants
unusually good-looking and agreeable."  "At last in the spring of 1867 he
returned, his luggage stained with the variation of each hotel
advertisement 'twixt here and Japan.  He looked very brown and strong,
and so well-favoured that it almost seemed as if he must have caught some
good looks from the people among whom he had been staying."

We are not told what particular countries Ernest went to; Japan is
mentioned, but less because Ernest went there than because the name of a
distant place was wanted to justify and complete the echo of the
description of Sir Walter Blunt in I. _Hen. IV._ i. 64:

   Stained with the variation of each soil
   Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours.

Butler confided to me verbally that Ernest visited, among other places,
Piora, and that he stayed there "when the mowing grass was about." {8}

36.  Oil Painting: inscribed, "S. Butler.  Sketch of his own head.  April
1878."

This is one of the series of portraits of himself referred to in the note
to no. 7.  Another of these later portraits was given after his death to
Christchurch, New Zealand; and another to the Schools, Shrewsbury.  This
one was given by Butler to me soon after it was painted, and it remained
in my possession till 1911, when I gave it to St. John's College.  It is
reproduced as the frontispiece to vol. I. of the _Memoir_.

37.  Oil Sketch: Calonico.

_Alps and Sanctuaries_, ch. v.  On a panel with no. 38, Rossura, on the
other side.

38.  Oil Sketch: Rossura.  The altar by the porch of the church.  1878.

On a panel with no. 37, Calonico, on the other side.

39.  Oil sketch on a panel: Rossura, from inside the porch looking out.

"I know few things more touching in their way than the porch of Rossura
church."  (_Alps and Sanctuaries_, ch. iv.)

"The church is built on a slope, and the porch, whose entrance is on a
lower level than that of the floor of the church, contains a flight of
steps leading up to the church door.  The porch is there to shelter the
steps, on and around which the people congregate and gossip before and
after service, especially in bad weather.  They also sometimes overflow
picturesquely, and kneel praying on the steps while service is going on
inside."  (_Memoir_, I. 284-5.)

In _Alps and Sanctuaries_, ch. iv., is an illustration showing the people
kneeling on the steps while "there came a sound of music through the open
door--the people lifting up their voices and singing, as near as I can
remember, something which on the piano would come thus:" and then follow
a few bars of chords.

In the list which appeared in _The Eagle_, vol. xxxix., no. 175, March
1918, writing of no. 38: "Rossura: the altar by the porch of the church,
1878," I said that it had been removed.  On reconsideration, I am not
sure that it has been removed; but I have not been to Rossura for thirty
years or more and cannot now say for certain.  I believe, however, that
it is still there, and that when I said it had been removed I was
thinking of the alteration of an opening which there was formerly in the
west wall of the porch, under the portrait of S. Carlo Borromeo, which
hangs between the two windows.  This opening is mentioned in ch. iv. of
_Alps and Sanctuaries_, and Butler says that it had to be closed because
the wind blew through it and made the church too cold.  It is shown with
the portrait and the two windows in another illustration in ch. iv.

The first illustration in ch. iv. of _Alps and Sanctuaries_ shows how the
chapel with the altar in it (no. 38) is placed in relation to the porch.
This is the chapel he was thinking of when he wrote:

   "The church has been a good deal restored during the last few years,
   and an interesting old chapel--with an altar in it--at which Mass was
   said during a time of plague, while the people stood some way off in a
   meadow, has just been entirely renovated; but, as with some English
   churches, the more closely a piece of old work is copied, the more
   palpably does the modern spirit show through it, so here the opposite
   occurs, for the old-worldliness of the place has not been impaired by
   much renovation, though the intention has been to make everything as
   modern as possible."

In 1878, the first time I was with Butler in Italy and in the Canton
Ticino, he talked a great deal about the porch of Rossura; there is a
passage in ch. xvi. of the _Memoir_ about it.  For him it was the work of
a man who did it because he sincerely wanted to do it, and who learnt how
to do by doing; it was not the work of one who first attended lectures by
a professor in an academy, learnt the usual tricks in an art school, and
then, not wanting to do, gloried in the display of his technical skill.
That is to say, it was done in the right spirit.  The result of doing
things in this way will sometimes appear incompetent; this never
embarrassed Butler, provided that he could detect the sincerity; for
where sincerity is incompetence may be forgiven; but the incompetence
must not be so great as to obscure the artist's meaning.  At Rossura the
sincerity is obvious, and the building is so perfect an adaptation of the
means to the end that there is no suggestion of incompetence.

Rossura porch was thus an illustration of what he says in _Alps and
Sanctuaries_ in the chapter "Considerations on the Decline of Italian
Art."  It was more than merely a piece of architecture.  When Butler
contemplated it he saw also the chapel with its altar and the people
standing in the meadow during the plague; he saw the same people, after
the pestilence had been stayed, kneeling on the steps in the dimness, the
sky bright through the arch beyond them and the distant mountains blue
and snowy, while the music floated out through the open church door; he
saw through the windows the gleaming slopes about Cornone and Dalpe, and,
hanging on the wall between them, the picture of austere old S. Carlo
with his hands joined in prayer.  All these things could be written about
in _Alps and Sanctuaries_, but they could not be brought into the
illustrations apart from the text; and anyone who looks at Butler's
sketches of Rossura may be disappointed.  If he does not bear these
things in mind he will not understand what Butler meant by saying that he
knew of few things more touching in their way than the porch of Rossura
church.  He will be like a man listening to programme-music and knowing
nothing of the programme.

40.  Pencil sketch inscribed: "Handel when a boy.  Pencil sketch from an
old picture sold at Puttick and Simpson's and sketched by me while on
view.  Dec. 15th, 1879.  S.B."

On the same mount with the sketch-portrait of Robert Doncaster, no. 56.

41.  Water-colour: Otford, Kent; from inside the church looking out
through the porch.  1879.

42.  Drawing in pencil and ink: Edgeware.  1880.

43.  Oil Painting: Rimella, Val Mastallone; up the Valley from Varallo-
Sesia.

44.  Oil Painting: Eynsford, Kent.

45.  Oil Painting: On the S. Bernardino Pass.

46.  Oil Painting: Bellinzona, The Castle.

In the same frame with no. 47.

47.  Oil Painting: Mesocco, The Castle.

_Alps and Sanctuaries_, ch. xix.  Butler always had this and no. 46 in
the same frame.

48.  Oil Painting: Bellinzona, The Castle.

He made many sketches of the Castle at Bellinzona, this and no. 46 are
the only two I have found; none was quite satisfactory because there was
no point of view from which the towers composed well behind a good
foreground.

49.  Drawing in pencil and ink: The Sacro Monte, Varese, from the seventh
or Flagellation Chapel.

He intended to paint a picture this size, and started by making this
drawing, which is an enlargement of the drawing reproduced in _Alps and
Sanctuaries_, ch. xxiii. (1881), but he did not proceed with the
painting.

50.  Drawing in pencil and ink: Boulogne-sur-Mer, La Porte Gayole.

This was a favourite view which he often sketched; but I have only found
this example.



SAMUEL BUTLER AND OTHERS


51.  All (except a few which are lost) the original drawings for _Alps
and Sanctuaries_.

Placed here in order of date because the book was published in 1881.  Some
of the drawings are by Charles Gogin, who did the frontispiece and the
Madonna della Neve on the title page, and who also introduced the figures
into those of Butler's drawings which have figures; and a few are by me.
There are among this lot also several sketches, etc., by various persons
which Butler collected as illustrating his "Considerations on the Decline
of Italian Art."  Some are published in the chapter so headed in the
book, but others were not published.



SAMUEL BUTLER


52.  Oil Painting: Portrait of Henry Festing Jones.  1882.

53.  Oil Painting: Castello Fenis, Val d'Aosta.  1882.

It was over one of the gateways of this Castle that Fortune with her
Wheel was to appear in a fresco.  See no. 19.



HENRY FESTING JONES


54.  Oil Painting: View from Butler's room in Clifford's Inn showing the
tower of the Law Courts.  1882.

Drawn with the camera lucida.  Reproduced in the _Memoir_, ch. xx.

55.  Oil Painting: Unfinished sketch-portrait of Butler.  1882

Drawn with the camera lucida.  Referred to in the _Memoir_, I. 135-136,
in letters from which extracts are given below.

_Miss Savage to Butler_.

   31_st_ _October_, 1883: I went to the Fisheries Exhibition last week
   and spent a rather pleasant day.  I was by myself for one thing, and,
   for another, took great delight in gazing at a life-size model of a
   sea-captain clad in yellow oil-skins and a Sou'wester.  It was
   executed in that style of art that you so greatly admire in the
   Italian Churches, and was so good a likeness of _you_ that I think you
   must have sat for it.  The serious occupations of my day were having
   dinner and tea, and the relaxations, buying shrimps in the fish-market
   and then giving them to the sea-gulls and cormorants.  My most exalted
   pleasure was to look at your effigy, which I should like to be able to
   buy, though, as I have not a private chapel in my castle, I hardly
   know where I could put it if I had it.  Upon the whole I enjoyed
   myself, but I am glad to hear that the Exhibition is to be closed to-
   day, so that I cannot by any possibility go there again.

_Butler to Miss Savage_.

   5_th_ _November_, 1883: I believe I am very like a sea-captain.  Jones
   began a likeness of me not long since, which I will show you next time
   you come and see me, which is also very like a portrait of a
   sea-captain.

56.  Sketch-portrait of Robert Doncaster.

On the same mount with no. 40.  A tracing is among the miscellaneous
papers given to St. John's.  This sketch of Robert was done, I suspect,
with the camera lucida, and if so its date must be about 1882-3.  Robert
Doncaster was the husband of Mrs. Corrie; that is to say Mrs. Corrie, who
was Butler's laundress in Clifford's Inn, "lost" her husband.  After a
suitable interval it was assumed that he was dead and she married Robert
Doncaster and was known as Mrs. Doncaster.  Robert, who was a half-witted
old man, used to hang about the place, do odd jobs, and make himself
fairly useful.  He died in 1886.

57.  Water-colour: Pinner.  1883.



SAMUEL BUTLER


58.  Oil Painting: Edward James Jones.

Inscribed thus: "Portrait of E. J. Jones, Esq., of the Indian Geological
Survey, Aet. Suae 24, painted by S. Butler, November, 1883."  The date is
not clearly written, but it must be 1883, because my brother Edward, born
5th September, 1859, was twenty-four in 1883, and in November 1883 he
went to Calcutta, having obtained an appointment on the Geological
Survey.  Butler painted the portrait just before he started.

59.  Oil Painting: Chiavenna.  1887.

It looks in some lights like 1881, but in other lights 1887, and it must
be 1887.  Butler did not go abroad in 1881 and he was at Chiavenna in
1887.  This is one of the pictures given by Alfred.



THOMAS SADLER


60.  Black and white drawing: Butler and Scotto in 1888.

Sadler made this for the _Pall Mall Gazette_ from the photograph which is
reproduced in _Ex Voto_; the drawing was reproduced in an article, and a
cutting from the _Pall Mall_ with the reproduction is with the papers
given to St. John's.



SAMUEL BUTLER


61.  Oil Painting: Wembley, Middlesex.  Sketch of the back of the Green
Man public-house, since burnt down.

Butler intended to finish this, and send it to the Royal Academy, but he
got tired of it and turned it up.



THOMAS SADLER


62.  Water-colour drawing of the Vecchietto in the Deposition Chapel at
Varallo-Sesia.

63.  Water-colour drawing in black and white of a boy with a basket at
Varallo.

Sadler made these two drawings about 1890 from photographs taken by
Butler in 1888.



SAMUEL BUTLER


64.  Water-colour: copy of a landscape behind a small Madonna and Child
by Bartolomeo Veneto, signed and dated 1505.

I forget the precise date, but I think it was about 1898, when Butler was
searching in real landscape for the original of the castle which appears
in the background of one of the Giovanni Bellini pictures of the Madonna
and Child in the National Gallery, the one with the bird on the tree and
the man ploughing.  It may now be attributed to some other Venetian
painter.  He would have been pleased if he could have found the original
of the background of any picture by one of his favourite painters.  This
copy was made to fix in his mind the castle on the hill, which he hoped
afterwards to identify with some real place.  But he never succeeded.



HENRY FESTING JONES


65.  Water-colour: Jones's chambers in Staple Inn, Holborn.  1899.

66.  Water-colour: another view in the same room.  1899.

In these rooms Butler nearly always spent his evenings from 1893, when I
moved into them, until the end of his life.  The frames of these pictures
are veneered with oak from the Hall of Staple Inn, and into each are
inserted two buttons showing the wool-pack, the badge of the Inn, which
is said to be named from the Wool-Staplers.

When Butler and I were on the Rigi-Scheidegg with Hans Faesch in 1900 I
had these two sketches with me, and was showing them to the landlord, who
spoke English.  He looked at them and considered them carefully for some
moments.  Then he said gravely "Ah I see; much things.  That means
dustings; and then breakings; and then hangriness."



SAMUEL BUTLER


67.  Water-colour: Meien near Wassen on the S. Gottardo.  1896.

We went often to Meien to sketch when we were staying at Wassen on the S.
Gottardo.  We took our lunch with us, and ate it at the fountain in the
village.  "The old priest also came to the fountain to wash his shutters,
which had been taken down for the summer, and it was now time to bring
them out again and replace them for the winter" (_Memoir_, II. 236).  The
house on the left is the priest's house, and the shutters are already up
at one of his windows.

68.  Pen and ink sketch: Trapani and the Islands from Mount Eryx about
1897.

This sketch is reproduced in _The Authoress of the Odyssey_, ch. ix.  He
did it to show the situation of Trapani and the Islands with Marettimo
"all highest up in the sea."  In the Odyssey Ithaca is "all highest up in
the sea," and Butler supposed that the authoress in so describing it was
thinking of Marettimo.

69.  Wash drawing: Trapani and the Islands from Mount Eryx about 1898.

He wished to make a more complete version of no. 68, but this was as far
as he could get; there was not enough time and there were too many
interruptions.

70.  Pencil sketch inscribed, "Calatafimi, Sund. May 13th, 1900.  2
hours.  Eleven a.m. is the best light."

I added "S. Butler."  He could not continue because there came on a
terrific scirocco which lasted two or three days.

71.  Water-colour: Taormina, the Theatre and Etna.  1900.

This shows the fragments of the stones that are strewn about in the
orchestra which Butler said were like the fragments of My Duty towards My
Neighbour that lay strewn about in his memory.  It would take a lot of
work to put them all back into their places and reconstruct the original.
(_Memoir_, II. 292.)

72.  Water-colour: Siena.  1900.

73.  Water-colour: Pisa, inside the top of the Leaning Tower.  1900.

74.  Water-colour: Wassen.  1901.

75.  Water-colour: Wassen.  1901.

76.  Water-colour: Trapani, S. Liberale and Lo Scoglio di Mal Consiglio.
1901.

See _The Authoress of the Odyssey_.  The Scoglio is the ship of Ulysses
which Neptune turned into a rock as she was on her way home to Scheria.

77.  Rough sketch by Butler of the islands Marettimo, Levanzo, and
Favignana.

Two views showing how Marettimo is hidden by Levanzo when you are below
and comes out over Levanzo when you are up Mount Eryx.



HENRY FESTING JONES


78.  My first attempt in colour to draw the islands from Mount Eryx.

I saw I should not have time to finish it, and, instead, did no. 80.

79.  A volume of thirty-four leaves of drawings in pencil and ink.

I did all these under Butler's auspices, and often he was sitting near
doing another sketch of much the same view.  It may be said that they are
the work of his pupil.

80.  Drawing in pencil and ink: Trapani and the Islands from Mount Eryx.
1913.

Reproduced in the _Memoir_, ch. xxxii.



SAMUEL BUTLER AND OTHERS


81.  A portfolio of miscellaneous drawings, prints, etchings,
photographs, etc., by Butler, Gogin, and Sadler.

This is the portfolio containing the small water-colour of Dieppe, 1866.
I have given that the prominence of a place (no. 11) because it is
interesting to compare it with the more finished Dieppe, no. 10.  Possibly
the portfolio contains others (_e.g._ Dinant), which it will be thought
proper to take out and have mounted and framed.




II.  BOOKS AND MUSIC WRITTEN BY BUTLER:
AND BOOKS, MAGAZINES, &c., CONTAINING CONTRIBUTIONS BY HIM


For fuller particulars as to Butler's books see the Bibliography prefixed
to Vol. I. of the _Memoir_ by H. F. Jones (1919).



THE EAGLE


1858.  Vol. I., no. 1, Lent Term, containing "On English Composition," by
Cellarius, _i.e._ Samuel Butler.

1859.  Vol. I., no. 5, Easter Term, containing "Our Tour," by Cellarius,
_i.e._ S. Butler.  (These two bound together.)

1861.  Vol. II., containing "Our Emigrant" in two contributions (p. 101
and p. 149), by Samuel Butler; used by him in writing _A First Year in
Canterbury Settlement_, and referred to in the Preface to that book.

1894.  Vol. XVIII., no. 103 (March).  "A Translation (into Greek from
_Martin Chuzzlewit_) attempted in consequence of a challenge."

1902.  Vol. XXIV., no. 129 (December).  "The Shield of
Achilles."--"Napoleon at St. Helena."  _Also_ "Samuel Butler, B.A."
(Obituary by H. F. Jones.)

1910.  Vol. XXXII., no. 153 (December).  "Mr. Festing Jones on Samuel
Butler."  (Report by D. S. Fraser of H. F. Jones's paper on Samuel
Butler, read 16 Nov.)

1913.  Vol. XXXIV., no. 160 (March).  "Samuel Butler and his Note-Books."
By J. F. H[arris].

1913.  Vol. XXXIV., no. 161 (June).  "Prospectus of the Great Split
Society."--"A Skit on Examinations."  _Also_ "Two Letters of Samuel
Butler" (to W. E. Heitland: with note by W. E. Heitland).

1914.  Vol. XXXVI., no. 165 (December).  "Samuel Butler's Early Years."
(Review of new edition of _A First Year in Canterbury Settlement_, by J.
F. Harris.)

1916.  Vol. XXXVIII., no. 171 (December).  "A 'Few Earnest Words' on
Samuel Butler."  (Review of J. F. Harris's "Samuel Butler: the man and
his work" (1916), by W. E. Heitland.)



A FIRST YEAR IN CANTERBURY SETTLEMENT


1863.  Original cloth, purchased.

1914.  New edition with other early Essays.  Presentation copy from R. A.
Streatfeild, with two letters inserted.



THE EVIDENCE FOR THE RESURRECTION


1865.  One complete copy containing pencil marks made by Butler.  Cloth,
original wrappers bound in.

1865.  Two mutilated copies used by Butler in making the MS. of _The Fair
Haven_.  These were given to St. John's some years ago.



EREWHON


1872.  First edition, purchased.

1872.  Second edition, purchased.  This contains pencil notes by Butler.

1879.  Ergindwon.  (German translation.)

1901.  New and revised edition.  Proofs, with corrections by Butler.

1901.  New and revised edition--inscribed "H. Festing Jones, with all
best wishes from the author, Oct. 11, 1901.  First copy issued."

1901.  Colonial issue.

1908.  Reprint of New and revised edition.

1920.  American edition.  With Introduction by Francis Hackett.

1920.  Erewhon in French.  With an Introduction by the translator, M.
Valery Larbaud.  _Also_ the Typescript and Proofs, both with manuscript
corrections by the translator.



THE FAIR HAVEN


1873.  First edition, purchased.  The first edition contained an errata
slip, which this copy has not got.  Longman's re-issue.

1873.  Second edition, purchased.  Original cloth.  Longman's re-issue.

1873.  Second edition.  This copy contains the errata slip.  It is a
special copy cut down and bound as an experiment.  Given by Butler to H.
F. Jones.

1913.  New edition with Introduction by R. A. Streatfeild.  Presentation
copy from R. A. Streatfeild.

1902 (Oct.).  Letter to H. F. Jones from Alfred Marks (a brother of Henry
Stacy Marks, R.A.), enclosing copy of Remarks on _The Fair Haven_, made
by some friend of Alfred Marks.

1915 (12 June).  A letter from James W. Clark, with separate copy of the
prefatory matter to the Second Edition enclosed, given to him by Butler.
Clark was at Trinity Hall with me, later Fellow of the College, and
afterwards K.C. and Counsel to the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries.



THE CANADA TANNING EXTRACT CO., LTD.


1874-75.  Extracts from letters sent by Mr. Foley to the Foreman of the
Works of the Company, and other extracts and letters.  Inscribed "Copy of
Laflamme's Copy with Notes," in Butler's writing.  I believe the marginal
notes to have been Butler's originally, and then copied by a clerk into
this copy of the pamphlet.  _Also_ Another copy, with MS. notes by
Butler.



LIFE AND HABIT


1878.  First edition.  Presentation copy from Butler, inscribed "H. F.
Jones.  S.B."

1878.  Second edition.  Given to H. F. Jones by A. T. Bartholomew.

1890.  A copy of Longman's issue, with MS. corrections by Butler.  Cf.
Streatfeild's introduction to new edition (1910).

1910.  New edition with Author's Addenda and Preface by R. A.
Streatfeild, and letter from R. A. Streatfeild to H. F. Jones, 29 Nov.
1910.



EVOLUTION OLD AND NEW


1879.  "First copy issued."

1879.  "Second copy issued," with MS. Note by Butler.  Presentation copy.

1882.  Second edition with an Appendix and Note, given to H. F. Jones by
Butler, but not inscribed.

1911.  New edition (the third) with Author's Revisions, Appendix, and
Index; also Note by R. A. Streatfeild.



UNCONSCIOUS MEMORY


1880.  First edition, given to H. F. Jones by Butler, but not inscribed.

1880.  Butler's copy, with pressed flowers mounted on the fly-leaves, and
the names of the donors added.  Also a few notes.

1910.  New edition, with Introduction by Marcus Hartog.

1910.  A separate copy of Hartog's Introduction.  Inscribed "H. Festing
Jones from his brother in Ydgrun M.H."

1920.  Third edition.



ALPS AND SANCTUARIES


1882.  The Manuscript, together with the original drawings (cf. p. 10).

1882.  First edition (Bogue).  Presentation copy from Butler.  _Also_
Bogue's prospectus.

1882.  Second edition, purchased.

1882.  Second edition, with Index in MS. by Butler.

1890.  Streatfeild's copy with Longman's title-page, purchased, and a few
spare copies of Longman's title-page.

No date.  A copy with Fifield's title-page.

1913.  New edition with Author's Revisions and Index, and an Introduction
by R. A. Streatfeild.



GAVOTTES, MINUETS, FUGUES
BY SAMUEL BUTLER AND HENRY FESTING JONES


1884.  The Manuscript.

1884.  The published work.



SELECTIONS FROM PREVIOUS WORKS


1884.  Presentation copy with inscription: "First copy of the book to
leave the binder's, March 12, 1884.  S.B."



HOLBEIN


[1886].  Holbein's "La Danse."  A Note on a drawing in the Museum at
Basel.  Printed on a card.  _Also_ Another edition [1889].



LUCK OR CUNNING?


1886.  Revises, unbound, with corrections by Butler.

1887.  "First copy issued.  S.B."

1887.  Butler's copy, with notes, pressed flowers, and numerous additions
to the Index, mostly in Alfred's handwriting.

[1908].  Re-issue (Fifield).

1920.  Second edition, corrected.



NARCISSUS: A CANTATA
BY S. BUTLER AND H. F. JONES


1888.  A copy inscribed by both authors and composers.



EX VOTO


1888.  "2nd copy issued, S.B."  With 4 pp. "Additions and Corrections"
loose.

1894.  In Italian, translated by Angelo Rizzetti.  Inscribed, in Butler's
writing, "H. F. Jones.  Omaggio dell' Autore."

[1909].  Re-issue (Fifield).





UNIVERSAL REVIEW ARTICLES


1888-90.  Butler's set of them, complete with illustrations and bound
together.  Table of Contents in Alfred Cathie's writing and a few
accompanying photographs loose.



ESSAYS ON LIFE, ART, AND SCIENCE


1904.  Edited by R. A. Streatfeild.  Presentation copy with letter from
R. A. Streatfeild.  This contains most of the "Universal Review" articles
reprinted, and two Lectures.

1904.  A copy of the Colonial issue.

1908.  Re-issue (Fifield).



THE HUMOUR OF HOMER AND OTHER ESSAYS


1913.  A new edition of the _Essays_, with additions and Biographical
Sketch of Butler by H. F. Jones.

[1913].  Sketch of the Life of Samuel Butler, being a volume of MS. and
typewritten documents showing how the Biographical Sketch mentioned in
the preceding item grew out of the obituary notice which originally
appeared in _The Eagle_, December 1902.





ITALIAN PAMPHLETS (bound together)


1892.  Three numbers of "Il Lambruschini," containing papers on Butler's
Odyssey theories.

1893.  L'Origine Siciliana dell' Odissea.  (Estratto dalla Rassegna della
Letteratura Siciliana.)

1894.  Ancora sull' Origine Siciliana dell' Odissea.  (Estratto dalla
Rassegna della Letteratura Siciliana.)





ENGLISH PAMPHLETS, ETC.  (bound together)


1892.  The Humour of Homer.

1893.  On the Trapanese Origin of the Odyssey.

No date.  Sample passages from a new translation of the Odyssey.

1894.  A translation into Homeric verse of a passage from _Martin
Chuzzlewit_: attempted in consequence of a challenge.  From _The Eagle_.

No date.  Prospectus of _The Life and Letters of Dr. Samuel Butler_.

1887 (27 June).  Words of the Choruses from "Narcissus," for performance
at Mrs. Thomas Layton's.

1890 (15 Dec.).  Programme of Shrewsbury School Concert, at which some of
Butler's music was performed.



1892.  The Humour of Homer.  Butler's own copy.

1892-4.  Butler's own copies of his Odyssey pamphlets (see above), with
MS. notes.  2 sets.



{Facsimile of post-card from S. Butler to H. F. Jones: p22.jpg}



THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF DR. SAMUEL BUTLER
2 Vols.


1896.  Butler's own copy.

1896.  A copy, inscribed, in Butler's writing, "H. F. Jones from S. B.
Oct. 2, 1896."



THE AUTHORESS OF THE ODYSSEY


1897.  Inscribed, in Butler's writing, "H. F. Jones, with the author's
best thanks (first copy issued).  Nov. 1, 1897."

[1908].  Re-issue (Fifield).



THE ILIAD RENDERED INTO ENGLISH PROSE


1898.  The Manuscript.  This was given to St. John's some years ago by
Butler's literary executor, Mr. R. A. Streatfeild.

1898.  Proofs.

1898.  First edition.  Inscribed, in Butler's writing, "H. F. Jones, with
the author's best love.  Oct. 15, 1898."

1914.  New impression (Fifield).



SHAKESPEARE'S SONNETS RECONSIDERED


1899.  Inscribed, "H. F. Jones, Esq.  (the first copy issued).  Oct. 28,
1899.  S. B."



THE ODYSSEY RENDERED INTO ENGLISH PROSE


[1900].  Manuscript of Books I-XII. only, on letter paper.  The complete
MS. is at Aci Reale.

1900.  Proofs.

1900.  Inscribed, "H. Festing Jones.  Oct. 18, 1900 (first copy issued).
S. B."



QUO VADIS?


1901-1902.  Copies of four issues of the periodical bound together.  With
contributions by and about Butler.  Together with a MS. Italian
translation by Capitano Giuseppe Messina Manzo entitled, "La nuova
Quistione Omerica," and other matter relating to the Odyssey question.



EREWHON REVISITED


1901.  Proofs, with corrections by Butler.  2 copies.

1901.  First edition.  Inscribed, in Butler's writing, "H. Festing Jones.
With the author's best thanks for much invaluable assistance.  Oct. 11,
1901.  Second copy issued."

1902.  A copy of the edition intended for the Colonies, not sold in
England.

1908.  Reprint (Fifield).

1920.  The American edition.  With Introduction by Moreby Acklom.



THE WAY OF ALL FLESH


1903.  First edition, given by R. A. Streatfeild to H. F. Jones.

1903.  Streatfeild's copy, with his alterations to make the second
edition (1908).  Purchased.

1903.  A copy of the Colonial edition.

1908.  Second edition (Fifield).

1916.  A copy of the American edition.  Introduction by Wm. Lyon Phelps.
With letter from R. A. Streatfeild to H. F. Jones.



SEVEN SONNETS AND A PSALM OF MONTREAL,
AND OTHER PIECES (bound together)


1903.  Streatfeild's Raccolta of Necrologies of Butler.

1904.  Diary of a Journey through North Italy to Sicily, by H. F. Jones.

1904.  Autograph letter from Cavaliere Biagio Ingroja of Calatafimi to H.
F. Jones.

1904.  Seven Sonnets and A Psalm of Montreal.

1904.  Translations into Italian of Butler's "Seven Sonnets" (except Nos.
I. and V.), by Ingroja.  In manuscript.  His translation of Sonnet I. is
printed with the "Seven Sonnets."  He could not manage Sonnet V.  I think
the repetitions of "pull" puzzled him.

1904.  Translation of Sonnet I. into Italian by De Nobili.  In
manuscript.



1904.  Seven Sonnets.  Proof, and corrected copy, formerly the property
of R. A. Streatfeild.



ULYSSES: AN ORATORIO
BY SAMUEL BUTLER AND HENRY FESTING JONES


1904.  The work as published.  H. F. Jones's original copy, with notes.



GOD THE KNOWN AND GOD THE UNKNOWN


1909.  The work as published.  Ed. by R. A. Streatfeild.  These articles
first appeared in _The Examiner_ in 1879.



THE NOTEBOOKS OF SAMUEL BUTLER


1907-1910.  All the numbers of the "New Quarterly," a review which
appeared during these years and which contained Extracts from Butler's
MS.  Notebooks, bound into 3 vols.

1907-1910.  The Extracts from Butler's Notes as they appeared in the "New
Quarterly" bound together.

1910-1912.  The first MS. of the published _Notebooks_, 2 vols.

1910-1912.  The second MS. from which the first edition of the published
_Notebooks_ was printed, 2 vols.

1912.  Proofs.

1912.  Revises.

1912.  First impression, with MS. Notes by H. F. Jones.

1913.  Second impression.

1915.  Third and popular impression.

1917.  American edition, with Introduction by Francis Hackett.



CHARLES DARWIN AND SAMUEL BUTLER


1911.  Charles Darwin and Samuel Butler.  A Step towards Reconciliation.
By H. F. Jones.



SAMUEL BUTLER: A MEMOIR
BY HENRY FESTING JONES


1902-1914.  First Manuscript.  Second Manuscript.  Third Manuscript.

1915-16.  Proofs.

1916.  Revises.

1917.  Advance copy, without illustrations.

1918-1919.  Manuscript, proofs, and revises of additional matter for
First Impression.

1920.  Manuscript, proofs, and revises of additional matter for Second
Impression.

1920.  Second Impression.




III.  BOOKS ABOUT BUTLER:
AND BOOKS, MAGAZINES, &c., CONTAINING CHAPTERS OR ARTICLES ABOUT BUTLER
OR PROMINENT ALLUSIONS TO HIM


ACCADEMIA DAFNICA DI SCIENZE, Lettere, e delle Arti in AciReale: Atti e
Rendiconti.  Vol. ix.  Anno 1902.

ACCADEMIA DI SCIENZE, Lettere, ed Arti de' Zelanti di AciReale:
Rendiconti e Memorie.  1906.  Pp. 22, 27, 44, 50 refer to Butler.

ACKLOM, MOREBY.  The Constructive Quarterly, March 1917, containing
"Samuel Butler the Third," by Moreby Acklom.

BARRY, CANON WILLIAM.  The Dublin Review, Oct. 1914, with article "Samuel
Butler of Erewhon."

BLUM, JEAN.  Mercure de France, 16 Juillet 1910, with article on Samuel
Butler by Jean Blum.

BODLEIAN QUARTERLY RECORD.  Vol. II., nos. 16, 17.  1918.

Includes a note on Butler's use of Frost's "Lives of Eminent Christians"
(see "Quis desiderio . . . ?" in his _Essays_); and on Dr. John Frost.

BOOK MONTHLY for February 1913, with notice of the _Note-Books of Samuel
Butler_, reproducing the portrait.

BOOTH, ROBERT B.  Five Years in New Zealand (1859 to 1864).  By Robert B.
Booth, M.Inst.C.E.  Printed for private circulation.  1912.

Referred to in my _Memoir_ of Butler.  With three letters from Mr. Booth
and three other documents.  Mr. Booth was with Butler on his run at
Mesopotamia, N.Z.

BRIDGES, HORACE J.  Samuel Butler's Erewhon and Erewhon Revisited.  By
Horace J. Bridges.  1917.

BURDETT, OSBERT.  Songs of Exuberance, together with The Trenches.  By
Osbert Burdett.  Op. I.  London, A. C. Fifield, 1915.

This contains, among Sonnets on People and Places, (I.) Samuel Butler;
(II.) Samuel Butler.

CAMBRIDGE READINGS IN ENGLISH LITERATURE.  Ed. by George Sampson.  Book
III.  Cambridge, 1918.

Pp. 5-15 are occupied with an extract from _Erewhon_.

CANNAN, GILBERT.  Samuel Butler: a Critical Study.  By Gilbert Cannan.
London, Martin Seeker, 1915.

CLUTTON-BROCK, A.  Essays on Books.  London, 1920.

Containing reprints of articles on the _Note-Books_ and the _Memoir_.

CONSTRUCTIVE QUARTERLY, THE.  See Acklom, M.

CONTEMPORARY REVIEW, THE, June 1913, containing review of the _Note-Books
of S. Butler_.

DARBISHIRE, A. D.  An Introduction to a Biology.  By A. D. Darbishire.
London, Cassell, 1917.

With autograph letter to H. F. Jones from the author's sister, Helen
Darbishire.

DARWIN, SIR FRANCIS.  Rustic Sounds.  By Sir Francis Darwin.  London,
John Murray, 1917.

Reproducing "The Movements of Plants," a lecture delivered by him at the
Glasgow Meeting of the British Association, Sept. 16, 1901.  This lecture
is referred to in the _Memoir_ of Butler; it quotes a passage from
Butler's translation of Hering in _Unconscious Memory_.

DE LA MARE, WALTER.  The Edinburgh Review, Jan. 1913, containing a notice
of the _Note-Books of Samuel Butler_ in "Current Literature."  By Walter
De La Mare.

DUBLIN REVIEW, THE.  See Barry, Canon.

DUFFIN, H. C.  The Quintessence of Bernard Shaw.  With "Prologue: Of
Samuel Butler."  London, Allen and Unwin, 1920.

EDINBURGH REVIEW, THE.  See De La Mare, Walter.

FIRTH, J. B.  Highways and Byways in Nottinghamshire.  By J. B. Firth.
With Illustrations by Frederick L. Griggs.  London, 1916.

See pp. 93-6 for Langar.

HARDWICK, J. C.  The Modern Churchman, March 1920, containing "A Modern
Ishmael," by J. C. Hardwick.

HARRIS, JOHN F.  Samuel Butler, author of "Erewhon: the Man and his
Work."  By John F. Harris.  London, Grant Richards, 1916.

Inscribed "H. Festing Jones, with best wishes and very many thanks from
John F. Harris, July 5, 1916," with a few newspaper notices, loose.

HARTOG, MARCUS.  Problems of Life and Reproduction.  By Marcus Hartog.
London, Murray, 1913.

With letter from the author to H. F. Jones.

HARTOG, MARCUS.  The Fundamental Principles of Biology.  By Marcus
Hartog.  Reprinted from "Natural Science," vol. XI., nos. 68 and 69, Oct.
and Nov. 1897.

HARTOG, MARCUS.  Samuel Butler and recent Mnemic Biological Theories.
Extract from "Scientia," Jan. 1914.

HEWLETT, M.  In a Green Shade.  London, 1920.

Containing an article on the _Memoir_.

INDEPENDENT REVIEW, THE.  See MacCarthy, Desmond.

JACKSON, HOLBROOK.  Samuel Butler.  "T.P.'s Weekly," July 1915.  "To-Day,"
Dec. 1918 and Jan. 1919.

JONES, HENRY FESTING.  Samuel Butler as Musical Critic.  "The
Chesterian."  N.S. No. 7.  London, May 1920.

LARBAUD, V.  Samuel Butler.  In "La Nouvelle Revue Francaise," Jan. 1920.
_Also_ specimens of his translation of _Erewhon_, etc., in other numbers
of the same periodical, and notices of it.

LARBAUD, V.  L'Enfance et la Jeunesse de Samuel Butler.  In "Les Ecrits
Nouveaux," April 1920.

MACCARTHY, DESMOND.  The Independent Review, Sept. 1904, with article
"The Author of Erewhon," by Desmond MacCarthy.

MACCARTHY, DESMOND.  The Quarterly Review, Jan. 1914, containing "The
Author of Erewhon," by Desmond MacCarthy.

MACCARTHY, DESMOND.  Remnants.  By Desmond MacCarthy.  London, 1918.

Being essays and articles reprinted from various periodicals and
including "Samuel Butler: an Impression."

MAIS, S. P. B.  From Shakespeare to O. Henry.  By S. P. B. Mais.  London,
G. Richards, 1917.

Containing a chapter on Butler.

MERCURE DE FRANCE.  See Blum, Jean.

MIND.  See Rattray, Robert.

MONTHLY REVIEW, THE.  See Streatfeild, R. A.

NATIONAL GALLERY OF BRITISH ART.  Catalogue of the National Gallery of
British Art, 19th ed., 1911.

See pp. 37-8 for Butler's picture, "Mr. Heatherley's Holiday."

NEGRI, FRANCESCO.  Il Santuario di Crea in Monferrato.  By Francesco
Negri (_i.e._ Butler's friend the Avvocato Negri of Casale-Monferrato).
Alessandria, 1902.

Two of the illustrations are as in _Ex Voto_, Butler having lent his
photographs to the Avvocato.

NUOVA ANTOLOGIA, 16 Luglio 1902, with necrology of S. Butler under "Tra
Libri e Riviste."

PESTALOZZI, G.  Samuel Butler der Jungere, 1835-1902.
Inaugural-Dissertation.  Zurich, 1914.

QUARTERLY REVIEW, THE.  See MacCarthy, Desmond.

QUILTER, HARRY.  What's What.  By Harry Quilter.  1902.

With MS. Note by H. F. Jones.  Pp. 308-311 are about Butler, who
possessed a copy of the book, given him, I suppose, by Quilter; but he
passed it on to Alfred.

RATTRAY, ROBERT F.  Extract from "Mind," July 1914, containing "The
Philosophy of Samuel Butler."  By Robert F. Rattray.

SALTER, W. H.  Essays on two Moderns: Euripides and Samuel Butler.  By W.
H. Salter.  London, Sidgwick and Jackson, 1911.

SAMPSON, GEORGE.  The Bookman, Aug. 1915, containing illustrated article
by George Sampson.

SELLA, ATTILIO.  Un' Inglese Fervido Amico dell' Italia, Samuel Butler.
By Attilio Sella.  1916.

Given to H. F. Jones by the author.

SINCLAIR, MAY.  A Defence of Idealism.  By May Sinclair.  London,
Macmillan, 1917.

Containing "The Pan-Psychism of Samuel Butler."

STREATFEILD, R. A.  The Monthly Review, Sept. 1902, with article, "Samuel
Butler."  By R. A. Streatfeild.

WALL, ARNOLD.  A Century of New Zealand Praise.  By Arnold Wall.
Christchurch, 1912.

Sonnet XC. is about Butler.

WILLIAMS, ORLO.  The Essay.  By Orlo Williams.  London Secker [1915].

YEATS, JOHN BUTLER.  Essays, Irish and American.  By John Butler Yeats.
With an appreciation by A. E. Dublin, 1918.

The first essay is "Recollections of Samuel Butler."

ZANGWILL, ISRAEL.  Italian Fantasies.  By Israel Zangwill.  London,
Heinemann, 1910.

Contains "Sicily and the Albergo Samuele Butler."




IV.  BOOKS, ETC., RELATING TO BUTLER AND HIS SUBJECTS


ADAMS, C. WARREN.  A Spring in the Canterbury Settlement.  By C. Warren
Adams.  London, 1853.

BARKER, LADY.  Station Life in New Zealand.  By Lady Barker.  London,
1870.

With MS. note by H. F. Jones, referred to in the _Memoir_ of Butler.  F.
Napier Broome and his wife, then Lady Barker, had a run near Butler's in
New Zealand.

BASLER JAHRBUCH.  See Faesch, Hans Rudolf.

BATESON, WM.  Biological Fact and the Structure of Society: The Herbert
Spencer Lecture (p. 19).  Oxford, 1912.

BATESON, WM.  Problems of Genetics (Silliman Lectures).  By Wm. Bateson,
F.R.S.  New Haven, 1913.

BUTLER, JAMES.  Copies of Letters by Ensign James Butler (an uncle of Dr.
Butler) sent from Deal, Funchal, and Calcutta, 1764-1765; with
Introduction by H. F. Jones, all in typewriting and MS.

James Butler and these letters are referred to in the _Life of Dr.
Butler_, and also in the _Memoir_ of Butler.  Butler gave to the British
Museum an incomplete copy of the Letters and kept another incomplete copy
which I gave to the British Museum.  Each of the incomplete copies
contained matter not in the other.  I had this volume (now at St John's)
made up from the two incomplete copies.

BUTLER, HENRY THOMAS, and another.  Auction Bridge in a Nutshell.  By
Butler and Brevitas--the Butler being Henry Thomas Butler, nephew of
Samuel Butler.  [1913].

BUTLER, MARY.  A Kalendar for Lads.  1910.  Compiled by Butler's sister,
Mary Butler, and dedicated to her great-nephew, Patrick Henry Cecil
Butler (son of her nephew, Henry Thomas Butler).

Referred to in the _Memoir_ of S. Butler.  Given to me by Miss Butler.

BUTLER, SAMUEL, D.D.  A Sketch of Modern and Ancient Geography for the
Use of Schools.  By Samuel Butler, D.D.  A new edition revised by the
Rev. Thomas Butler, M.A., F.R.G.S.  London, 1872.

Referred to in Butler's _Life of Dr. Butler_ and also in the _Memoir_ of
Butler.

BUTLER, REV. THOMAS.  See Butler, Samuel, D.D.

CLARKE, CHARLES.  The Beauclercs, Father and Son.  By Charles Clarke.  3
vols.  London, 1867.

Referred to in Butler's _Life of Dr. Butler_, also in the _Memoir_ of
Butler, who saw the book in the British Museum.  I bought this copy
second-hand on an open-air bookstall in Paris.

DREW, MARY.  Catherine Gladstone.  By her Daughter, Mary Drew.  London,
1919.

With letter from the Authoress to H. F. Jones, 20 Jan. 1920.

DUDGEON, ROBERT ELLIS.  Colymbia.  London, Trubner, 1873.

No author's name is given, but the author was Dr. Robert Ellis Dudgeon,
the well-known homoeopathic doctor and friend of Butler.  Referred to in
the _Memoir_ of Butler.

FAESCH, HANS RUDOLF.  The Easier Jahrbuch, 1906.

Containing Letters from the East by Hans Rudolf Faesch, who is referred
to in _The Note-Books of Samuel Butter_ and also in the _Memoir_.

FIGHTING MAN IN FICTION, THE.  Woodville, N.Z.  (1917?)

A New Zealand pamphlet with letter from and photo of E. C. Chudleigh, who
sent it to me and who knew Butler in New Zealand.

FRANCATELLI, C. E.  The Cook's Guide.  By Charles Elme Francatelli.
London, 1865.

"I believe you could read Francatelli right through from beginning to end
without being moved in the smallest degree."  Miss Savage to Butler
(1877).  _Memoir_ I. 246.

GALLONI, PIETRO.  Sacro Monte di Varallo.  Atti di Fondazione.  By Pietro
Galloni.  Varallo, 1909.

With two post cards from Galloni to H. F. Jones.

GALLONI, PIETRO.  Sacro Monte di Varallo.  Origine e Svolgimento.  By
Pietro Galloni.  Varallo, 1914.

With two letters from Galloni and one from R. A. Streatfeild to H. F.
Jones.

GROSVENOR, THE HON. MRS. RICHARD CECIL.  Physical Exercises for Women and
Girls.  By the Hon. Mrs. Richard Cecil Grosvenor.  Additional exercises,
loose, accompanying.  1903.

She was formerly Mrs. Alfred Bovill, daughter of Charles Clarke, the
author of _The Beauclercs_, _Father and Son_ (see above).  She is
mentioned in Butler's _Life of Dr. Butler_ and in the _Memoir_ of Butler.

HELPS, ARTHUR.  See Victoria, Queen.

HERING, EWALD.  Memory.  Lecture on the Specific Energies of the Nervous
System, by Professor Ewald Hering, University of Leipzig.  English
translation.  The Open Court Publishing Co., Chicago and London, 1913.

Inscribed "H. Festing Jones, with best wishes from John F. Harris, August
31, 1915."  Cf.  Butler's translation of the Lecture on Memory in
_Unconscious Memory_.

HUTTON, FREDERICK WOLLASTON.  The Lesson of Evolution.  By Frederick
Wollaston Hutton, F.R.S.  2nd ed.  1907.

KING, REV. S. W.  The Italian Valleys of the Pennine Alps.  By the Rev.
S. W. King.  London, 1858.

Referred to in _Ex Voto_.  Near the beginning of this book Mr. King
speaks of Varallo-Sesia.

LARKEN, EDMUND PAUL.  The Pall Mall Magazine, May 1897, with "The
Priest's Bargain," a story by E. P. Larken.

Butler gave Larken the plot for this story.  See _The Note-Books of
Samuel Butler_, pp. 235-6.

LE DANTEC, FELIX.  Lamarckiens et Darwiniens.  Par Felix Le Dantec. 3e
ed.  Paris, 1908.

LYTTON, EDWARD, LORD.  The Coming Race.  London, 1886.

Referred to in the _Memoir_ of Butler.

NOTES AND QUERIES, 2 April 1892.  Containing article, "Took's Court and
its neighbourhood," with plans and illustrations, including Clifford's
Inn, Barnard's Inn, and Staple Inn.

PALL MALL MAGAZINE, THE.  See Larken, E. P.

SIX "RED ROSE" PAMPHLETS.  1913-1916.

REINHEIMER, HERMANN.  Symbiogenesis, the Universal Law of Progressive
Evolution.  By Hermann Reinheimer.  London, 1915.

See, especially, chap. vii.--Psychogenesis.

RUSSELL, E. S.  Form and Function.  London, 1916.

Ch. xix--"Samuel Butler and the Memory Theories of Heredity."

SALT, H. S.  Animal Rights.  London, 1894.

With MS. note by H. F. Jones.

SLADEN, DOUGLAS.  Selinunte and the West of Sicily.  By Douglas Sladen.
London, 1903.

SMYTHE, WILLIAM HENRY.  Memoir descriptive of the Resources, Inhabitants,
and Hydrography of Sicily and its Islands.  By Captain William Henry
Smythe, R.N., K.S.F.  London, Murray, 1824.

SMYTHE, WILLIAM HENRY.  The Mediterranean.  By Rear-Admiral Wm. Henry
Smythe, K.S.F., D.C.L.  London, Parker, 1854.

These two books by Admiral Smythe were wanted for _The Authoress of the
Odyssey_.  Butler saw them in the British Museum; I bought these copies.

TRIPP, ELLEN S.  My Early Days.  By Ellen Shephard Tripp.  Timaru, N.Z.,
Joyce, 1915.

With letter to H. F. Jones from Leonard O. H. Tripp, of New Zealand.

VICTORIA, H.M. QUEEN.  Leaves from the Journal of our Life in the
Highlands.  Edited by Arthur Helps.  London, Smith, Elder and Co., 1868.

VICTORIA, H.M. QUEEN.  More Leaves from the Journal of a Life in the
Highlands.  London, Smith, Elder and Co., 1884.

"Visit to Inveraray . . . and after lunch we went into the large drawing-
room next door to where we had lunched in 1847, when Lorne was only two
years old.  And now I return, alas! without my beloved husband, to find
Lorne my son-in-law!"  This passage, which occurs on page 291, is
referred to, with a comment, by Miss Savage in a letter to Butler, 18th
Nov. 1884.  (_Memoir_ I. 429.)

WARD, JAMES.  Heredity and Memory.  By James Ward.  Cambridge, 1913.




V.  BOOKS FORMERLY THE PROPERTY OF SAMUEL BUTLER


BUTLER wrote to Robert Bridges, 6 Feb. 1900, "I have, I verily believe,
the smallest library of any man in London who is by way of being
literary."  (_Memoir_, II., 320.)

Cf. no. 9 in Section I. Pictures, "Interior of Butler's sitting-room,"
where part of his library is shown.  The rest of his books were in a
cupboard between his sitting-room and his painting-room.  They all passed
under the residuary bequest in his will to his nephew, Henry Thomas
Butler, who gave them to me.  Some were taken by Streatfeild, his
literary executor, and some few were lost in transitu; the remainder are
here.

AGAR, T. L.  Emendationes Homericae.  [189-]

With notes by Butler.

ALLEN, GRANT.  Charles Darwin.  By Grant Allen.  (English Worthies.)
London, 1885.

Butler was asked to review this, but declined on the ground that there
was too strong a personal hostility between both Darwin and Grant Allen
and himself to make it possible for him to review the book without a bias
against it.  (_Memoir_, II. 28.)

ANDERSON, W. C. F.  See Engelman, R.

BETTANY, G. T.  The Life of Charles Darwin.  (Great Writers.)  London,
1887.

BIBLE, THE HOLY.  Oxford, 1836.

Inscribed "Samuel Butler, from his affectionate Godmother and Aunt Anna
Worsley, September 13th, 1836."  So that he was not christened till he
was more than nine months old, and he used to say that this delay was a
risky business, because during all those months the devil had the run of
him.  He imitated the inscription in this Bible for the inscription in
the christening Bible which Ernest spurns from him when he is about to
undertake the conversion of Miss Maitland in chapter lx. of _The Way of
All Flesh_.  But he imitated it too closely for he wrote, "It was the
Bible given him at his christening by his affectionate Godmother and
Aunt, Elizabeth Allaby."  Whereas Ernest only had one godmother, and she
was Alethea, the sister of Theobald.  Anna Worsley was a sister of
Butler's mother, and Elizabeth Allaby was a sister of Ernest's mother.

BIBLE.  New Testament in Greek.  Oxford, 1851.

Two copies, with very numerous MS. notes by Butler.  Given to St. John's
College some years ago.

BORDIGA, GAUDENZIO.  Notizie intorno alle opere di Gaudenzio Ferrari.
Milano, 1821.

Used by Butler in writing _Ex Voto_.

BOSWELL, JAMES.  Croker's Boswell's Johnson.  New edition.  London, 1860.

Pencil marks by Butler.

BRIDGES, ROBERT.  Poetical Works of Robert Bridges.  2 vols.  London,
1898.

Butler and Bridges corresponded about the Sonnets of Shakespeare and the
Odyssey and exchanged examples of their published works.  (See the
_Memoir_.)

BUCKLEY, THEODORE ALOIS.  The Iliad of Homer and the Odyssey of Homer.
Translated by Theodore Alois Buckley.  (Bonn's Classical Library.)  2
vols.  1872-3.

BURKE, EDMUND.  Reflections on the Revolution in France.  By Edmund
Burke.  London, Daly [18--].

CANDLER, C.  The Prevention of Consumption.  By C. Candler.  London,
1887.

Inscribed "Samuel Butler, Esq., with the Author's compliments."

CARLYLE, THOMAS.  Oliver Cromwell's Letters and Speeches.  By Thomas
Carlyle.  3 vols.  London, 1857.

COLBORNE-VEEL, MARY.  The Fairest of the Angels and Other Verse.  By Mary
Colborne-Veel.  London, 1894.

Given to Butler by the Authoress, who is the daughter of J.
Colborne-Veel, formerly editor of _The Press_, Christchurch, New Zealand.
Miss Colborne-Veel found Butler's "Philosophic Dialogue" in _The Press_
of 20 Dec. 1862.  (See the _Memoir_, I. 100.)

CREIGHTON, CHARLES.  Illustrations of Unconscious Memory in Disease.  By
Charles Creighton.  London, 1886.

Inscribed "To Samuel Butler from the author, February, 1888."

CRUVEILHIER, J. C.  Atlas of the Descriptive Anatomy of the Human Body.
By J. C. Cruveilhier.  London, 1844.

DALLAS, W. S.  See Darwin, Charles.

DALY, CH.  See Shakespeare.

DANIEL, P. A.  Notes and Conjectural Emendations of certain Doubtful
Passages in Shakespeare's Plays.  By P. A. Daniel.  London, 1870.

Inscribed "S. Butler from his friend the Author."

DARWIN, CHARLES.  The Origin of Species.  By Charles Darwin.  First
Edition.  London, 1859.

"From the Author."  With MS. notes and marks by Samuel Butler.

DARWIN, CHARLES.  The Origin of Species.  By Charles Darwin Sixth Edition
(18th thousand), with additions and corrections to 1872.  London, 1876.

With MS. notes and marks by Samuel Butler.  Butler bought this in order
to compare it with the original edition.

DARWIN, CHARLES.  The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals.  By
Charles Darwin.  London, 1872.

Inscribed "From the Author."  Butler procured for Mr. Darwin the two
illustrations by Mr. A. May, pp. 54-5.  (See the _Memoir_.)

DARWIN, CHARLES.  The Variation of Animals and Plants under
Domestication.  By Charles Darwin.  Second edition.  2 vols.  London,
1875.

DARWIN, CHARLES.  Erasmus Darwin.  By Ernst Krause.  Translated from the
German by W. S. Dallas, with a preliminary notice by Charles Darwin.
First edition.  London, 1879.

This book is referred to in chapter iv. of _Unconscious Memory_; also in
my pamphlet, "Charles Darwin and Samuel Butler: a Step towards
Reconciliation"; also in the _Memoir_.

DARWIN, CHARLES.  The Life of Erasmus Darwin.  By Charles Darwin.  Being
an introduction to an Essay on his Scientific Works by Ernst Krause,
translated from the German by W. S. Dallas.  Second edition.  London,
1887.

Pencil note by Butler, p. 4.  "Second Edition" means second edition of
the preceding book which is called "Erasmus Darwin," that is, the title
was altered.  In the first book precedence is given to Krause's Life of
Erasmus Darwin, in the second precedence is given to Charles Darwin's
introduction.

DAVIES, JOHN LLEWELYN.  See Plato.

DICTYS CRETENSIS.  (Teubner Classics.)  Leipzig.

DUDGEON, ROBERT ELLIS.  The Prolongation of Life.  By R. E. Dudgeon, M.D.
Second edition.  London, 1900.

Given by Dr. Dudgeon either to Butler or to me after Butler's death, I
forget which.

DUNCAN, W. STEWART.  Conscious Matter.  By W. Stewart Duncan.  London,
1881.

ELEMENTS, THE, of Social Science; or, Physical, Sexual, and Natural
Religion.  By a Graduate of Medicine.  Third edition.  London, 1860.

I have no doubt that Butler was directed to this book by Dr. Dudgeon.

EMSLIE, JOHN PHILIPPS.  New Canterbury Tales.  By John Philipps Emslie.
London [1887].

ENGELMAN and ANDERSON.  Pictorial Atlas to Homer's Iliad and Odyssey.
London, 1892.  Thirty-six Plates by R. Engelman and W. C. F. Anderson.

EPICORUM GRAECORUM FRAGMENTA.  (Teubner Classics.)  Leipzig.

GARNETT, RICHARD.  Poems.  By Richard Garnett.  London, 1895.

Inscribed "Samuel Butler, with R. Garnett's very kind regards.  December,
1893."

GARNETT, RICHARD.  Edward Gibbon Wakefield.  By R. Garnett, C.B., LL.D.
London, 1898.

Inscribed "From the Author."

GARNETT, RICHARD.  The Life of Thomas Carlyle.  By Richard Garnett.
London, 1887.

Inscribed "Samuel Butler from Richard Garnett."

GARNETT, RICHARD.  Dante, Petrarch, Camoens. CXXIV.  Sonnets translated
by Richard Garnett, LL.D.  London, 1896.

Inscribed "Samuel Butler, from R. Garnett."

GOETHE.  Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship.  Translated.  2 vols.  Leipzig,
1873.

HESIOD.  (Teubner Classics.)  Leipzig.

HOMER.  Iliad and Odyssey.  2 vols.  London, Pickering, 1831.

With numerous MS. notes by Butler.  Given to St. John's College some
years ago.

HOMER.  Iliad and Odyssey.  4 vols.  [18--]

Interleaved and profusely adnotated by Butler.

HOMER.  Iliad, Odyssey, and Hymns.  (Teubner Classics.)  Leipzig.

HOMER.  See Buckley, Theodore Alois.

JEBB, SIR R. C.  Introduction to Homer.  Third edition.  London, 1888.
_Also_ a copy with a few MS. notes by Butler.

JESUS OF HISTORY, THE.  London, 1869.

Used by Butler in preparing _The Fair Haven_.

KRAUSE, ERNST.  See Darwin, Charles.

LAMARCK.  Philosophie Zoologique.  Nouvelle edition par Ch. Martins.  2
vols.  Paris, 1873.

Used by Butler in preparing _Evolution Old and New_.

LAURENTIUS.  The Miocene Men of the Bible.  By Laurentius.  London, 1889.

LOCKE, JOHN.  An Essay concerning Human Understanding.  By John Locke.  2
vols.  London, 1824.

MALONE, E.  See Shakespeare.

MENDELSSOHN-BARTHOLDY, FELIX.  Letters from Italy and Switzerland.  By
Felix Mendelssohn-Bartholdy.  Translated by Lady Wallace.  London, 1862.

See p. 37 about Mendelssohn's staying such a long while before things in
_Alps and Sanctuaries_, ch. ii.

MILTON, JOHN.  The Prose Works of John Milton.  Only Vol. III.,
containing "The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce."  (Bohn.)  London,
1872.

Referred to in _The Way of All Flesh_, when Theobald and Christina drive
away together after their marriage.  And cf. _Life and Habit_, ch. ii.,
where, after quoting from a journal an extract about Lycurgus, Butler
proceeds: "Yet this truly comic paper does not probably know that it is
comic, any more than the kleptomaniac knows that he steals, or than John
Milton knew that he was a humorist when he wrote a hymn upon the
Circumcision and spent his honeymoon in composing a treatise on Divorce."

MIVART, ST. GEORGE.  On the Genesis of Species.  By St. George Mivart.
Second edition.  London, 1871.

Used by Butler in preparing his books on evolution.

PALEY, WILLIAM.  Natural Theology or Evidences of the Existence and
Attributes of the Deity.  By William Paley, D.D.  New edition.  London,
1837.

PALEY, WILLIAM.  A View of the Evidences of Christianity.  By William
Paley, D.D.  New edition by T. R. Birks.  London [18--].

PIERS PLOUGHMAN.  The Vision and Creed of Piers Ploughman.  Edited by
Thomas Wright.  2 vols.  London, 1887.

Butler bought this to help him to make up his mind as to the limits of
permissible archaism in translating the Odyssey and the Iliad.

PILKINGTON, MATTHEW.  A General Dictionary of Painters.  By Matthew
Pilkington.  2 vols.  London, 1829.

PLATO.  The Republic of Plato.  Translated by John Llewelyn Davies and
David James Vaughan.  Cambridge, 1852.

H. F. Jones to Butler from the Hotel dell'Angelo, Faido, in 1883: "The
signora has given me No. 4, the room into which you came one morning,
more than five years ago, and said, 'Oh, you've been reading that damned
Republic again!'"  _Memoir_, I. 395.

RIGAUD, JOHN FRANCIS.  See Vinci, Leonardo da.

ROCKSTRO, W. S.  The Rules of Counterpoint.  By W. S. Rockstro.  London
[1882].

Out of which Butler used to do his counterpoint exercises.

ROSSETTI, WILLIAM MICHAEL.  See Webster, Augusta.

SCHOELCHER, VICTOR.  The Life of Handel.  By Victor Schoelcher.  London,
1857.

Referred to in the _Memoir_ of Butler.

SHAKESPEARE, WILLIAM.  The Poems of William Shakespeare.  London, Daly
[18--].

SHAKESPEARE, WILLIAM.  Shakespeare's Poems.  Malone.  1780.

This is part of Vol. I. of Malone's "Supplement to the Edition of
Shakespeare's Plays published in 1778 by Samuel Johnson and George
Steevens."  I do not know where Butler got it; he wanted Malone's
comments on the Sonnets and he may have bought this second-hand or it may
have been given to him.  It was probably in a bad state, for he had it
bound; there is an entry to that effect in his account book, 30th March,
1899.

SKERTCHLY, SYDNEY B. J.  See Tylor, Alfred.

STANLEY, ARTHUR PENRHYN.  The Life and Correspondence of Thomas Arnold,
D.D.  By Arthur Penrhyn Stanley.  Seventh edition.  London, 1852.

Butler bought this when he was writing the Life of his Grandfather,
because he was told that it was a model biography of a great
schoolmaster.

STRAUSS, FRIEDRICH.  A New Life of Jesus.  By Friedrich Strauss.
Authorised translation.  2 vols.  London, 1865.

Used by Butler in preparing _The Fair Haven_.

SWIFT, JONATHAN.  The Works of Jonathan Swift.  2 vols.  London, 1859.

With pencil marks by Butler.

TYLOR, ALFRED.  Colouration in Plants and Animals.  By Alfred Tylor.
Edited by Sydney B. J. Skertchly.  London, 1886.

Alfred Tylor was a friend of Butler, and is referred to in my _Memoir_.

TYLOR, ALFRED.  On the Growth of Trees and Protoplasmic Continuity.  By
Alfred Tylor.  London, 1886.

This was originally a lecture read by Skertchly to the Linnean Society,
Mr. Tylor being too ill to attend.  Butler was present and spoke.
Referred to in the _Memoir_.

VAUGHAN, DAVID JAMES.  See Plato.

VINCI, LEONARDO DA.  A Treatise on Painting.  By Leonardo da Vinci.
Translated by John Francis Rigaud.  London, 1835.

WEBSTER, AUGUSTA.  Mother and Daughter.  By the late Augusta Webster.
London, 1895.

With an Introductory Note by Wm. Michael Rossetti.  Inscribed, "Samuel
Butler, with kind regards from Thomas Webster."  Augusta Webster is
referred to in the _Memoir_.

WHITE, WILLIAM.  The Story of a Great Delusion.  By William White.
London, 1885.

WILBERFORCE, SAMUEL.  Agathos and other Sunday Stories.  By Samuel
Wilberforce, M.A., Archdeacon of Surrey.  Nineteenth edition.  London,
1857.

WRIGHT, THOMAS.  See Piers Ploughman.




VI.  ATLASES AND MAPS
FORMERLY THE PROPERTY OF SAMUEL BUTLER


Some of the maps are marked with red lines showing, in the words of
another illustrious Johnian, "fields invested with purpureal gleams."
These red lines, specially noticeable in Butler's ordnance maps of the
neighbourhood within thirty miles round London, denote his country walks,
and are referred to in his Introduction to _Alps and Sanctuaries_.

BUTLER, SAMUEL, D.D.  An Atlas of Modern Geography for the use of Young
Persons and Junior Classes in Schools.  Selected from Dr. Butler's
"Modern Atlas," by the Author's son, the Rev. T. Butler, Rector of
Langar.  London, 1870.  _Also_ an edition inscribed, "Samuel Butler,
October 20th, 1850"; and an edition of Dr. Butler's "Atlas of Antient
Geography."

Environs of London, North side (eastern half missing).

Environs of London, South side--Sevenoaks, Tonbridge, Maidstone.

There is something wrong; one piece is much dirtier than the other; the
two do not belong to one another.  The dirty one is inscribed, almost
illegibly, thus: "S. Butler, 15, Clifford's Inn, Fleet Street, London,
E.G.  Please return to the above address.  The finder, if poor, will be
rewarded; if rich, thanked."  May be he did lose one half, and it was not
returned, and he bought another.

Environs of London (Surrey).

Environs of London (Sussex).

Brighton and Environs (reduced Ordnance).

Chatham (near) to Romney Marsh (in two parts).

France (part of) and Channel Islands.

Boulogne }

Dieppe }

Dieppe } Mounted, and all in one envelope.

Canton Uri }

Tuscany }

Canton Ticino.

Provincia di Torino.

The Val Leventina, 1681.

Trapani, Monte S. Giuliano and neighbourhood, in two sheets.

Trapani (Ordnance).

Ithaca and Corfu (three sheets).

An envelope containing maps and plans relating to Butler's Run,
Mesopotamia, New Zealand.




VII.  MUSIC
FORMERLY THE PROPERTY OF SAMUEL BUTLER


These volumes contain many pencil notes, exclamations, and marks by
Butler.  xxx means very great admiration; xx moderate admiration; x
slight admiration.

HANDEL'S ORATORIOS in Novello's octavo edition:--

Acis and Galatea.

Alceste.

Alexander Balus.

Athaliah.

Belshazzar.

Chandos Te Deum and St. Cecilia's Day.

Deborah.

Dettingen Te Deum.

Israel in Egypt.

Jephtha.

Joshua.

Miscellaneous.

Occasional Oratorio.

The Passion.

Samson.

Selections.

Semele.

Solomon.

Susanna.

Theodora.

Time and Truth.

HANDEL'S 16 SUITES, TROIS LECONS, CHACONNE, SEPT PIECES, SIX GRANDES
FUGUES (p. 118.  Note in Butler's writing at no. 6, "This is the 'Old
Man' Fugue"; cf. the _Memoir_ of Butler), and SIX PETITES FUGUES.

TWELVE GRAND CONCERTOS.  By G. F. Handel.  Pencil marks by Butler, _e.g._
p. 27, "xxx the whole of this concerto"; and by Butler and Jones, _e.g._
p. 88, "cf. Sarabande Suite, xvi. (Set 2, no. 8)" (so far by Jones and
the rest is by Butler), "cf. 'When Myra Sings,' Clarke's 'Beauties of
Purcell,' pp. 124-5."

A volume containing CONCERTOS by Handel and Hasse and SIX OVERTURES by
Handel.  Two papers pasted in; one printed with verses, the other MS.
with "Upbraid me not, capricious fair."  This was set to music by H. F.
Jones, and at that time we were told, through _Notes and Queries_, that
the words were by Alexander Brome.

A volume inscribed "15, Clifford's Inn, Fleet Street, E.G." containing
ARRANGEMENTS OF HANDEL, by Wm. Hutchins Callcott; HANDEL'S HAUTBOY
CONCERTOS, Nos. 2, 4 and 5; Eight of his SUITES; his CONCERTANTE; his SIX
ORGAN CONCERTOS; a FANTASIA; his WATER MUSIC, and TWO MINUETS by
Geminiani.

A volume containing HANDEL'S CORONATION ANTHEM; ACIS AND GALATEA; an
ORATORIO with no title or composer's name, the first song being "Tune
your Harps to Chearful Strain"; the OVERTURE, SONGS, DUETS and TRIO in
"Comus" by Dr. Arne; and THE BLACKBIRDS, a Cantata by M. Isaac.

A volume with "Miss E. Parkes" on a label outside; inscribed, "Samuel
Butler, with the love of his Aunt, Ellen Worsley, January 2nd, 1865";
containing Corelli's Sonatas and Concertos, "Thorough-Bass," by M. P.
King, and a few of Handel's Overtures.  Pencil marks by Butler.

A volume containing L'INDISPENSABLE (a Manual for performers on the
Pianoforte); MELODIES OF ALL NATIONS, ENGLISH AIRS, and various pieces by
Handel, Bach and others.

Two Portfolios containing unbound music by Handel and others, including
the SIX FUGUES, of which no. 6 in C Minor is the "Old Man" Fugue.

THE HANDEL ALBUM FOR THE PIANOFORTE.  Arranged by William Hutchins
Callcott.

HANDEL'S CONCERTOS AND ROSEINGRAVE'S SUITES.  Walsh's edition.  Inscribed,
"To S. Butler, with kind regards from Julian Marshall, June 20, 1873."

THE FITZWILLIAM VIRGINAL BOOK.  Ed. by Fuller Maitland and Barclay
Squire.  Butler subscribed for this at the instigation of Fuller
Maitland.  He had the parts bound and gave the volumes to me.

THE BEAUTIES OF PURCELL (John Clarke), inscribed "S. Butler."

THE WELL-TEMPERED CLAVICHORD.  By John Sebastian Bach.  (Czerny).

371 VIERSTIMMIGE CHORALGESANGE VON JOHANN SEBASTIAN BACH.

LIEDER OHNE WORTE.  6 books, by Mendelssohn.

A MUSICAL MS. SCRAP-BOOK, containing Notes of Rockstro's lessons; also
pieces copied by Butler, including some composed by him for Alfred to
learn.




VIII.  MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS
FORMERLY THE PROPERTY OF OR RELATING TO SAMUEL BUTLER


Thomas Harris, of Shrewsbury.

Butler when a boy was amused by the advertisement put up over his shop by
this man, who was a baker.  He copied or invented the two pictures
showing Harris (1) making bride cakes, (2) making funeral cakes, and
composed the music.  Miss Butler showed it to me at Shrewsbury in June or
July, 1902, and I copied it.

MS. copies of "The New Scriptures," according to Darwin, Tyndall, Huxley
and Spencer.

The first twenty-four verses of this appeared in an American paper (the
_Index_, if I remember right) many years ago.  They were given to me by
Herbert Phipson; I showed them to Butler; he copied them and composed
verses 25 to 33.

Testimonials by Eyre Crowe, A.R.A.; G. K. Fortescue; R. Garnett, LL.D.;
A. C. Gow, A.R.A.; T. Heatherley; the Rev. B. H. Kennedy, D.D.; Henry
Stacy Marks, R.A.; and W. T. Marriott, M.P., submitted by Butler in 1886
when a Candidate for the Slade Professorship of Fine Art at Cambridge.

Two numbers of the Parish Magazine of St. Augustine's, Kilburn, Mar. 1887
and April 1887.

Between pp. 80 and 81 of the March number are unsuitable advertisements
of Pears' Soap involving the Bishop Q of Wangaloo and Lillie Langtry.
Their appearance drew from the Editor, pp. 97 and 112 of the April
number, an expression of regret, distress, and surprise, and a statement
that precautions had been taken against any occurrence of a similar
nature in future.  If I remember right Miss Savage sent these to Butler
and they are referred to in their correspondence, but perhaps not in any
of the letters included in the _Memoir_.

Review of "Luck or Cunning?" written by George Bernard Shaw, which
appeared in the _Pall Mall Gazette_, 31st May, 1887.

This was given to me by Dan Rider, who told me that Bernard Shaw's
original review, which he wrote off his own bat, was very much more
laudatory and much longer, but the Editor of the _Pall Mall Gazette_ cut
it down in length and took out some of the praise because he was afraid
of offending the Darwins and their friends.

A collection of Butler's Letters to the _Athenaeum_ and the _Academy_ and
other contributions to the press.  See the _Memoir_.

20 Marzo 1893.  Nomination of Butler as Socio Corrispondente of the
Accademia di Scienze, Lettere, ed Arti de'Zelanti di Aci-Reale.

4 Luglio 1893.  Nomination of Butler as Socio Corrispondente of the
Accademia Dafnica di Scienze, Lettere, ed Arti in Aci-Reale.

An envelope containing papers relating to Dr. Butler and to Butler's
_Life_ of him, which appeared in 1896.

Statement as to the position of the violinist Mademoiselle Gabrielle
Vaillant, May 1897.

She occurs in the _Memoir_.  She broke down, and a few hundred pounds
were raised to help her.

A collection of obituary notices of Butler.  1902.

Two collections of notices of Butler's books, one made by Butler, the
other by Streatfeild.

Particulars and Conditions of Sale of such of Butler's houses near London
as were sold after his death, Oct. 1902.

A parcel of newspapers, mostly _The Press_ and _The Weekly Press_ of New
Zealand, referring to Butler and to his contributions to the New Zealand
press.  Some of his early contributions are reprinted.  See _A First Year
in Canterbury Settlement_ (1914), Introduction.

A collection of letters and papers relating to the Erewhon Dinners.

An envelope containing _pieces justificatives_ in connection with the
"Diary of a Journey," by H. F. Jones.  1903.

_The Cambridge Magazine_ for 1 March 1913, containing "Samuel Butler and
the Simeonites," by A. T. Bartholomew.  See _A First Year in Canterbury
Settlement_ (1914), pp. 266-272.

Catalogue of the Butler Collection at St. John's College, Cambridge.  Pts.
1-3.  Extracted from _The Eagle_ for March and June 1918 and for June
1919.  (No more published in this form.)

Menu of Dinner given to Henry Festing Jones on the completion of the
_Memoir_ of Butler, the hosts being Mansfield Duval Forbes and A. T.
Bartholomew, 11th Nov. 1916, in Forbes's rooms, Clare College, Cambridge.
Each course is illustrated by an appropriate quotation from the _Memoir_.

Menu of Dinner given to Henry Festing Jones on the publication of his
_Memoir_ of Butler by A. T. Bartholomew at the University Arms Hotel,
Cambridge, 22 Nov. 1919.

A collection of _pieces justificatives_, permissions to print letters in
the _Memoir_ of Butler, and the original MSS. of Reminiscences of Butler
therein included by Miss Aldrich, Rev. Cuthbert Creighton, the Hon. Mrs.
Richard Cecil Grosvenor, H. R. Robertson.

A collection of newspaper cuttings, being reviews and notices of the
_Memoir_.

A collection of letters received by H. F. Jones on the publication of the
_Memoir_.




IX.  PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS
FORMERLY THE PROPERTY OF OR RELATING TO SAMUEL BUTLER


An engraving of "The Fortune Teller," by Sir Joshua Reynolds.

An engraving of "The Woodman," by Gainsborough.

A print of a view of "Clifford's Inn Hall from the Garden."  1800.

A paper about Clifford's Inn, extracted from "Picturesque Views and an
Historical Account of the Inns of Court," by Samuel Ireland, published in
the year 1800.

An envelope containing prints of the photograph of Butler's Fireplace, 15
Clifford's Inn.

Six boxes of photographic negatives.  Portraits and Italian works of art.

Five volumes of prints of snap-shots by Butler.

Photographs illustrating Butler's notions about the Portraits of Gentile
and Giovanni Bellini as to which he wrote to the _Athenaeum_, 20 Feb.
1886.  (_Memoir_, ch. xxv.)

Photographs to illustrate his notions about the Holbein drawing, "La
Danse," dealt with in the article in the _Universal Review_, "L'Affaire
Holbein-Rippel."  Together with various papers relating to the same
matter.  This article was not reproduced in _Essays on Life_, _Art and
Science_ (afterwards _The Humour of Homer_) because of the trouble of
reproducing the illustrations, but it is among the _Universal Review_
articles bound together and included in this catalogue (p. 19).

A print of the great statue of S. Carlo Borromeo, near Arona, called "S.
Carlone."

A collection of photographs of Italian pictures, unmounted.

Three large cards with photographs of the fresco by Gaudenzio Ferrari
which is in S. Maria delle Grazie at Varallo-Sesia.  It is in twenty-one
compartments.

Two cards, not so large, with photographs of pictures and frescoes by
Gaudenzio.  One of these reproduces frescoes and pictures in the
Crucifixion Chapel at Varallo.  In the left-hand bottom corner is the
whole of the fresco in S. Maria delle Grazie showing how the twenty-one
compartments are placed.  The other card contains Gaudenzio's frescoes in
the Church of S. Cristoforo at Vercelli.

A card with five photographs, two of the frescoes at Busto Arsizio near
Varese--at least, I think that is where they are.  One is "St. John
Baptist's head in a charger," the other "The baptism in the Jordan."
Butler particularly liked the scratchings of names and dates on the
former.  The other three photographs are of pictures.  The foregoing six
cards (three, two and one) used to hang framed in Butler's chambers.

A woman in a black dress from Lima.  Used by Butler to make female heads
for sale, but he was not successful.

_The Weekly Press_, N.Z., 21st Mar. 1917.  Page 26 contains views of
Butler's homestead at Mesopotamia.

Two views of Butler's homestead, Mesopotamia, New Zealand, extracted from
the _Press_.

A view of the ruins of Hagiar Chem (Haggiar Kim in Malta).

A card with five photographic views.  Two are the Garden at Langar.  One
is at Langar, Mrs. Barratt.  Cf. snapshot album, 891, p 27.  The
remaining two are huts or whares in New Zealand, one being "Whare at
Mount Peel Station, Oct. 14."




X.  PORTRAITS
FORMERLY THE PROPERTY OF OR RELATING TO SAMUEL BUTLER


{Samuel Butler when an undergraduate about 1858: p53.jpg}

Butler's Photograph Album.

I have written the names against those portraits of whose identity I am
certain.  The cabinet photograph of Canon Butler resembles the father in
"Family Prayers"; but Butler cannot have used this photograph, which was
done when Canon Butler was an old man, for a picture painted in 1864.

Photographs of S. Butler:

(1)  Soon after his return from New Zealand.

(2)  1866.

(3)  Taken by Mrs. Bridges in the garden at Langar about 1866.

(4)  His identification photograph at the Paris Exhibition, 1867.  2
copies.

(5)  At Milan about 1886.

(6)  At 15 Clifford's Inn, by Alfred, about 1888.

(7)  At 15 Clifford's Inn, by Alfred, about 1889.

(8)  Taken at The Long House, Leatherhead, by Mr. Pidgeon, about 1894.

(9)  Taken by Russell in 1901.  Given by Butler to Streatfeild.

The Rev. T. Butler, of Wilderhope House, Shrewsbury, Butler's father.

Mrs. Butler, Butler's mother.

Tom Butler, Butler's brother.

Miss Eliza Mary Anne Savage.

Three photographs of Charles Paine Pauli, two on cards and one on glass.

Butler kept the glass one on his mantelpiece until Pauli's death in 1897.
Then he removed it.  He would have removed it earlier, but Pauli came to
his rooms to lunch three times a week, and would have noticed its
absence.  For Pauli see the _Memoir_.

Hans Rudolf Faesch as a boy.

Hans Rudolf Faesch, taken by Butler in 1893.

Cavaliere Biagio Ingroja of Calatafimi.

Professore Alberto Giacalone-Patti of Trapani.

William Smith Rockstro, who used to teach Butler counterpoint.  See the
_Memoir_.  Taken by Butler at 15 Clifford's Inn, 10 Oct. 1890.

Charles Gogin }

Joseph Benwell Clark } All taken by Butler at 15 Clifford's Inn.

Edward James Jones }

An engraving of G. A. Paley and letter from Mr. Barton Hill (on behalf of
Henry Graves and Co.) to H. F. Jones identifying the portrait.

A card with photographs of twelve of Butler's College friends.




XI.  EFFECTS
FORMERLY THE PERSONAL PROPERTY OF SAMUEL BUTLER


One mahogany table with two flaps.

Butler used this table for his meals, for his writing, and for all
purposes to which a table can be put.  A corner of it covered with a red
cloth is seen in the picture of the interior of his room.  See p. 4, no.
9.

Sandwich case.

This he took with him on his Sunday walks and sketching excursions.

Passport.

Pocket magnifying glass.

Address book.

Homeopathic medicine case.

He always took this with him on his travels.

Two account books, 1897-1900 and 1900-1902.

Butler destroyed his early account books when he made the Skeleton Diary
of his life which is in Vol. III. of his MS. Note-Books.  After his death
the remaining account books were destroyed except these two.

Books in which Butler used to keep his accounts by double entry.  The
handwriting during the early years is Butler's, afterwards it is
Alfred's.  Journal, 1895-1902; Cash Book, 1881-1899; Cash Book,
1899-1902; Union Bank Book, 1881-1902; Ledger.

A set of books containing accounts for his published works.

Two of the small note-books which after April 1882 Butler always carried
in his pocket and in which he made the notes afterwards copied into his
full-size MS. Note-Books.

Before 1882 he used some other kind of pocket note-book.  The first one
he had of this kind was sent to him by Miss Savage in a letter of 18th
April, 1882, from which the following is an extract; the words in square
brackets are a note by Butler on Miss Savage's letter.

   "I send you a little present; the leaves tear out, so that when you
   leave your note-book at the "Food of Health" [I don't remember ever
   going to the "Food of Health."  I do not know the place.  S. B.] or
   elsewhere, as you sometimes have done, you will not lose so much, and
   then you can put the torn leaves into one of the little drawers in
   your cabinet which is just made for such documents."  (_Memoir_, I.
   373.)

The cabinet she refers to was one of the two Japanese cabinets, the next
items, which he had bought at Neighbour's grocery and tea-shop in Oxford
Street, and which she had seen in his rooms.  He used to keep stamps in
them.

One small Japanese cabinet.

One larger Japanese cabinet.

Two pen trays.

One camera lucida with table (see the _Memoir_).

One round wood-carving: a female bust.

Two large dishes, German or Swiss, which stood on his table.

One tin case holding pencils and brushes for water-colour sketching.

One tin water-bottle for sketching.  One sketching camp-stool.  One
sketching portfolio.  One water-colour paint-box.

One sloping desk.

"I shoud explain that I cannot write unless I have a sloping desk."   See
"Quis desiderio--" (_The Humour of Homer_).  This is the sloping desk on
which he wrote in Clifford's Inn.

One pair of chamois horns given him by Dionigi Negri at Varallo Sesia.

One handle and webbing in which he carried his books to and from the
British Museum.

A photograph showing one wall of Butler's chambers in Clifford's Inn with
the fireplace and accompanying sketch plan.

Some of the pictures mentioned in Section I. of this Catalogue can be
identified, and also the following nine items, which are on the
mantelpiece or on the wall.  The two dolls (no. 9) were destroyed by
Butler about 1898; the other eight objects are included in this
collection at St. John's.

One pair of pewter candlesticks (1).

One bust of Handel (2).

One plate, which he called "Three Acres and a Cow," because it seems to
be decorated in illustration of that catch-word (3).

Two crockery holy water holders; only one is shown in the photograph (4).

Three medallions under glass, representing, in some kind of plaster, the
Madonna di Oropa (5).

Three crockery examples of "the Virgin with Child" (6).

One only is shown in the photo.  One of these is from Oropa where the
Virgin and Child are both black, see "A Medieval Girl-School" in _The
Humour of Homer_.  These holy water holders and Madonnas are some of the
cheap religious knick-knacks which are sold at most Italian Sanctuaries.
We often brought back a few and gave them away to Gogin, Alfred, Clark,
and other friends.

Bag for pennies (7).

Miss Savage's kettle-holder (8).

In Oct. 1884 (see the _Memoir_), about four months before her death, Miss
Savage sent Butler a present of a pair of socks which she had knitted
herself, and she promised to make him some more.  Butler gratefully
accepted her gift, but

   "As for doing me any more, I flatly forbid it.  I believe you don't
   like my books, and want to make me say I won't give you any more if
   you make me any more socks; and then you will make me some more in
   order not to get the books.  No, I will let you read my stupid books
   in manuscript and help me that way.  If you like to make me a kettle-
   holder, you may, for I only have one just now, and I like to have two
   because I always mislay one; but I won't have people working their
   fingers out to knit me stockings."

_Miss Savage to Butler_, 27_th_ _Oct._ 1884: "Here is a kettle-holder.
And I can only say that a man who is equal to the control of two kettle-
holders fills me with awe, and I shall begin to be afraid of you. . . .
The kettle-holder is very clumsy and ugly, but please to remember that I
am not a many-sided genius, and to expect me to excel in kettle-holders
_and_ stockings is unreasonable.  I take credit to myself, however, for
affixing a fetter to it, so that you may chain it up if it is too much
disposed to wander.  My expectation is that it is too thick for you to
grasp the kettle with, and the kettle will slip out of your hand and
scald you frightfully.  I shall be sorry for you but you would have it,
so upon your own head be it."

_Butler to Miss Savage_, 28_th_ _Oct._ 1884: "The kettle-holder is
beautiful; it is like a filleted sole, and I am very fond of filleted
sole.  It is not at all too thick, and fits my kettle to perfection."

The subject is developed antiphonally between Miss Savage and Butler
throughout several letters, and near the close comes this note made by
Butler when "editing his remains" at the end of his life:

"I need hardly say that the kettle-holder hangs by its fetter on the wall
beside my fire, and is not allowed to be used by anyone but myself.  S.B.
January 21st, 1902."

Two small Dutch dolls (9)

Mr. Charles Archer Cook was at Trinity Hall with me.  He is mentioned in
the _Memoir_ as having edited _The Athenaeum_ in October, 1885, during
the absence of MacColl, the editor.  Butler and I sometimes dined with
him and met his brother, Mr. (afterwards Sir) Edward T. Cook and his
wife.  Mr. and Mrs. E. T. Cook came to tea with Butler, and Alfred was
showing them round the sitting room, while Butler was in his painting
room, where he had gone to look for something.

"These are the pictures which the governor does when he is away," said
Alfred, "and these are the photographs which he brings back with him and
the plates and images."

"And please, Alfred, what are these two little dolls among the pictures?"

"Oh, those, ma'am!  Those are ---."

"Alfred!" exclaimed the reproving voice of Butler, who although in the
next room, had overheard.

"Well, Sir," replied Alfred, "that's what we always call them."

Alfred was referring to a recent divorce case in which the names of two
ladies had been brought prominently before the public, but Butler did not
approve of the names being blurted out in the presence of visitors.

A brass bowl which my brother Edward brought from India.

It always stood on my table in Staple Inn, and Butler used it as an ash-
tray and played with it and liked the sound it made when he struck it.  He
also liked its shape, and was pleased with it for not being "spoilt by
any silly ornament."  It is mentioned in the _Memoir_ (II. xliii.) when
Miss Butler comes to my rooms after Butler's death.

A leather (or sham leather) cigarette case from Palermo (but, I am
afraid, made in Germany).

It contains a fragment of a Greek vase picked up on Mount Eryx and given
to Butler by Bruno Flury.  He was one of the young men who came about him
in 1892 when he broke his foot on the mountain; he afterwards settled in
Pisa, where I saw him in 1901.

Two of the blue and white wine cups mentioned in _Alps and Sanctuaries_
(ch. xxii.; new ed., ch. xxiii.), "A Day at the Cantine."

"These little cups are common crockery, but at the bottom there is
written Viva Bacco, Viva l'Italia, Viva la Gioia, Viva Venere or other
such matter; they are to be had in every crockery shop throughout the
Mendrisiotto, and they are very pretty."

The Viva is not written in full; it is represented by a double V, which
overlaps, so that it looks like W, but the letter W is not used by the
Italians, so there is no chance of its being mistaken by them for
anything but the symbol meaning Viva.

A small horn and tortoiseshell snuff-box from Palermo.

It contains three coins wrapped in paper and a piece of the pilgrim's
cross at Varello-Sesia.  The cross is mentioned somewhere in Butler's
books as being of very hard wood, so hard that the pilgrims have great
difficulty in cutting pieces off it.  So had I in cutting off this bit.

The day after Butler's death Alfred came to me with the coins and said:

"I took these out of his pockets, Sir; I thought you ought to have them."

Butler's watch and chain.

Butler used to possess his grandfather's gold watch and chain.  He was
robbed of the watch in Hyde Park one night just before starting on one of
his journeys to Canada; he then bought this silver watch at Benson's,
and, if I remember right, wore it with the gold chain.  He was robbed of
the chain in Fetter Lane, Oct. 1893 (_Memoir_, II. 167).  He then bought
a silver chain, which, with the silver watch, passed under his will to
Alfred.  Alfred wore them until 1919, when the watch was declared by an
expert to be beyond repair.  I took it from him, giving him in exchange
the watch of my brother Charlie, who had recently died.

The matchbox which Alfred gave to Butler.

When Alfred knew that I was handing Butler's watch and chain on to St.
John's College, he said:

"And then, Sir, they had better have this matchbox which I gave him."

I looked at it and said, "Well, but Alfred, how can that be?  It is dated
1894, and he gave your matchbox to the Turk in 1895."

"I know he did, Sir; and when he told me I was very angry and went out
into Holborn and bought this one and had it engraved same as the other."

"With the old date?"

"Yes, Sir, just the same as the one he gave to the Turk."  See the _Note-
Books_, p. 286.




WORKS BY SAMUEL BUTLER.


London: A. C. Fifield, 13, Clifford's Inn, E.C. 4.

A FIRST YEAR IN CANTERBURY SETTLEMENT.  New Edition, with other early
essays.  7s. net.

EREWHON.  14th Impression of Tenth Edition.  6s. net.

THE FAIR HAVEN.  New Edition.  7s. net.

LIFE AND HABIT.  Third Edition, with Addenda.  7s. net.

EVOLUTION OLD AND NEW.  Third Edition, with Addenda.  7s. net.

UNCONSCIOUS MEMORY.  Third Edition, with Introduction by Marcus Hartog.
8s. 6d. net.

ALPS AND SANCTUARIES.  New and enlarged Edition.  Illustrated.  7s. 6d.
net.

LUCK OR CUNNING?  Second Edition, corrected.  8s. 6d. net.

THE AUTHORESS OF THE ODYSSEY.  Illustrated.  Reprinting.

THE ILIAD RENDERED INTO ENGLISH PROSE.  7s. net.

SHAKESPEARE'S SONNETS RECONSIDERED.  8s. 6d. net.

THE ODYSSEY RENDERED INTO ENGLISH PROSE.  Illustrated.  8s. 6d. net.

EREWHON REVISITED.  8th Impression.  5s. net.

THE WAY OF ALL FLESH.  12th Impression of Second Edition.  7s. net.

THE HUMOUR OF HOMER AND OTHER ESSAYS.  With Portrait and Biographical
Sketch of the Author by H. F. Jones.  7s. net.

GOD THE KNOWN AND GOD THE UNKNOWN.  2s. 6d. net.

THE NOTEBOOKS OF SAMUEL BUTLER.  With Portrait.  Ed. by H. F. Jones.  5th
Impression.  7s. net.

EX VOTO.  Illustrated.  _To be reprinted_.

SELECTIONS.  Arranged by S. Butler.  _Out of print_.

THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF DR. SAMUEL BUTLER.  2 vols.  Illustrated.  _Out
of print_.




WORKS BY HENRY FESTING JONES.


London: A. C. Fifield.

DIVERSIONS IN SICILY.  6s. net.

CASTELLINARIA AND OTHER SICILIAN DIVERSIONS.  6s. net.

CHARLES DARWIN AND SAMUEL BUTLER.  A Step towards Reconciliation.  1s.
net.

London: Macmillan & Co.

SAMUEL BUTLER, Author of "Erewhon."  A Memoir.  2 vols.  Illustrated.
42s. net.

Printed by
W. Heffer & Sons Ltd., Cambridge.
England.




Footnotes:


{8}  Joanna Mills in _The Life and Letters of Dr. Samuel Butler_, I. 90.