[Secretary's Circular No. 7--1919-20.]




SCHEDULE OF SALARIES FOR TEACHERS, MEMBERS OF THE SUPERVISING STAFF
AND OTHERS.

JANUARY 1--AUGUST 31, 1920, INCLUSIVE.


                              Boston School Committee,
                                  Secretary's Office, January 20, 1920.


                    In School Committee,
                              January 5, 1920.

1. ORDERED, That the salaries of teachers, members of the supervising
staff, and others in the public schools are hereby established for the
period January 1 to August 31, 1920, inclusive, in accordance with the
following schedules and subject to the following restrictions:

1A. ORDERED, That the salaries of teachers, members of the supervising
staff, and others who receive annual salaries, which have been fixed by
Order 1A of the salary schedule for the year ending August 31, 1919,
shall, during the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, inclusive, be
fixed and advanced in accordance with the provisions of said order;
provided, that the salaries of such persons in those ranks in which the
minimum and maximum salaries in the following schedules have been
increased over the minimum and maximum provided in the existing
schedules by the same amount, be advanced by said amount on January 1,
1920, and the salaries of such persons shall thereafter be advanced on
their several anniversaries by the annual increment provided in the
following schedules; and provided further, that the final increment
shall be such amount as shall place the teacher on the maximum salary of
the rank.

1B. ORDERED, That the salaries of teachers, members of the supervising
staff, and others who receive annual salaries, which have been fixed by
Order 1A of the salary schedule for the year ending August 31, 1919,
shall, during the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, inclusive, be
fixed and advanced in accordance with the provisions of said order;
provided, that the salaries of such persons in those ranks in which the
minimum and maximum salaries have been increased over the minimum and
maximum provided in the existing schedules by unequal amounts, shall be
advanced in the following manner:

(a) The salaries of those teachers, members of the supervising staff,
and others who have not reached the maximum salary of the existing
schedule or who have not served one year on said maximum salary, shall,
on January 1, 1920, be advanced by the amount of the increase in the
minimum of their respective schedules over the minimum of the existing
schedules; and the salaries of such persons shall thereafter be advanced
upon their respective anniversaries by the annual increment provided in
the following schedules until the new maximum of their ranks is reached;
provided, that the final increment shall be such amount as shall place
the teacher upon the maximum salary of the rank.

(b) The salaries of those teachers, members of the supervising staff,
and others who on December 31, 1919, have reached the maximum salary of
the existing schedules, and who have served one full year thereon, shall
on January 1, 1920, be advanced by the amount of the increase in the
maximum of the following schedule over the maximum of the existing
schedule.

1C. ORDERED, That the salaries of masters of day elementary and day
intermediate schools which have been fixed by Order 1B of the existing
salary schedule shall, during the period January 1 to August 31, 1920,
inclusive, be fixed and advanced in accordance with the provisions of
said order; provided, that the salaries of such masters shall on January
1, 1920, be advanced by the amount of two hundred forty dollars ($240)
per annum, and the salaries of such masters shall thereafter be advanced
upon their respective anniversaries by the annual increment provided in
the following schedule until the new maximum of their rank is reached;
and provided further, that the salaries of those masters who have
reached the maximum of the existing schedule on December 31, 1919,
shall, on January 1, 1920, be advanced by the receipt of one hundred
twenty dollars ($120) per annum to the new maximum of their rank in the
following schedule:


  NORMAL SCHOOL.

  Head master, first year $3636,
    annual increase $144, maximum    $4,500
  Master, Director of Model
    School, first year $2916,
    annual increase $144, maximum     4,068
  Masters, first year $2484, annual
    increase $144, maximum            3,492
  Junior Masters, first year $1620,
    annual increase $144, maximum     3,060
  First Assistants, first year $1812,
    annual increase $96, maximum      2,484
  Assistants, first year $1668,
    annual increase $96, maximum      2,340
  Clerical Assistant, first year
    $984, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,272


  LATIN AND DAY HIGH SCHOOLS.

  Head Masters, first year $3636,
    annual increase $144, maximum    $4,500
  Masters, Heads of Departments,
    first year $2484, annual
    increase $144, maximum            3,492
  Junior Masters, appointed before
    June 1, 1906, who have
    attained the rank of Master       3,204
  Junior Masters, appointed after
    June 1, 1906, first year $1764,
    annual increase $144, maximum     3,060
  Assistant Principals, first year
    $2004, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,484
    The rank of assistant principal shall be abolished as the
    position becomes vacant by the retirement of the present
    incumbents.
  First Assistants, first year
    $1,812, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,484
  Industrial Instructors, Heads
    of Departments (High School of
    Practical Arts), first year
    $1,812, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,484
  Assistants, first year $1,452,
    annual increase $96, maximum      2,316
  Junior Assistants, first year
    $1,008, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,200
  Instructors in Mechanical
    Department (Mechanic Arts
    High School), first year
    $1,764, annual increase $144,
    maximum                           2,772
  Co-ordinator, first year $2,412,
    annual increase $96, maximum      3,180
  Co-operative Instructors
    (Brighton, Charlestown,
    Dorchester, East Boston and
    Hyde Park High Schools),
    first year $1,884, annual
    increase $144, maximum            3,036
  Industrial Instructors
    (Dorchester, East Boston, and
    Hyde Park High Schools and
    High School of Practical
    Arts), first year $1,500,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,932
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)

  Clerical Assistants, first year
    $984, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,272


  INSTRUCTORS--LATIN AND DAY HIGH SCHOOLS.

  Commercial Branches

  Instructors, first year $1764,
    annual increase $144, maximum     2,772
  Assistant Instructors, first year
    $1452, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,932

  Manual Arts

  Instructors, first year $1764,
    annual increase $144, maximum     2,772
  Assistant Instructors, first year
    $1452, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,932

  Salesmanship

  Assistant Instructors, first year
    $1452, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,932


  BOSTON CLERICAL SCHOOL

  Head Master, first year $3636,
    annual increase $144, maximum     4,500
  Head Instructors in Bookkeeping
    and Head Instructors in
    Stenography, first year $2484,
    annual increase $144, maximum,    3,492
  Clerical Instructors, first year
    $1728, annual increase $144,
    maximum                           2,736
  Clerical Assistants, first year
    $1440, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,208
  Teachers of English, first year
    $1440, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,016
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)


  DAY ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS AND DAY INTERMEDIATE SCHOOLS

  Masters, first year $3060, annual
    increase $120, maximum            3,660
  Sub-Masters in charge, in addition
    to the regular salary
    of their rank                       240
  Sub-Masters, first year $1,740,
    annual increase $120, maximum     2,820
  Masters' Assistants in charge,
    in addition to the regular
    salary of their rank                240
  Masters' Assistants, first year
    $1,788, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,076
  First Assistants, Grammar
    School, first year $1,788,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,980
  First Assistant, Primary School     1,752
    The rank of First Assistant, Primary School, shall be abolished
    on the retirement or promotion of the present incumbent.
  First Assistants in Charge, first
    year $1,788, annual increase
    $96, maximum                      2,076
  Assistants, first year $1,080,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,752
  Prevocational Assistants, first
    year $1,380, annual increase
    $96, maximum                      1,956
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)

  Clerical Assistants, first year
    $984, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,272


  KINDERGARTENS.

  Director, first year $2,100,
    annual increase $120, maximum     3,060
  Assistant Director, first year
    $1,788, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,980
  First Assistants, first year
    $1,416, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,608
  Assistants, first year $960,
    annual increase $96, maximum     $1,344
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)


  TRADE SCHOOL FOR GIRLS.

  Master (including regular,
    Summer and evening terms),
    first year $3060, annual
    increase $120, maximum            3,660
  Heads of Departments, first
    year $1956, annual increase
    $96, maximum                      2,340
  Trade Assistants, first year
    $1512, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,896
  Helpers, first year $1164,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,452
  Vocational Assistants, first year
    $1428, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,004
  Instructor in personal and shop
    hygiene, first year $1452,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,740
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)

  Bookkeeper (including evening
    and Summer terms), first
    year $984, annual increase
    $96, maximum                      1,428
  Clerical Assistant (including
    evening and Summer terms),
    first year $984, annual
    increase $96, maximum             1,332


  BOSTON TRADE SCHOOL.

  Master (including day, evening
    trade, Summer, continuation
    and trade extension
    classes), first year $3468,
    annual increase $144, maximum     4,332
  Vice-Principal (including day,
    evening trade, Summer,
    continuation and trade
    extension classes), first year
    $2412, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           3,180
  Division Heads, first year
    $2172, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,844
  Shop Foreman, first year $1836,
    annual increase $96, maximum      2,028
  Shop Instructors, first year
    $1548, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,932
  Instructors in Academic and
    Technical Branches, first
    year $1860, annual increase
    $120, maximum                     2,700
  Instructors, first year $1548,
    annual increase $96, maximum      2,028
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)

  Bookkeeper (including evening
    term), first year $984, annual
    increase $96, maximum             1,368
  Clerical Assistant, first year
    $984, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,272


  EVENING CLASSES

  Assistants in Charge, per evening   $5.50
  Assistants, per evening              4.50
  Second Assistants, per evening       3.00
  Toolkeeper, per evening              1.00


  HORACE MANN SCHOOL FOR THE DEAF

  Principal, first year $3,060,
    annual increase $120, maximum     3,660
  Assistants, first year $1,260,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,836
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)


  EVENING SCHOOLS

  Director, first year $2,940,
    annual increase $120, maximum    $3,900
  Supervisors of Divisions in
    Evening Elementary Schools,
    per evening                       $4.00

  High

  Principals, per evening              7.00
  Assistants, per evening              4.50
  Typewriting Assistants, per evening  3.00
  Laboratory Assistants, per evening   2.50
  Clerical Assistants, per evening     3.00
  Temporary Clerical Assistants,
    per evening                        2.00

  Elementary.

  Principals, per evening             $5.50
  First Assistants, per evening        3.50
  Assistants, per evening              3.00
  Assistants, Classes in Lip Reading,
    per evening                        4.00
  Clerical Assistants, per evening     2.00


  DAY SCHOOL FOR IMMIGRANTS.

  Instructors, first year, $1,428,
    annual increase $96, maximum     $2,004
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)


  CONTINUATION SCHOOL.

  Principal, first year $3,636,
    annual increase $144, maximum    $4,500
  Heads of Divisions, first year
    $2,004, annual increase $120,
    maximum                           2,844
  Division Foremen, first year
    $1,932, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,316
  Shop Foremen, first year $1,836,
    annual increase $96, maximum      2,028
  Shop Instructors, first year
    $1,548, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,932
  Trade Assistants, first year
    $1,512, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,896
  Helpers, first year $1,164,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,452
  Instructors, Boys' Classes,
    first year $1716, annual
    increase $26, maximum             2,388
  Assistants, first year $1428,
    annual increase $96, maximum      2,004
  Vocational Assistant, first year
    $1428, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,004
  (For teachers employed on a per diem basis see Order No. 2.)

  Clerical assistants, first year
    $984, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,272


  SUMMER REVIEW SCHOOLS.

  High School.

  Principal, per session              $7.00
  Assistants, per session              4.00

  Elementary Schools.

  Principal, per session               5.00
  Assistants in charge of branches,
    per session                        3.50
  Assistants, per session              3.00


  EDUCATIONAL INVESTIGATION AND MEASUREMENT.

  Assistant Director, first year
    $2340, annual increase $120,
    maximum                          $3,060


  DEPARTMENT OF HOUSEHOLD SCIENCE AND ARTS.

  Director, first year $2220,
    annual increase $120, maximum    $3,180
  Assistant Director, first year
    $1596, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,980
  Teachers of Cookery, first year
    $1080, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,752
  Teachers of Sewing, first year
    $1080, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,752


  DEPARTMENT OF MANUAL ARTS.

  Director, first year $3420,
    annual increase $120, maximum    $3,780
  First Assistant Director, first
    year $2100, annual increase
    $120, maximum                     3,420
  Assistant Directors, first year
    $1908, annual increase $120,
    maximum                           3,108
  First Assistants in Manual Arts,
    first year $1812, annual
    increase $96, maximum             2,484
  Assistants in Manual Arts, first
    year $1692, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,172
  Shop Foremen, first year $1,836,
    annual increase, $96, maximum     2,028
  Shop Instructors, first year $1548,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,932
  Foremen, Shop Work, first year
    $1836, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           2,028
  Instructors, Shop Work, first year
    $1548, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,932
  Instructors in Manual Training,
    Elementary Schools, first year
    $1632, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,920
  Assistant Instructors in Manual
    Training, Elementary Schools,
    first year $1332, annual
    increase $96, maximum             1,812


  MEDICAL INSPECTION.

  Director                           $3,300
  School Physicians                     804
  School Physician assigned to
    Certificating Office              1,200


  NURSES

  Supervising Nurse, first year
    $1,740, annual increase $120,
    maximum                          $1,980
  School Nurses, first year $1,080,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,368


  DEPARTMENT OF MUSIC

  Director, first year $3,420,
    annual increase $120, maximum    $3,780
  Assistant Directors, first year
    $2,292, annual increase $120,
    maximum                           3,012
  Assistants in Music, first year
    $1,620, annual increase $96,
    maximum                           1,908


  PENMANSHIP

  Director                           $2,124


  PHYSICAL TRAINING

  Director, first year $3,420,
    annual increase $120, maximum    $3,780
  Instructors in Physical Training,
    first year $1,812, annual
    increase $96, maximum             2,100
  Assistant Instructors in Physical
    Training, first year $1,452,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,740
  Instructor of Military Drill,
    first year $2,004, annual
    increase $120, maximum            2,484
  Assistant Instructors of Military
    Drill                             2,040
  Armorer, first year $1,200, annual
    increase $120, maximum            1,680


  PLAYGROUNDS.

  Play Teachers--
    One Session                       $2.00
    Two Sessions                       4.00
  Supervisors--
    One Session                        2.50
    Two Sessions                       5.00
  First Assistants--
    One Session                        1.75
    Two Sessions                       3.50
  Assistants--
    One Session                        1.50
    Two Sessions                       3.00
  Assistants in Sand Gardens--
    One Session                        1.10
    Two Sessions                       2.20

"One Session" in this schedule for playgrounds shall mean from the close
of school on afternoons and Saturday mornings during the school weeks,
and one-half day during the summer season.

"Two Sessions" shall mean forenoon and afternoon.


  GARDENING.

  Supervisors of Gardening--
    One Session                       $2.50
    Two Sessions                       5.00
  Instructors in Gardening--
    One Session                        1.75
    Two Sessions                       3.50
  First Assistants in Gardening--
    One Session                        1.50
    Two Sessions                       3.00
  Assistants in Gardening--
    One Session                        1.25
    Two Sessions                       2.50
  Assistants in School Gardens--
    One Session                         .75
    Two Sessions                       1.50

"One session" means from the close of school on afternoons, Saturday
mornings during school weeks, and one-half day during the Summer term.


  DEPARTMENT OF PRACTICE AND TRAINING.

  First Assistant Director, first
    year $2,244, annual increase
    $120, maximum                    $2,844
  Assistant Directors, first year
    $2,004, annual increase $120,
    maximum                           2,484


  SPECIAL CLASSES.

  Director, first year $2,220,
    annual increase $120, maximum    $2,700
  Medical Inspector                   2,328
  First Assistants in Charge,
    first year $1,932, annual
    increase $96, maximum             2,124
  Instructors, first year $1,260,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,836


  SPEECH IMPROVEMENT CLASSES AND CLASSES FOR CONSERVATION
  OF EYESIGHT.

  Instructor in Charge of Speech
    Improvement Classes              $2,160
  Instructors, first year $1,260,
    annual increase $96, maximum      1,836

Teachers promoted to the rank of instructor from the rank of assistant,
day elementary schools, shall be placed upon that year of the schedule
for the rank of instructor that is at least $72 higher than the rate
they are on in the rank of assistant, day elementary schools, at the
time of their promotion.


  VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE.

  Director, first year $2412,
    annual increase $120, maximum    $2,652


  EXTENDED USE OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS.

  Director                           $3,000


  SCHOOL CENTERS.

  Managers (per hour)                 $1.00
    (All School Centers not to exceed 800 hours per year.)
  Associate Managers (See Orders Nos. 22 and 23.)
  Conductors, per session              4.50
  Special Leaders, per session         3.50
  Leaders, per session                 2.50
  Special Helpers, per session         2.00
  Doormen, per session                 1.50
  Pianists, per session                1.50
  Helpers, per session                 1.00
  Matrons, per session                 1.00
  Lecturers for public lectures
    not illustrated, English or
    non-English, per lecture, not
    more than                          5.00
  Lecturers for public lectures
    illustrated with uncolored
    slides, when lantern and
    operator are furnished by the
    School Committee, per lecture,
    not more than                     10.00
  Per lecture (colored or uncolored
    slides) for non-English
    speaking people, not more than     7.00
  (Slides furnished by School Committee.)

  Lecturers for public lectures
    illustrated with colored slides
    when lantern and operator
    are furnished by the School
    Committee, per lecture, not
    more than                         15.00
  Per Lecture (colored or uncolored
    slides) for non-English
    speaking people, not more than     8.00
  (Slides furnished by lecturer.)

  Lecturers for public lectures
    illustrated with uncolored
    slides when lantern and operator
    are furnished by the lecturer,
    per lecture, not more than        12.00
  Lecturers for public lectures
    illustrated with colored slides
    when lantern and operator
    are furnished by the lecturer,
    per lecture, not more than        20.00
  Lecturers for public lectures
    illustrated with both colored
    slides and motion pictures
    furnished by the lecturer or
    lectures illustrated with songs
    or picture plays, character dramas
    or dramatic impersonations,
    per lecture, not more than        25.00
  Stereopticon lantern operators,
    per session                        1.50
  Motion picture operators, per
    session                            2.50


  TEACHERS SPECIALLY ASSIGNED.

  To the Model School Sub-Master,
    in addition to the
    regular salary of his rank      $240.00
  To the Model School, Master's
    Assistant, First Assistant in
    Charge, Assistants in Grades,
    First Assistant in Kindergarten
    and Assistant Kindergarten,
    in addition to the regular
    salary of their rank             192.00
  To Teachers in Day High Schools,
    assigned to afternoon Industrial
    Classes, per two-hour period       3.00
  To Assistants, Day Elementary
    Schools, assigned to Latin or
    Day High Schools or to a
    special department, in addition
    to the regular salary of their
    rank                             192.00
  To Assistants, Day Elementary
    Schools, and Assistants, Day
    Intermediate Schools, assigned
    to the Continuation School, if
    employed six hours per day, in
    addition to the regular salary
    of their rank                       192
  To Assistants, Day Elementary
    Schools, and Assistants, Day
    Intermediate Schools, assigned
    to prevocational classes if
    employed six hours per day, in
    addition to the regular salary
    of their rank                       192
  To Assistants, Day Elementary
    Schools, and Assistants, Day
    Intermediate Schools, assigned
    to Boston Disciplinary Day
    School, in addition to the
    regular salary of their rank        144
  To Teachers of Cookery or Sewing,
    assigned to Prevocational Classes
    for Girls, in addition to the
    regular salary of their rank         96

The additional compensation above provided for teachers specially
assigned shall cease upon the return of said teachers to their former
positions and shall not be taken into consideration in determining the
compensation to which they may be entitled upon appointment to any other
rank or grade.


2. ORDERED, That the compensation of substitute and temporary teachers
is hereby fixed for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, inclusive,
at the following rates for each day of actual service, one-session days
being reckoned as whole days:

  NORMAL, LATIN AND DAY HIGH SCHOOLS.

  Master and Junior Masters,
    Normal, Latin and Day High
    Schools                           $6.00
  First Assistants and Assistants,
    Normal, Latin and Day High
    Schools                            5.00
  Junior Assistants, Latin and
    Day High Schools                   5.00
  Instructors and Assistant
    Instructors in Commercial
    branches or Physical Training,
    Latin and Day High Schools         4.50
  Instructors in Manual Arts and
    Co-operative Instructors in
    Day High Schools                  10.00
  Assistant Instructors in Manual
    Arts, Latin and Day High Schools   6.00
  Industrial Instructors in Day
    High Schools                       4.00
  Instructors in Military Drill,
    Latin and Day High Schools         8.00
  Special Assistants in Mechanical
    Departments, per day:
      First year                       3.50
      Second year                      4.00
      Third and subsequent years       4.50
  Emergency Special Assistants
    in Mechanical Departments,
    per day                            2.00
  Special Assistants, Industrial
    Departments, per day:
      First year                       2.50
      Second year                      3.00
      Third and subsequent years       3.50
  Teacher Coaches or Coaches in
    Latin, Day High Schools, and
    Boston Trade School, per day       4.00


  BOSTON CLERICAL SCHOOL.

  Teacher Assistants, per day          5.50
  Aids, per day                        3.00


  DAY ELEMENTARY AND DAY INTERMEDIATE SCHOOLS.

  Sub-Masters                         $5.00
  Masters' Assistants, First
    Assistants in Charge, and First
    Assistants Grammar                 4.50
  Assistants, per day                  4.00
  Assistants, Horace Mann School,
    per day                            4.00
  Special Assistants, Horace Mann
    School, per day                    4.00
  Special Assistants, in grades, per
    day                                4.00
  Special Assistants, Fort Strong
    School                             4.00
  Prevocational Assistants, per day    5.00
  First Assistants, Kindergarten--
    One Session                        2.75
    Two Sessions                       3.50
  First Assistants, Kindergarten
    for one session, and Assistants,
    Kindergarten, for one session
    during the same day                3.50
  Assistants, Kindergarten--
    One Session                        2.25
    Two Sessions                       3.00
  Special Assistants, Kindergarten--
    One Session                        2.25
    Two Sessions                       3.00
  Instructors, Special Classes         4.00
  Teachers of Cookery and Sewing,
    per day                            4.00
  Attendants, Open Air Classes, per
    day                                1.50
  Special Assistants, Day School for
    Immigrants, per half-day           3.00

  Continuation School and Industrial Schools and Classes.

  Instructors Academic and Technical
    Branches, Boston Trade School      6.00
  Vocational and Trade Assistants
    (Continuation School and Trade
    School for Girls)--
      Per hour                         1.25
      Not to exceed per day            5.00
  Aids (Continuation School and
    Trade School for Girls), per day:
      First year                       3.50
      Second year                      4.00
      Third and subsequent years       4.50
  Helpers (Continuation School
    and Trade School for Girls),
    per day                            4.50
  Toolkeepers (Continuation School and
    Boston Trade School), per day:
      First year                       3.00
      Second year                      3.50
      Third and subsequent years       4.00
  Special Instructors (Continuation
    School), per half-day              4.00
  Special Assistants (Continuation
    School), per half-day              2.00
    In this school, one two-hour session, together with such
    preparatory and follow-up work as may be required, shall
    constitute one-half day of service for teachers employed and
    paid on the basis of each half-day of service.
  Student Aids (Trade School for
    Girls), per day:
      First year                       2.00
      Second and subsequent years      2.50
  Apprentice Helpers (Boston Trade
    School), per day:
      First year                       4.00
      Second and subsequent years      5.00
  Special Shop Foremen and Foremen
    Shop Work, Department of
    Manual Arts, Boston Trade
    School, and Continuation School   10.00
  Instructors, Shop Work, and
    Shop Instructors, Department
    of Manual Arts, Boston Trade
    School, and Continuation School    8.00
  Shop Assistants, Department of
    Manual Arts, per day               6.00
  School Nurses                        4.00
  School Physicians                    4.00
  Temporary Clerical Assistants,
    Latin, Day High, Continuation,
    Trade Schools and Day
    Elementary Schools, per day        3.50

and that the compensation of substitute and temporary teachers of other
ranks than those enumerated herein shall be one four-hundredth part of
the minimum salary of the respective ranks for each day of actual
service.


3. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, any
teacher or member of the supervising staff who may be designated by the
Superintendent, in accordance with the regulations to fill a vacancy
caused by the death, disability or absence of a principal of a school or
district, or of a director, assistant director, supervisor or
supervising nurse, for a continuous period exceeding two weeks, shall
receive in addition to his or her regular salary one-half of the
difference between the said salary and the minimum salary of the higher
position during the time of such service, but not including the Summer
vacation. Teachers who may similarly be designated to fill the positions
of sub-master, master's assistant, first assistant in charge, first
assistant in charge, special classes, or first assistant, kindergarten,
shall be paid at the rate of ninety-six dollars ($96) per year in
addition to the regular salary of their rank.


4. ORDERED, That during the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, or
during such portion thereof as the Dorchester High School is conducted
on the two-platoon system, the head master of that school shall be paid
at the rate of three hundred dollars ($300) per annum in addition to the
regular salary of his rank.


5. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, high
school teachers designated to take charge of a branch or colony of a
high school in a separate building shall be paid at the rate of three
hundred dollars ($300) per year in addition to the regular salary of
their rank.


6. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, the
salaries of temporary teachers of salesmanship are hereby established in
accordance with the following schedule:

  Day High Schools, per period        $2.00
  Evening High Schools, per period    $2.00
  Continuation Schools, per half-day  $2.00

(The term "period" is a teaching unit accompanied by a definite
requirement of follow-up work.)


7. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, deductions
on account of absence of temporary teachers serving on an annual salary
shall be made on the same basis as that established for regular
teachers.


8. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, in
addition to the compensation provided for master's assistants, first
assistants in charge, and assistants, day elementary schools, those
assigned to classes attended exclusively by boys in grades above the
third in the Agassiz, Bigelow, Dudley, Dwight, Eliot, Frederic W.
Lincoln, Lawrence, Quincy, Sherwin, Thomas N. Hart and Wendell Phillips
Districts, shall be paid additional compensation at the rate of
forty-eight dollars ($48) per year, beginning with the second
anniversary of their assignments to such classes and continuing until
the expiration of such assignment.


9. ORDERED, That teachers who have been reappointed to the Boston Trade
School, Trade School for Girls, or the Continuation School following
service in either school ending not later than the close of the regular
term in the preceding year, or appointed to service in other parts of
the day school system following such service in such schools, shall be
paid for the period between August 31 and the date of the reopening of
the schools at the same rate for said period as they were paid during
the month of June last preceding.


10. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, Marie A.
Solano be paid at the rate of six hundred dollars ($600) per year in
addition to her regular salary as first assistant, head of department,
Normal School, during her special assignment to the supervision of the
foreign language work in intermediate schools and classes, and for
lectures and instruction to the teachers of foreign languages in
intermediate schools and classes.


11. ORDERED, That Ellen S. Bloomfield, assistant, day elementary
schools, assigned to special service as teacher of penmanship in the
Normal and day elementary schools, be paid at the rate of one hundred
forty-four dollars ($144) per year in addition to the regular salary of
her rank, for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920.


12. ORDERED, That the compensation of Sarah M. Lilley and Helen L.
Smith, teachers of classes for conservation of eyesight, is hereby
established at the rate of five dollars and seventy-five cents ($5.75)
per day of service for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920.


13. ORDERED, That the salary of Eleanor J. O'Brien, vocational
assistant, Department of Vocational Guidance, is hereby established at
the rate of twenty-one hundred forty-eight dollars ($2,148) per year, to
take effect January 1, 1920.


14. ORDERED, That the salary of Irving O. Scott, vocational assistant,
Department of Vocational Guidance, is hereby established at the rate of
two thousand fifty-two dollars ($2,052) per year, for the period January
1 to August 31, 1920.


15. ORDERED, That the salary of Margaret M. Sallaway, vocational
assistant, Department of Vocational Guidance, is hereby established at
the rate of seventeen hundred forty dollars ($1,740) per year, for the
period January 1 to August 31, 1920.


16. ORDERED, That the salary of Ethel Fletcher, vocational assistant,
Department of Vocational Guidance, is hereby established at the rate of
sixteen hundred forty-four dollars ($1,644) per year, for the period
January 1 to August 31, 1920.


17. ORDERED, That the employment of Frances McCormick as temporary
vocational assistant, Department of Vocational Guidance, is hereby
authorized on six days a week, from January 1 to August 31, 1920, and
that she be paid during such employment at the rate of five dollars ($5)
per day.


18. ORDERED, That the compensation of Louis K. Hull, temporary
prevocational instructor, is hereby established at the rate of two
dollars and twenty cents ($2.20) per two-hour period of service for the
period January 1 to August 31, 1920.


19. ORDERED, That the compensation of pianists employed in connection
with physical training exercises in the Public Latin School is hereby
established at the rate of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per
session for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920.


20. ORDERED, That the compensation of the pianist in the Normal School
is hereby established at the rate of fifty cents (50c) per hour during
the period January 1 to August 31, 1920.


21. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, Ethel D.
Hodson and Caroline A. Shay be paid at the rate of one hundred dollars
($100) per year in addition to their regular salaries as instructors,
Day School for Immigrants, during their special assignment to assist the
Director of Evening Schools in the organization and supervision of
classes in Americanization, provided that such additional compensation
shall not be taken into consideration in determining the compensation to
which said teachers may be entitled upon appointment to any other rank
or grade.


22. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, the
compensation of Margaret M. Higgins and Mary S. Keene, associate
managers in school centers, is hereby established at the rate of six
dollars and fifty cents ($6.50) per day, for service not more than the
equivalent of one hundred nineteen (119) days during said period.


23. ORDERED, That for the period January 1 to August 31, 1920, the
compensation of Elizabeth W. Pigeon and Elizabeth R. Teaffe, associate
managers in school centers, is hereby established at the rate of five
dollars and fifty cents ($5.50) per day, for service not more than the
equivalent of one hundred thirty-nine (139) days during said period.


24. ORDERED, That Alice McNally be paid at the rate of fifty dollars
($50) per year in addition to her regular salary as assistant, Eliot
District, during her special assignment to the Fort Strong School for
the period January 1 to August 31, 1920.


25. ORDERED, That the salary of the Chief Attendance Officer is hereby
established at the rate of thirty-one hundred twenty dollars ($3120) per
annum, to take effect January 1, 1920, and to continue until otherwise
ordered.


26. ORDERED, That the salary of Attendance Officers is hereby
established in accordance with the following schedule, to take effect
January 1, 1920, and to continue until otherwise ordered:

First year $1464, annual increase $108, maximum $2004.


27. ORDERED, That the salary of the Supervisor of Licensed Minors is
hereby established at the rate of twenty-two hundred twenty dollars
($2220) per annum, to take effect January 1, 1920, and to continue until
otherwise ordered.


28. ORDERED, That the salaries of permanent substitutes in the public
schools are hereby established at the rate of four hundred forty-four
dollars ($444) for the period January 1 to June 30, 1920, both included.


ORDERED, That for the year ending August 31, 1920, the salary of the
research assistant, department of educational investigation and
measurement, is hereby established at the following rate:

Minimum, $1,272; annual increase, $96; maximum, $1,944.


ORDERED, That for the year ending August 31, 1920, the salary of the
rank of examiner in penmanship is hereby established at the rate of
twelve hundred dollars ($1,200) per year.


ORDERED, That the Superintendent is authorized to fix the compensation
of lecturers employed in school centers and whose compensation is not
fixed in the salary schedule; provided, that such compensation,
including any service or other charges, shall in no case exceed forty
dollars ($40) per evening.


                    In School Committee,
                              January 19, 1920.

ORDERED, That the compensation of the rank of emergency assistant, day
elementary schools, is hereby established at the rate of three dollars
($3) per day of actual service, to take effect Jan. 1, 1920.


ORDERED, That the compensation of the rank of emergency kindergarten
assistant, day elementary schools, is hereby established at the rate of
two dollars ($2) for one session of actual service, and three dollars
($3) for two sessions of actual service during the same day, to take
effect Jan. 1, 1920.


                                        THORNTON D. APOLLONIO,
                                                      Secretary.




(2,500-1-20-'20.)

  [Illustration: Allied Printing
  Trades Union Council Label 21
  Boston, Mass.]




    +--------------------------------------------------------------+
    |                                                              |