CHAPTER XII

FORWARD AGAIN

Time was when the mention of Del Pinzo's name would have brought forth
a yell of anger from the cowboys of Diamond X ranch.  He was an enemy
at once to be feared and loathed, for he did not fight fair, and he was
of the detested, half-breed Mexican type.

But now, when the cry of Dick apprised the others of the presence of
this ruthless cattle rustler, thief and all-around bad man, there was
no answering shout.  One reason for this was that caution was
necessary, so that the presence of the skirmishing party be not
disclosed, and another was that the information that it was Del Pinzo,
and presumably his gang who had ambushed our friends, came as a great
surprise.

"Del Pinzo?" half gasped Snake Purdee as he ran to Dick's side.

"Yes, there he is!  See!"

The boy rancher pointed to a figure standing near a stunted bush.

There was no doubt about it--Del Pinzo it was, and at his usual
business, firing on some one, for he had a rifle raised, in the act of
taking aim.

"I'll spoil one shot for him, anyhow," announced Snake.

He whipped out his .45, there was a sharp crack, and the gun of the
Mexican half breed dropped to the ground, discharging as it fell, but
harmlessly.  And then the outlaw, with a yell of rage, gripped his
right hand in his left.  For Snake had fired at the man's trigger
member, thus disabling him for the time.

And, as he turned, and beheld who had thus "winged" him, Del Pinzo gave
another cry--as filled with surprise as had been the exclamation of
Dick on beholding the Mexican renegade who, it was supposed, was safely
locked up in penalty for many crimes.

"That your bunch down there?" called Del Pinzo to Snake, and he waved
his uninjured hand toward the camp amid the rocks.

"You said something, Del Pinzo," grimly answered the cowboy.  "What you
all up to now?  Be careful--I have you covered!" he warned.  "And if
your men want to bask in the sweet sunshine of your presence from now
on, tell 'em to chuck down their guns.  Also, up with your hands!"

There was a stinging menace in the tones that Del Pinzo knew well
enough to obey.  His hands, one dripping blood, were raised over his
head, and he called something in Spanish to his followers, as yet
unseen by the boy ranchers and their friends.

Instantly the scattered firing on the part of the outlaws ceased, and,
catching this air of silence, Yellin' Kid gave an order that silenced
his guns.

"Now, what's the game?" demanded Snake, holding the whip hand as it
were.  "What do you mean by firing on us?"

"I did not know it was you," declared the half breed.  "We set out to
look for the Yaquis--"

"The Yaquis?" interrupted Snake.

"Sure!  They have risen, it is said, and I and my men are on their
trail!"

This was news indeed--another surprise, in fact.  That Del Pinzo was
speaking the truth could scarcely be believed.  In the first place this
was almost an unknown accomplishment with him, and in the second place
the Yaquis were of his own kind--reckless outlaws who would stop at
nothing to get booty, either in cattle or money.  It was more likely
that Del Pinzo and his gang were seeking an opportunity to join forces
with the band of up-rising Yaquis.

"Oh, you're after the Yaquis; are you!" asked Snake.

"Sure, senor Purdee!" Del Pinzo spoke fairly good English, and he could
be polite when it suited him.  "We saw that some one was encamped in
the rocks, and I took them for the Yaquis.  So we opened fire--it is
with sadness that I know now it was your friends whom I shot at."

"Um!  Maybe so--maybe not," grimly retorted the cowboy.  "Anyhow it's
us, and it seems to be you.  I thought you were somewhere else," he
added referring to the fact that Del Pinzo had been arrested.  It was
not the first time the half breed had been in the toils of the law,
following cattle raids on Diamond X or other ranches.

In the previous books of this series I have related some of Del Pinzo's
outrages.  He was concerned in the water fight that so nearly ended
disastrously for Bud and his cousins.

"Oh, I get out!" said Del Pinzo, easily, and with a shrug of his
shoulders which might mean that coming forth from a jail was nothing in
his life.

"So I see," observed Snake with a grin.  "By hook or crook, I reckon.
Well, I don't know as we have anything against you and your bunch just
at present.  If you're after the Yaquis you're on the same errand as
us.  But, if you'll excuse me sayin' so, I'd rather travel my own road."

This was a delicate hint to which Del Pinzo was not oblivious.

"Surely, senor," he answered, grinning.  "You go your way and I go
mine.  Only let the fighting cease.  As you say--there is nothing
against me--now."

"Which isn't saying that there won't be, or hasn't been," spoke Snake.
"File out your men--without guns, you understand!" he snapped.  "And
then you can hit your own trail.  Looks like there'd been a mistake all
round.  We thought you the Yaquis."

"Oh, Senor Purdee!"  There was false injury in the tones.

"And I'm not so sure but what it will turn out that way in the end,"
added the cowboy grimly.  "However, we'll give the benefit of the doubt
for the time being.  File out!"

Del Pinzo gave an order, and his band of disreputable half breeds like
himself, including several Indians, though not of the Yaquis tribe,
marched out, hands above their heads, while Snake and his men, the boy
ranchers in the van, watched.

"Is that all?" asked Snake, when the outlaws stood in a row amid the
rocks.  He was taking no chances on leaving a hidden, lurking foe to
fire behind their backs.

"All, Senor Purdee.  Shall we go?"

"When I tell you to, yes.  Now, Del Pinzo, you know I don't trust you,
and there's no use soft soaping the situation.  I wouldn't trust you
with a Mexican dollar.  So here's what you've got to do.

"March over there," and he indicated a bunch of scrub about half a mile
away.  "Stay there until we get breakfast and are on our way.  When
we're far enough off I'll fire a shot, and that'll mean you can come
over here again, get your horses and guns, and take after the Yaquis,
if it suits you."

"We want to drive the Indians back," declared Del Pinzo.

"Yes, I reckon they're picking on your preserves, that's the reason,"
said Snake.  "Well, this is a free country.  As long as you're out of
jail--though how you beat it I can't guess--you can do as you please, I
s'pose--as long as it doesn't interfere with us.

"So hit any trail you like as long as it isn't ours.  Now
remember--don't make a break for your horses and guns until I fire a
shot."

"So be it, Senor.  And one thing more?"

"What is it?"

"May I put down my hands?  I am wounded--"

"Oh, put 'em down?  I didn't more than graze you to keep you from
shooting one of our men.  Put 'em down!"

With a sigh of relief the outlaw lowered his hands, an example followed
by his men, all of whom were unarmed.  They marched behind their leader
to the place designated, and for the first time Snake breathed easily.

"How do you reckon he got here?" asked Bud, when hurried preparations
were under way for breakfast.

"Give it up," answered Snake, who had sent some men to collect the guns
and horses of the Del Pinzo gang.

"He may have bribed his way out of jail, or have broken out, and we'll
have to let that go until later.  He may really be trying to drive back
the Yaquis, for fear they'll steal things that he has an eye to
himself.  Or he may be lying--I think most likely the last.  Anyhow he
happened to strike this place the same time as we did, and either
knowing who we were, or not knowing, and that part has me guessing, he
tried to pick us off.  However we'll give him the slip this time."

"I don't see how, if you leave him his horses and guns," put in Yellin'
Kid.

"Well, he and his men can't do much riding on horses without saddles
and bridles," said Snake, "and as for the guns--well, I'll leave them
for him at the first ranch I come to."

"You mean you're going to take his guns with you?" asked Bud.

"Surest thing you ever said, son.  Think I'd trust him with any
shooting irons behind me.  And we'll just strip his horses, too.  We
can pack along his saddles and bridles.  If they want to ride bare back
that's up to them."

And this was the plan followed.  There were several pack animals in the
outfit from the Diamond X, and on these the saddles and bridles from
the outlaws' horses were packed.  Then the guns were collected from the
ambush, and taken along when the start was made after breakfast.

"Hit the trail!" cried Snake, when preparations were complete.

Off in the distance, hungrily waiting for the signal that would let
them return, stood Del Pinzo and his gang.  Their food was not
disturbed.  They had the means for making breakfast.

Off rode Snake and his followers.  At a distance of little more than
half a mile from the scene of the fighting, on a rising hill, the
cowboy stopped.

"Here's where we let 'em go back and eat," he said grimly.

He raised his gun and fired a shot.  Instantly the gang, with Del Pinzo
in the lead, rushed for the place where their property had been left.

"We spiked their guns, I think," chuckled Bud, as he rode beside his
cousins.

"I guess yes!" laughed Nort.

Forward they rode once more--on the trail of the Yaquis.  As they
dipped down into a little valley there came to their ears faint yells
of rage.

"They've found their saddles gone!" said Nort.

Again came a shout.

"They've missed their bridles!" said Dick.

A louder yell!

"No guns!" shouted Bud.  "Oh, this is one time we put it all over Del
Pinzo!"

Forward rode the outfit from Diamond X.




CHAPTER XIII

WEARY CAPTIVES

"Rosemary, are you able to stand it?"  Floyd put this question to his
sister as the weary captives were urged along the trail by the Yaquis.

"We've just _got_ to stand it, Floyd," was the brave answer.  "Help
must come to us, and we must bear up until it does come."

"Oh, I can stand it all right--I really don't mind.  But for you--it
must be terrible!  And the worst of it is I can't do a thing to help
you."

"Not now, no, Floyd," Rosemary answered, with a brave attempt at a
smile.  "But we must watch our chance.  These Mexican Indians aren't
like our own--or like our own used to be.  They aren't half as smart.
We ought to be able to escape from them if we get half a chance."

"Well, maybe, Rosemary.  But they're bad enough if they aren't smart."

Floyd spoke with all the evidence on his side.  For a more
disreputable, unsavory, desperate and wicked band of men it would be
almost impossible to find.  Repulsive in face, dirty, tattered and
torn, wearing all sorts of cast off garments, a few in blankets,
astride bony and broken horses, most of them, but each one armed with
gun, revolver or knife, it was a crew of pirates, cut-throats,
highwaymen to be carefully shunned.

"Well, I'm glad to see you keeping your courage up, Rosemary," remarked
her brother, trying to ease himself in the saddle.  It was not very
feasible, as the captives were partly tied to prevent their escape, and
they could not shift about as they pleased.

"Oh, we have to make the best of it, Floyd," his sister told him.
"They haven't treated us roughly yet."

"No, and I wonder at it."

"It's because they have taken us for a ransom, I'm sure.  They know if
they don't hand us over in good shape there will be no ransom money for
them."

"Who do you think they count on getting it from?"

"Our relatives, of course.  Or maybe they think Uncle Sam will
intervene on our behalf."

"I wish to goodness he would--that he'd send a band of U.S. regulars
after this bunch of pirates.  Golly!  How the Yaquis would scatter; eh,
Rosemary?"

"Maybe we'll see that soon, Floyd.  And maybe the boys from the Diamond
X will come to our rescue.  You know Bud's mother wrote that he and his
two eastern cousins had a ranch of their own now.  My message ought to
reach some one."

"I hope it does, Rosemary.  But who's this coming up?"

The talk of brother and sister had attracted the attention of the
Indians, and there had been muttered comments.  Following this one of
the knot of guards around the two captives had spurred ahead to where
Paz rode.  Then back with the messenger came riding an Indian better
mounted and equipped than most of the members of the band.

He forced his horse between the steeds of Rosemary and Floyd, and gave
each of them a grin he may have intended to be friendly.

"What's the idea--Mike?" asked Floyd.

"Mike?  Why do you call him that?" asked Rosemary.

"Because he looks friendly enough to be an Irishman," was the answer.
"See, he has a turned up nose, I verily believe he has Irish blood in
him.  Let's call him Mike."

"Mike" grinned, though doubtless he understood nothing of what was said.

"He does look Irish," agreed Rosemary.  "But I don't see how."

The explanation probably was that some wandering, adventuring Irishman
had married an Indian woman.  The Yaquis, like many other Indian or
native tribes often intermarried.  In fact it was this that in a
measure led to their downfall.  For they lost the ideals of their race,
disease crept in and to-day many a band of what was once a noble people
is but a dragged-out remnant, steeped in crime.

The Yaquis were once among the best of the Mexican Indian tribes.
Though not large in numbers they were clean-living and of high
character.  The Spanish conquest of Mexico marked the beginning of the
end for them, as it did many another Mexican race.

There was once a great civilization existing in the narrow strip of
land connecting North and South America.  Now only the faintest traces
remain.

Once the Indian tribes flourished, they may even have had a written
language, of which now only a few idiograms remain.  The men and women
were skilled in basketry, pottery and the making of gold and silver
ornaments.

But they fell upon evil days, or evil days came to them, it matters
little which, and they began to go down.  Today there are only a few
thousands of the Yaquis left, and they have degenerated into train
robbers along the Southern Pacific line.  They live like beasts, they
have mingled with negroes, degenerate Spaniards and Mexicans until it
is almost an insult to apply the name "Indian" to them.

And it was a band of such natives as this that had captured Rosemary
and Floyd.  Kept as much as possible to the confines of what might be
termed, unofficially, a reservation, the Yaquis occasionally broke
through the line of Mexican soldier guards and went on a rampage, often
crossing the border into Arizona, as happened in the spring of 1921,
when several Americans were killed in a border town.

It was an uprising of this same nature which had spelled trouble for
Rosemary and her brother.  They had happened along at the wrong time,
as it were.

Tired and weary, in body and spirit, the captives were urged forward.
"Mike" as our friends had dubbed him, seemed good natured enough, for
he kept a perpetual grin on his face.  His mission seemed to be to ride
between Rosemary and Floyd, and prevent any collusion to escape.

However there was no time or chance to think of that now.  The
cavalcade filed along a narrow, rocky gorge, from which there was no
side trail.  Paz and some of his more intimate followers rode in the
van, and the rear guard was made up of ragged Indians--with apologies
for using the name.

Rosemary and Floyd would not have had a chance had they been able to
turn their horses and make a bolt for it.  So they must ride on.  They
were too weary to talk now, they could only hope for the best.  When
would the rescuers come?

A halt was made at noon, and some coarse food was passed to the
captives.  Rosemary shuddered at it and turned away.

"You must eat," Floyd told her.  "Got to keep up your strength you
know."

And she managed to choke down a few mouthfuls.

The afternoon passed wearily.  They were going deeper into the
mountains it seemed.  There appeared to be some dispute between Paz on
one side and a few of his followers on the other.  And it seemed to
have to do with a place to camp for the night.  The men wanted to stop
while the sun was yet in sight, but Paz insisted on going on until it
was below the jagged peaks.  Then he indicated a place where camp was
to be made.

Mike slid off his horse, and, loosening the ropes, indicated that
Rosemary and Floyd were to do the same.  So cramped and stiff was
Rosemary that she fell in a heap as she slid from the saddle.  With a
cry Floyd sprang to her aid, only to be thrust back by Mike.

"What do you mean?" yelled the boy.  "I want to help my
sister--you--you--"

He was spluttering with rage as he raised his hand, and looked about
for a rock with which to attack the Indian.

"Don't--Floyd!" called Rosemary calmly.  "I am all right--just numb,
that's all!  Don't get into a fight.  They may separate us!"

Indeed that did seem to be the orders given by Paz, who rode up a
moment later.  For Mike took Rosemary by the arm, and was leading her
away, while another Indian, dirty, greasy and with an evil grin on his
fat face, thrust Floyd to one side.

"Stop!" suddenly cried Rosemary.  She swung free of Mike's grasp, and
in an instant that individual was looking straight into the muzzle of a
small but very serviceable automatic.




CHAPTER XIV

SURROUNDED

Bubbling over with mirth, at the manner in which they had gotten the
best of Del Pinzo and his gang, the outfit from Diamond X rode on the
trail again, once more intent on trailing the Yaquis that had captured
Floyd and Rosemary.  And if Bud, Nort and Dick could, at that moment,
or thereabouts, have seen Rosemary boldly defying the evil-faced Mike
with her automatic, their admiration for the girl would have been
manifested by yells of approval.

But Bud and his chums, with their cowboy friends, were all unaware of
what was happening farther on in the desolate mountain whither the
Indians had led their captives.  If they had been they probably would
not have ridden on in such comparative leisure.  For they did not rush
at headlong pace, knowing they had a long, long trail ahead of them,
and must conserve not only their strength, but, what was more
important, that of their horses.

Without horses it would have been impossible to have gone on for more
than a short distance in that wild country.  As I have explained motor
cars, even the marvelous little Ford, would have been out of the
question, so rough was the trail, so winding amid rocks, now down in
some narrow defile, hardly wide enough for a single rider, and again
ascending some slope tangled with brush and dead trees.

Knowing themselves to be thus dependent on their horses our heroes
saved their steeds all they could.  It was for this reason that, much
as they hated Del Pinzo and his gang, they would not deprive these
outlaws of what was a means of life--their horses.

"But they won't ride after us, and I don't believe they'll give us any
more trouble," chuckled Bud, as he visioned the outlaws, used to their
comfortable if clumsy saddles, riding bareback.  To a horseman this is
the limit of torture, for the horses of the west are no circus animals,
with broad, flat backs.  Instead, they generally have a ridge of bone
on which it is almost impossible to ride, even when a blanket or two is
strapped on in place of a saddle.  Only an Indian can manage to ride
along with but a blanket for a seat.

"Yes, we put one over on them all right," agreed Dick.

"The only thing about it is that they held us up," remarked Nort.
"We're several hours behind our schedule now."

"It can't be helped," spoke Bud, looking at a deep scratch on his
hand--a scratch caused by a glancing bullet.  "We can't really do
anything toward rescuing Rosemary and Floyd until we strike the trail
of the Yaquis, and it's mostly guess work until then."

"But when we do locate them!" exclaimed Nort, as he gripped the handle
of his gun, "we'll let 'em see what a mistake they made!"

"You got rid of a mouthful that time, son," observed Yellin' Kid.  And
then, lifting his voice he roared out:

  "As I was ridin' on the trail,
  My true love for to see.
  I met a four-legged grizzly bear,
  An' th' grizzly he met me!

  "'Oh kind Mr. Bear,' I gently called,
  'Move on!' but he shook his head.
  So then I ups with my .45
  An' fills him full of lead!"


Having gotten this out of his "system," Yellin' Kid seemed to feel
better.  He smiled genially at the boy ranchers, and flapping his hat
down on the side of his pony sent the animal ahead in a cloud of dust
to join some of his companions in the lead.

Thus, making merry as possible under the circumstances, the outfit from
Diamond X resumed the trail, the more experienced cowboys looking here
and there for any "sign" that would indicate the presence or the
passage of the Yaquis.

As a matter of fact Snake Purdee did not expect to "meet up" with any
of the Indians for some time.  He and Rolling Stone had talked the
matter over, and Rolling Stone had given the benefit of his experience
in trailing Yaquis.

"With them," said the new acquisition to Diamond X, "it's a sort of a
flash in the pan.  They get excited for some reason or other, have a
war dance, a pow wow or some ceremony, and before they know it some
crazy leader has taken the trail with some of his friends, and they're
bent on shooting up some Mexican or American town, getting strong drink
when they can, and stealing everything they can lay their dirty paws on.

"That's when they're in the first rush of excitement, and I take it
that it was on a time like this the Yaquis took Miss Rosemary and
Floyd.  Why they did this, instead of shooting 'em, as they generally
do, I can't make out.  The Yaquis don't ordinarily use those methods."

"Unless they took my cousins to hold for ransom," suggested Bud.

"Well, of course that's possible, but I didn't know the Yaquis were
that smart," answered Rolling Stone.  "Still, some new leader may have
gotten together a band, or it may be some half breed, or even some
renegade American is at the bottom of this.  I can understand a chap
like that holding prisoners for ransom.

"But what I started to say was that once the first wild outburst is
over, the Yaquis will keep mighty quiet.  They won't go about with a
brass band, advertising their hiding places."

"You mean it won't be easy to find them?" asked Nort.

"That's it, son.  They're going to be mighty cute and foxy, and while a
Yaqui isn't in it with our old time American Indians in the matter of
covering a trail, still we aren't going to have any walkover.  We've
got our work cut out for us."

"I believe you!" shouted Yellin' Kid.  "But we'll get the devils sooner
or later."

"The sooner the better," said Rolling Stone quietly, and there was in
his very quietness a menace which the boys understood very well.  Every
hour that Rosemary and Floyd remained in the hands of the Yaquis meant
an ever increasing danger.  And once the mad frenzy of the Indians wore
off and they began to realize what they had done, anticipating the
consequences once they were captured with the prisoners in their
possession, there was hardly a question of what they would do to
Rosemary and Floyd.  The captives would be killed to get them out of
the way.

It was this that urged the rescue party ahead with all the speed
possible, and consistent with preserving their horses' power to travel.

In spite of wounds, and some were seriously hurt (one dying later)
there was no sign of gloom in the midst of the party of which the boy
ranchers formed an important element.  Some of the cowboys sang, and
Yellin' Kid intoned another verse or two of the many songs with which
he seemed plentifully provided.

Coming to a deep ravine, along which the trail led into the mountains,
where it was reported the Yaquis had headed, Snake Purdee called a halt.

"What's the matter now?" asked Rolling Stone.

"Do you see anything?" asked Bud, for he noticed the veteran cowboy
looking down into the black depths.

"No," answered Snake slowly, "but it strikes me this is a good place to
get rid of the saddles and truck we took offen Del Pinzo.  No use
carting the duffle along.  It's no good to us and it only tires our
pack mules.  Heave it down this gully, boys and we'll ride lighter."

This was soon done, and the baggage animals, at least, went forward
with easier burdens.  The trail became more rough as it led upward, but
Snake explained that they would cross one range of the mountain, and
come to a level plain which must be traversed before the second range
would be reached.

"And we'll either come across the Yaquis in the plain, or as we go up
the second mountain," said the cowboy.  "That will be about their limit
I fancy."

They camped that night on the downward slope of the first mountain,
having crossed the ridge through a narrow pass, not easy to negotiate.
There was a more tense feeling when this night camp was made than at
any time before.

"For it seems now, somehow," explained Bud, "that we're within striking
distance of the Yaquis.  We're trailing 'em close!"

"The closer the better--so, we can get a few shots at 'em!" declared
Nort.

"Will they really make a stand and fight?" asked Dick.

"I don't know," Bud replied.  "I never--"

"They'll fight all right!" interrupted Rolling Stone.  "They'll fight
now just through fear of being captured.  The first hot impulses that
caused them to run wild are cooling off.  They'll be worse to tackle
now than when they first took the war path, for they will be cool and
calculating, while before they were hot headed, and anyone who used
half his brains could best 'em.  Yes, we aren't going to have a picnic."

"Well, we didn't come for that," said Dick grimly.

He and his companion boy ranchers were willing to endure all the
hardships and dangers with the more seasoned cowboys, and Bud and Nort
who, until within a comparatively recent time were unused to western
ways, were now accounted as capable of Bud, than which there was no
higher praise.

There was evident in the manner in which campfires were built, and a
system of sentinel guards posted, that the older men realized the
nearness of danger.  The cowboys had dropped their half bantering
manner, and sat grim-lipped and thoughtful of eye about the blaze.
This change in their manners affected our youthful heroes who looked at
one another somewhat apprehensively, and more than once let their hands
stray to their weapons.

But the night passed without untoward incident, if we except a false
alarm given by Bud when he was standing guard.  He had been pacing
backward and forward for some hours, and it was almost time for his
relief, when he saw, peering over the top of a rock, what he took to be
the feathered headdress of an Indian.  Forgetting, for the moment that
the Yaquis did not adopt the picturesque adornments of the American
redmen, Bud fired, at the same time letting out a yell.

Of course, this roused the whole camp, and you can appreciate Bud's
chagrin when his "Indian" proved to be nothing more than a waving
branch of a bush topping a rock.  The waving leaves had looked like
feathers in the starlight, by which alone Bud had seen them.

"Well, I wasn't taking any chances," he said, when the cause of his
alarm was ascertained.

"That's right," Yellin' Kid assured him.

Morning saw the party in saddle again, and as better time could be made
on the down trail, they reached the intervening plain of the valley,
between the two mountain ranges well before noon.

A halt was made for "grub," and it was after this meal, when they were
about to proceed again, that an astounding discovery was made.  Dick
gave the alarm.  He had gone off a little way to get his pony, which
had strayed, when he saw, on the far horizon, a band of horsemen.  They
were too distant to be made out clearly, but against the intensely blue
sky Dick saw waving lances, and he at once shouted:

"Indians!"

This was enough to focus all eyes, first on him and then on the
approaching band.  The waving lances could plainly be seen now.

"And look there!" cried Nort, as he pointed to the North, a direction
exactly opposite to that whence the horsemen discovered by Dick were
approaching.

"More Indians!" shouted Yellin' Kid.

Snake Purdee leaped to a high rock and with rapid gaze swept the
horizon.

"They're coming from all directions," he said grimly, as he leaped down
and began a rapid survey of their position, with a view to its defence.
"We're being surrounded!"

And this was so.  From all points there rode in on the outfit from
Diamond X an ever narrowing circle of horsemen, many of whom carried
lances which pointed toward the zenith.

"They aren't Yaquis," exclaimed Rolling Stone.  "Those Mexican Indians
don't carry lances.  They must have met up with a band from some
American reservation and have gotten them to go on the warpath.  This
looks bad!"




CHAPTER XV

WITH THE TROOPERS

With a skill and foresight which never seemed to leave them, the
leaders of the rescue expedition had selected the place for the dinner
stop with a view to its possible defense in case of emergency.  This
was part and parcel of life in the west, especially when on an
expedition of this character.

In consequence there were several natural places of refuge and hiding,
behind which a fight could be conducted.  And as soon as it was
ascertained that a body of horseman--hostile it seemed they must
be--were riding against them, the first thought was how best a fight
could be conducted.

"Get in the horses!" commanded Rolling Stone.  "They'll shoot them off
first crack out of the box, for they'll know we're done for without our
animals."

As the rescuers had been about to move when the approaching party was
discovered, and as some of the cowboys actually had their horses in
hand, the securing of the remainder of the steeds was a work of no
great moment.

At one edge of the roughly outlined circle in which the noon camp had
been pitched, was a group of big rocks, that would make a natural
stable and hiding place for the horses.  The animals were led into this
little corral, and made fast there by lariats.  As much of the baggage
as possible was piled in with the horses.

This much done by Bud and his friends it was necessary to look to
themselves, for the strange horsemen were slowly but surely coming on,
and it was beyond question that they had entirely surrounded our
heroes.  From all points of the compass, a thin line it is true, but
one in which there were no breaks, in came the attackers.

"We've got to form a circle ourselves," said Snake grimly.  "Get down
as low as you can, boys, each one behind a rock, and with one at your
back if you can make it.  They won't rush us at first.  They'll try to
pick us off until they find out how many of us there are."

Quickly the others followed his advice.  It was an admirable place to
defend, and other things being equal could be held by a small band
against a large body.  But the factors of food and water would enter
into the fight, and though the camp was watered by a little stream,
everyone from Diamond X knew the first act of the attackers would be to
go higher up and cut off the supply of fluid.  In this hot summer
season men and beasts could only last a short time without water.

Then, having seen to it that the boy ranchers and the others were in as
good a position of defense as possible, Snake Purdee picked out his own
little niche and laid out on the ground in front of him his supply of
cartridges.

Each man--and by "man" I include the boy ranchers--had a rifle and a
revolver, or, rather, automatic, each weapon using cartridges of the
same caliber.  Thus only one sort of ammunition had to be packed, and
there was greater efficiency afforded.

"Get ready," called Yellin' Kid in as low a voice as he ever used.
"They've come to a stop for a talk, and they'll begin shooting soon I
reckon."

The feet of the steeds ridden by the advancing horsemen had raised a
cloud of dust which hung about them like a hazy curtain, preventing a
clear view.  In fact, after the first glimpse of the riders they had
only been seen as dim figures approaching through this haze of dust.

But now, as they had stopped, as Yellin' Kid had said, the dust began
to drift away, and, for the first time our friends had a comparatively
clear view of those surrounding them.

It was Bud who first gave the good news.  Looking intently at a
horseman nearest him, the boy suddenly leaped to his feet and gave a
shout that could be none other than joyous in its meaning.

"Get down, you idiot!" cried Snake.  "Do you want a bullet through you?"

But the lad continued to shout and yell, waving his hat, and there was
no fusillade of shots from the ring of horsemen.  Then, for the first
time Bud made himself understandable, for he shouted:

"They aren't Indians!  They aren't Indians!  They're United States
Troopers!  Hooray!  Now we've got our help!"

"Troopers?" repeated Snake, for a cloud of dust had blown about him,
greatly obscuring his vision.

"Troopers--sure!" yelled Nort, now seeing what Bud had beheld.

And a moment later it was clear to all of the surrounded band that the
horsemen were, indeed, mounted men of Uncle Sam's cavalry--a company of
lancers, a type of the armed force that has gone out of existence now,
but one which was very effective in some Indian fights.

A bugle rang out clear and sweet from somewhere in that surrounding
circle of troopers, and instantly the outer edges of the ring began
closing in.  Then our friends, knowing their fright had been without
foundation, rose up from their hiding places and, standing together,
with Snake at their head as commander, waited for what was to come next.

It was not long in manifesting itself.  A trooper, evidently an orderly
from a group of officers in front of our friends, rode up, waved his
hand in place of a salute when he saw he had to deal with one of his
own kind, and asked:

"Who are you and what are you doing?"

"We're from Diamond X ranch," replied Snake, "and we're on the trail of
the Yaquis who have captured some of our friends!"

"Oh, the Yaquis!" exclaimed the trooper, in evident surprise.  "Why,
we're after the same bloody beggars!  Glad to have met you.  We seem to
be off the trail for some reason.  Captain Marshal will want to speak
to you.  Better come with me."

"Wait 'til I get my horse," murmured Snake, for, like all westerners,
he hated to take more than a few steps out of the saddle.

A moment later he was riding toward the officers of Uncle Sam's
troopers, while the remainder of the lancers riding in, mingled with
the small force from Diamond X.

"It's good to see you fellows!" chuckled Bud as the bronze-faced
soldiers gathered around the boy ranchers.

"We were just about to open fire on you," said one of the lancers, and
Nort and Dick noticed that in addition to the steel-tipped weapon each
trooper carried a carbine and wore a revolver in his belt.  The lances
were, in reality, more for show than for actual use, though in charging
the hostile Indians the spears had served many a useful purpose.

"Glad you didn't," said Yellin' Kid.  "There'd have been trouble, for
we were all primed for you," and he waved his hand toward the rocks
amid which some cowboys were just arising, picking up the ammunition
they had spread out for quick use.

"We thought you were Yaquis, and we had orders to shoot to kill,"
explained another trooper.

"And we took you for Indians--not exactly Yaquis, for they don't carry
lances," said Dick.  "I'm glad it was a mistake all around."

"But say, do you fellows know anything about these dirty Mexicans who
have crossed the border?" asked a third trooper, a lieutenant from his
stripes, it would appear.  "I won't call 'em Indians, though I reckon
they are, of a sort.  But where are they?  We got orders to take after
'em, but we can't get sight of so much as a dirty blanket."

"Well, we think we're on their trail," Bud answered, "though maybe we
are as far off as you are.  Anyhow--"

But he did not complete the sentence.  From the distance a single shot
rang out, and as all turned they saw, standing on the sharp horizon
line, a solitary figure, from near which arose a thin wisp of smoke.




CHAPTER XVI

INDIAN "SIGN"

"What's that?" cried Snake, turning from where he had been talking with
Captain Marshall.  "Real Indians this time?"

"Nothing to worry about," answered the commander of the troopers with a
smile.  "That's one of my scouts, and he's evidently found something."

"Found something?" questioned the veteran cowboy.

"Indian sign, most likely.  I sent several men out, just before we
sighted your party and took you for the Yaquis.  I told my men, if they
discovered anything, to get within sight of us and fire one shot.  Then
they were to stay on the spot until we came to investigate, and that's
what we'll do now."

"Do you think it's the trail of the Yaquis he has discovered?" asked
Nort, waving his hand toward the solitary horseman.

"It may be--I rather hope so, for we haven't had any luck thus far in
locating the beggars.  When we sighted you we thought we were in for a
fight, but it didn't happen," the captain added, his voice quite rueful.

"I notice you came along all primed for business!" chuckled Yellin' Kid.

"But we were ready for you--in case you had turned out to be those
Mexican imps!" added Rolling Stone.

"Yes, you seemed to have picked out a good spot," complimented the
cavalry captain.  "We were just talking among ourselves that we were
going to have trouble in getting you out, when we saw one of you wave a
hat and then we knew it was all right.  In a way we were glad, for this
fighting is nasty business at best, though we don't pass any of it up
when it comes our way," he added with an air of pride in his troop.

"You weren't any gladder to find out there was a mistake than we were,"
said Dick.  "You soldiers looked like a lot of Indians with lances and
scalps dangling from them."  Indeed the lances of the troopers were
decorated with wisps from the tails of horses, and, at a distance,
might have resembled grewsome human scalps.

"There are few Indians, now-a-days who use lances," said Captain
Marshall.  "They went out of date about the time Fenimore Cooper wrote
about Leather Stocking.  The Indians didn't keep to their bows and
arrows, or lances, once they could get guns and powder.  I don't know
much about the Yaquis, but I fancy they did the same--discarded their
lances, if they ever used any, and their bows, for guns."

"Another thing," added Lieutenant Snow, who was next in command to his
captain, "scalps were too precious a trophy to dangle from the point of
a lance.  Some Indians may have tied strands of human hair on their
lances, but I doubt if they used scalps.  The scalps were hung at the
belt of the man who took them, to be afterward displayed in his tepee.
But I don't believe the Mexican Indians followed that practice, though
of course I'm not certain about it."

"The modern Yaquis are mean enough to do anything," said Rolling Stone.
"What the old timers did doesn't matter now.  It's what these of today
do.  And I reckon ye've heard how a party of 'em has taken prisoners
some of their friends," and he waved his hand toward the outfit from
Diamond X, of which he was not yet a full-fledged member.

"Yes, we heard about the uprising," admitted Captain Marshall.  "We had
orders to take the trail, and we've been on it since.  Well, as long as
you are ready, we may as well trot over and see what the scout has to
report.  I hope he can put us on the real trail."

The bugle sounded, the troopers formed, and with the boy ranchers and
their friends falling in the rear, an unofficial part of the company of
regulars, the cavalcade set forth again.

On the way Snake Purdee, who rode beside Captain Marshall, told such
details as he possessed about the capture of Rosemary and Floyd.  The
officer had heard pretty much the same story, for it had been wired to
distant points on the theory that the Yaquis would scatter, and there
was no telling in which direction they would travel.

"So Del Pinzo is on the rampage again; is he?" asked the Captain, as
they neared the lone scout, who was patiently waiting to impart such
information as he had.

"Well, he won't rampage an awful lot until he gets a new outfit!"
chuckled Yellin' Kid, who had ridden up to be on hand when the scout
was reached.

"What do you mean?  Did you shoot him up?" asked the cavalry captain.
"If you did you ought to get a medal of honor, for of all the rascals
in this section he's the worst."

"We shot him and his followers up a bit," admitted Snake, "but we
didn't damage 'em as we ought.  However we took their horse furniture
and guns away and left 'em their animals.  It'll be a few days before
they get active again."

"Good!" exclaimed Captain Marshall.  "And now we'll hear what Kelly has
to report."

The scout saluted as his commanding officer rode up, and the others,
realizing that there was a certain need of reserve in this first
interview, held back until the captain should signify that he was ready
to talk to them.  For a time Captain Marshall and Private Kelly talked
in low tones, the scout frequently leaning over to point to something
on the ground, the captain gazing intently where his trooper indicated.
Finally the commander waved his hand to invite his fellow officers and
troopers, as well as the members of Diamond X, to approach.

"Kelly has found it," said the captain.  "Plenty of Indian sign, which
shows the Yaquis, or some of them at least, passed this way.  Here's
the trail, and we'll follow it.  Do you want to come with us?" he asked
of Snake Purdee.

"Well, we'd like to, if it isn't asking too much.  Our main object is
to get within shooting distance of these Yaquis, and save this Rosemary
girl and her brother."

"Precisely our object," the captain said.  "And as long as we have the
same business I think we can do better together than if we separate.
Your men will undoubtedly be of service to us if the trail gets
fainter, and there's no telling how many are in this band, so the more
guns we have the better."

"My idea," agreed the leader from Diamond X.  "And now let's have a
look at this Indian sign.  Rolling Stone here claims to know a lot
about the Yaquis, and he may be able to put us wise to some of their
wrinkles.  Come here, Stone!" he invited.

In order not to obliterate the faint marks in the soil which indicated
the passage of a body of horsemen, the troopers, with Bud and his
friends, had halted some distance away from the lone scout.  The latter
had remained a little way off the trail, so his own horse's feet would
not mingle with those of the enemy.

For some time the older cowboys, Rolling Stone, Captain Marshall and a
few of his men who had fought Indians years back, gazed at the Indian
"sign" as it is called.  In this sense the word means the evidences
left by a passing body of Indians, the casual and accidental record of
passage.  The word is also used to indicate arbitrary marks and symbols
made by one body of Indians to leave a message for some body of
following savages.  This sign language is very difficult for a person
not accustomed to it to read, though it can not be said that the
degenerate Yaquis had the art down as fine as had our own American
Indians of two or three generations ago.

"Well, they've been along here, and they're headed that way," said
Rolling Stone, thus confirming the opinion of the older troopers.

"Then the thing to do is to follow them," said the Captain.  "Give the
signal, bugler!" he called.

Once more the clear notes rang out, and the party started off after the
Yaquis.

Nort and Dick, riding beside Bud, toward the rear of the cavalcade,
looked down to see what the "sign" consisted of.  Aside from some hoof
marks in the earth they saw nothing.

"They might have been made by our own ponies," observed Nort.

"Yes, but they weren't," Bud declared.

"How can they tell?" asked Dick.

"Oh, I don't know exactly, but there are dozens of little points that
an Indian trailer looks for," Bud answered.  "He can tell whether the
horses trotted or walked.  He can tell whether the man who rode him was
a tenderfoot or a cowpuncher.  And of course it's easy enough to tell
in which direction a horse is going."

"Unless they put the shoes on backwards," said Nort.

"There isn't much of that done," said Bud.  "And, as a matter of fact,
as you know, they don't shoe many horses out here.  They let 'em run
barefoot.  Anyhow, it looks as though we really were on the trail of
the Yaquis at last."

"I hope so!" agreed Nort and Dick.




CHAPTER XVII

AN ALARM

While the boy ranchers and their friends from Diamond X had joined
forces with Uncle Sam's troopers and were warm on the trail of the
Yaquis, the squalid, degenerate and vicious band that had captured
Rosemary and Floyd still retained possession of their captives.  Though
disheartened and apprehensive, Rosemary and her brother had made up
their minds to one thing--they would not be separated--come what might.

For his sister's sake Floyd had firmly decided that if they attempted
to take Rosemary off by herself he would, at any cost, make an effort
to follow, even if it resulted in his death at the hands of the Indians.

As for Rosemary, she had but one thought--to remain near her brother at
any cost.  And as she had so far managed to conceal from the Yaquis the
fact that she possessed her efficient automatic, and a supply of
ammunition, she felt a sense of security that otherwise would not have
been with her.  She, too, resolved on desperate measures before she
would let them separate her and Floyd.

So when Mike, as the one who carried out the orders of his villainous
chief Paz, tried to take Rosemary off by herself, probably to break her
spirit and induce her to send a letter to her friends asking that
ransom money be forwarded--when Mike tried to do this he received one
of the surprises of his miserable life as he found himself looking into
the muzzle of Rosemary's gun.

"Ugh!" grunted the Indian.

"I don't know exactly what that means," said Rosemary coolly, as she
held the gun with steady hand so that it "covered" Mike, "but my
brother and I are going to stay together.  If you try to separate us
I'll shoot as many of you as I can, and I'm a pretty good shot," she
added grimly.  "Then I'll shoot myself and him before I'll let you try
any of your tricks on us!"

She spoke with such fierce earnestness that, though all of her words
may not have been intelligible to her captors, they at least understood
her intent.

Paz gave a grunt, half of admiration and half of anger at this
unexpected change in his plans.  Rosemary suddenly wheeled, facing him.
She swung her weapon to cover the evil rascal.

There was a spurt of flame, a puff of smoke and before the crack of the
report snapped out the dirty, greasy hat of Paz went spinning from his
head.

A cry of dismay arose from the followers of the Yaqui chief and mingled
with his own grunt of rage.  With a yell Mike reached for his gun, but
with a gesture his chief stopped him, saying something in their own
tongue.

It was, undoubtedly, a command to refrain from shooting down the
captives, which was the evident intent of Mike.  And of course that
could easily have been done, for the Yaquis were well armed with rifles
and revolvers they had stolen in their raid.  They were not the best
shots in the world, but an infuriated band of them firing on a weary
boy and girl, would have made short work of their lives.

"That wasn't a miss!" said Rosemary with a laugh, as she still held her
gun to cover the leader.  "I just wanted to shoot off your hat.  I
could have aimed lower down if I had wanted to.  That was just to show
you I know how to shoot!"

"Ugh!" grunted Paz, and there was open admiration on his rascally face.
He talked rapidly to Mike and some of the latter's companions who had
gathered around, and there was no further attempt to take Floyd away
from Rosemary.

The latter, however, was on her guard, for she feared they would rush
her, and try to take away her weapon, the unexpected display of which,
as much as her cleverness in shooting away the hat of Paz, had held the
Indians at bay for the necessary reaction to take place.

"Yo' all right!" grunted Paz with another grin, while one of his
followers picked up the hat, looking curiously at the bullet hole
through it: "Yo' smart gal!"

"Sure did have your nerve with you!" complimented Floyd, as he stood
beside his sister.  "I wish I had my gun!"

"It's probably just as well you didn't have," she said with a
smile--rather a wan and weary one it must be admitted.

"Why?" demanded Floyd.  "I'm as good a shot as you are."

"I know it.  But in matters of this kind ruffians will stand for more
from a girl or woman than they would from a man.  If you had drawn a
gun they probably would have shot you down without a moment's
hesitation.  But when I pulled mine it took them off their feet, so to
speak."

"I wish it would take off a lot of their ugly heads, and their dirty
bodies, too!" grunted Floyd.  "Say, Rose, what are we going to do?
This is a terrible pickle to be in."

"It's better to be in a pickle, for that's a sort of preservative,
Floyd," she joked, though how she had the heart to do this she herself
scarcely realized.  "As long as they keep us in pickle there's some
hope," she went on, with a tired little laugh.  "But when they take us
out--well, I'll be glad to have my gun," she added grimly.

She still held the weapon, but it was evident that she was not going to
be obliged to use it again at once, either for intimidation or actual
defence.  Paz waved to her to put it away, and she did, slipping it
into a pocket of her skirt.

It was a pocket she had had made for just such a purpose as carrying a
gun where the ordinary observer would not see it.  And if you have ever
hunted for a pocket in your mother's or sister's skirt, and given up in
disgust, you will understand that the subterfuge of Rosemary was not as
simple as at first appears.  Of course she realized that if they had
been desperately bent on finding her weapon the Yaquis could have taken
it from her.  But they evidently did not dream that she had one.  And,
now, when she had given a demonstration of how quickly she could draw
and use it, they would be a bit careful of how they approached her.

Floyd's weapon, of course had been taken from him almost at once.  He
had been taken unawares or this might not have been the case.  But it
was probably better, under the circumstances, that he had no gun.  Or,
as Rosemary had said, he might have rashly fired and the answering
shots from the Indians might have killed both of the captives.

"Go on!" Paz said to Rosemary, indicating that she and her brother
might remain together.

She had brought about what she intended.

The captives were led farther in among the rocks to a sort of natural
cave, and there they were left, some food having been tossed down where
they could reach it.  It was the most primitive sort of a prison, so
simple, in fact, that after a while Floyd said:

"What's to hinder us walking away from here, Rosemary?  They aren't
watching us, and if we pack some of this grub--rotten as it is--maybe
we can get away, and reach Diamond X ranch."

"I'm afraid we'd have small chance of that," Rosemary answered wearily.
"What I'm in hopes of is that some one will come to the rescue.  I'm
sure my note will bring us help."

"Yes, but _when_?" asked Floyd, a bit fretfully.  "It may be too late.
I'm going to see if we can't get away.  Stay here and I'll crawl up to
the top of the rock and see what the situation is."

"I think you'll find it isn't as easy as it looks," said his sister.

Nor was it.  In the first place the climb up the jagged rocks was
wearisome, but Floyd managed it.  But when he was at the top, and
looked over to see if there was a trail of escape, he was unpleasantly
surprised by a piece of stone hitting him sharply on the head.

At first he thought it was a fragment of rock dropping from above,
perhaps dislodged by his exertions.  But there was no rock over his
head.  He was at the highest peak in that immediate vicinity.

Then the lad's eyes roved about and he saw, sitting in a natural niche
of the stone, not far from him, a greasy Indian, who held his hand
poised to toss another stone at Floyd.

The Indian grinned and motioned to the captive to go back.  Then Floyd
understood.  This Indian was a sentry, placed on guard to prevent the
captives leaving.

"Well?" questioned Rosemary, as Floyd slid back to where she was
spreading out some blankets that had been tossed in with their food.

"No go," was the discouraged answer.  "They've got us hemmed in."

"We'll just have to wait--that's all," said the girl.  "I don't believe
they'll do us any real harm now.  They probably want money for letting
us go.  I expect they'll be having us write notes, soon, to Uncle
Henry, asking him to forward ten thousand dollars, or some amount like
that."

"Ten thousand dollars!" gasped Floyd.

"Mexican!" laughed Rosemary with a joking spirit she did not altogether
feel.

Thus left to themselves, in a sort of natural prison of the rocks, a
roofless cave, the captives spent the night, rolled in blankets.  It
was cool without a campfire, but none was allowed them.  Sore, stiff
and disheartened, Rosemary and Floyd arose soon after the sun was up,
and made a pretense at breakfast.  They were given some tin cups of
black, bitter and muddy coffee, without sugar, but it was most
comforting.

"I never tasted anything better!" declared Floyd, draining the last
drops.

"Nor I," agreed his sister.

There was a movement among the Indians, and it was evident that they
were about to take to the trail again.  Rosemary and Floyd wondered how
far they would thus be led into the mountains.  Surely if a demand for
ransom money was to be made it must be made soon.

But then they did not know how far they were from the ranch of their
uncle, whom they had set out to visit.  They might be going toward it
or away from it.  They had lost all sense of direction.

Suddenly something seemed to take place down in the main camp of the
Indians that indicated a new element in the grim adventure.  There were
shouts and excited cries--cries of alarm, it was very evident.

"Oh!" cried Rosemary with shining eyes.  "Maybe it's a rescue party
after us?"

"I hope so!" shouted Floyd.

A moment later Mike, his face showing unmistakable signs of fear, came
rushing in, and by signs, and talk in his own tongue, of which Rosemary
and Floyd could understand a few words, he indicated that they were to
follow him.

Meanwhile the confusion and alarm in the main body of the Yaquis
increased.

What had happened?




CHAPTER XVIII

SEPARATED

Though realizing how useless it was to question Mike--useless because
she doubted if he understood her, and equally futile because he would
not bother to answer her--still Rosemary fired a volley of questions at
the Indian.

"If I had my way I'd fire a volley of bullets at him--provided I had
them to fire!" growled Floyd.  But he had not, and Rosemary did not
deem this an occasion to again produce her weapon, which she was
keeping as a last resort.

Besides, Mike did not betray any specially hostile intentions.  He
seemed merely anxious to get Rosemary and Floyd out of their prison
pen, so to speak, and on the move.

"But what's it all about?" demanded Rosemary.  "What's the excitement,
and what's the hurry?"

For that there was excitement and an alarm, and that she and her
brother were being urged to hurry was very evident.

"Yes, what is it?" and Floyd added his demand to that of his sister.

"No _sabe_!" grunted Mike, that being his way of using his command of
Spanish to indicate that he did not know.  More likely he did not want
to tell.  But there was no way of forcing him.

"Oh, we've got to ride those horrid knife-backed ponies!" half groaned
Rosemary, as she saw led out for the use of herself and her brother the
steeds on which they had been carried thus far into the mountains.
"They're so bony I'm afraid their backbones will cut through the
saddle."

"They look as though they might," agreed Floyd.  "Gee, but I'm dirty
and I'd like a shave and this is perfectly rotten altogether!" he
completed with a sigh.

"Don't mention such a thing as a bath tub!" wailed Rosemary.  "I don't
believe these heathen know what water means for washing in."

Certainly the appearances of the Yaquis bore out that assertion.  They
were dirty, grimy and greasy to a degree--and a high degree at that.

Rosemary wore bloomers under a short skirt, an attire eminently suited
to women folk in the west.  For Rosemary was a rider of no small
ability, more at home in the saddle than on the seat of an auto, and
she and Floyd counted on much riding once they reached their uncle's
ranch which now, alas, seemed far away.

Thus attired the girl found no difficulty in getting into the saddle,
and her ability provoked murmurs of admiration from the Yaquis.

"Oh, if I only had a chance I'd show you how to ride!" declared
Rosemary, when she understood that her skill as a horsewoman was being
commented on.  "Let me set out in the open once, with a good horse
under me instead of a specimen of crow-bait, and I'll open your eyes!"

But this was not to be--just yet.

Floyd, too, was a good rider, but his sister had more of a natural
knack with ponies, and often bested him in a race.  He too, now swung a
leg over the saddle and mounted.  With Mike in the lead, and several of
the Yaquis bringing up in the rear as a guard against a retreat on the
part of the captives, they were urged forward out of the rocky defile
into which they had come the night before.

Eagerly Rosemary and Floyd looked about them for some indication as to
the cause of the sudden excitement, and the movement among the Indians.
Anxiously the captives scanned the horizon for a sight of some rescue
party, the approach of which might have sent the Indians scurrying for
cover.  But nothing was to be seen--at least of that nature, though
Rosemary and her brother did see something that caused them great
surprise.

This was a sight of the main body of the Yaquis, under the leadership
of Paz, moving off at a right angle to the main trail, while Mike,
evidently in command of the smaller party which guarded the captives,
was going on up the mountain slope, farther into the fastnesses of the
rugged peaks.

"Say, what's up?" asked Floyd, of his sister.

"Don't know, but it looks as if they had separated.  One band going one
way and our bunch this way.  I don't like it either.  I'd rather deal
with Paz, ugly as he is, than with this Mike, who is Irish only because
we've given him that name," Rosemary answered.

"It is queer," murmured Floyd, as he guided his pony along the
difficult trail.  "Paz has gone off with the main body of Indians, and
left us in charge of these.  If I only had a gun we could take a chance
and rush them, Rose.  There's only about three dozen!"

"Too many for just one gun," she answered.

"But can you guess what the game is?" her brother wanted to know.

"Well that's all I can do--guess.  From what went on soon after
breakfast I imagine some of the Indians saw, or heard about a party
that was on their trail."

"You mean a party from Diamond X?"

"Either that or soldiers."

"That's so!  Soldiers!" cried Floyd.  "I hadn't thought of them!  Of
course there are troopers stationed out here at various places.  And
word of the Yaquis uprising is sure to go to them.  Maybe a band of
U.S. Regulars is on the way to save us, Rose!"

"I hope so.  But we can't count on it.  What I do think, though, is
that Paz took alarm at something, and he isn't going to chance being
found with us on his hands."

"You mean he's passing the buck to Mike here?"

"Something like that.  If our friends or Uncle Sam's men round up this
bunch of cut throats and find us in their possession it will go hard
with them.  So Paz isn't taking any chances."

"That may be the explanation," agreed Rosemary.  "Anyhow we're being
taken farther into the mountains by a small band, and the larger body
is sliding off to one side."

"It's a queer thing," said Floyd, as he and his sister rode along side
by side, "that these Yaquis didn't turn back into Mexico, and take us
across the border instead of rushing us into the United States."

"Maybe they were afraid to cross the border, which is pretty sure to be
better guarded than usual, after this outbreak," Rosemary said.  "Or
maybe the Yaquis didn't want to share spoils with any of their friends
on their own side of the fence."

"That's so!" agreed Floyd.  "And now that there's a chance of ransom
money--or these beggars think there is--I reckon they're less anxious
than before to whack it up.

"That's it!  They're taking us as far off as they can to keep the cash
among themselves, and, meanwhile, Paz leads the main body away from us."

"But what that move means I'd like to know," mused Rosemary.

It was rather a puzzle to her and her brother.  All they were sure of
was what they saw--that the Yaquis had separated, most of them
following Paz, while the captives were left in charge of the villainous
Mike and his selected followers.

Rosemary slipped her hand into her pocket to feel the handle of her
automatic.




CHAPTER XIX

THE FIGHT

The discovery of the Indian trail, and the unmistakable evidence that
the marks had been left by a band of Yaquis, was the most encouraging
news the boy ranchers and their friends had received since starting out
to rescue Rosemary and Floyd.  It was a fortunate meeting with the U.S.
Troopers.

"Only for that," observed Bud, as he rode along with his cousins, "we'd
have been way off.  We were headed just in the opposite direction when
we took to cover thinking the Yaquis were coming after us."

"Yes, and the longer we traveled the farther off we'd be," agreed Nort.
"It's lucky all around."

"It'll be luckier when we come up to this band of Greasers and take
Rosemary and Floyd away," declared Dick.

"Just think!" exulted Nort.  "We'll soon be taking part in a real
Indian fight!  I didn't think there could be such a thing outside of a
novel."

"Are these Yaquis real Indians?" asked Dick.  "They don't impress me
that way.  Seems more like fighting some low down colored men."

"I wouldn't insult a decent negro by comparing him to an Indian of the
present Yaquis tribe," laughed Bud.  "They aren't at all alike.  But
the Yaquis are real Indians of one of the Mexican races--a race that
was once among the best.  Of course, even then, they weren't like our
American Indians."

"I guess I'm looking for tomahawks and scalping knives and listening
for warwhoops!" admitted Dick.  "I have an Indian stone pipe home, with
a long flat stem, made of a piece of oak, with designs burned in it.
Around one end are wound some red and blue beads, and the stem has some
old faded ribbons tied to it.  Have the Yaquis anything like that?" he
asked Bud.

"Not that I know of.  The present generation smoke cigarettes when they
can get 'em, something no self-respecting American Indian would dream
of.  Maybe the Yaquis have some such ceremony as smoking the peace
pipe, but I don't know about it.  I never saw any of their stone pipes.
I know the kind you mean, Dick.  The pipe part is hollowed out with a
small hole--hardly holds enough tobacco for a good smoke, I'd say,
though I never tried it."

"That's the kind," Dick said.  "Well, to my mind, these Yaquis aren't
half so--so--well, you know what I mean," he concluded, at loss for the
right word.

"Picturesque," suggested his brother.

"That's it!  They aren't at all the kind of Indians you'd like to read
about."

"Rex Beach doesn't think much of 'em," commented Bud.  "I read in one
of his books where he says the Yaquis are a playful people, and they
dearly love to hold up Southern Pacific trains.  It's one of their
favorite sports and pastimes."

"Do you really think they do?" asked Dick.  "If they're train robbers
they have more gumption than I thought."

"Well, I don't know," admitted Bud.  "Rex Beach writes good stuff, and
has some corking movies out, but maybe he was joking when he spoke of
the Yaquis.  Anyhow we know what they've done to our friends, and it's
up to us to pay 'em back!"

"You said a hollow-toothful that time, kid!" declared Rolling Stone, as
he cantered up ahead to take part in a consultation, caused when a new
"sign" was discovered.

The discovery of new marks in the soil--marks left by the passing along
of some Indians--was deemed of enough importance to call a halt, while
those most familiar in the interpretation of such mystic evidences,
made certain what they indicated.

In this discussion the boy ranchers could have no part for they were
not at all versed in the meaning of what was quite plain to Rolling
Stone, some of the trooper scouts and a few of the cowboys.

"We'll eat as long as we had to stop," decided Captain Marshall, when
it was made known to him that some of the scouts wanted to scurry about
in a circle, and ascertain if there were any more evidences that would
help solve many vital questions.

The troopers had come out well rationed--much better so, in fact than
had our friends, and the soldiers extended an invitation to their
comrade in arms to partake of "grub," an invitation that was quickly
accepted.  For the American soldier is the best fed of any in the world.

In the midst of the meal word was sent back to have Buck Tooth, the old
Indian in the service of Bud, to come out to where the trooper scouts
and cowboys were having a consultation.

"Buck Tooth can tell 'em what's what," declared Bud.  "He claims to be
a Yaqui, though since these imps have pulled off this stunt I think
I'll get Buck Tooth to change his tribe.  But he can read Indian sign
all right."

This was evidently so for, a little later, exultant shouts on the part
of the trooper scouts and the cowboys announced that something new had
been found.  And it was Buck Tooth's discovery as the boy ranchers
learned soon.

The old Indian had carefully studied the trail, and then, going off to
one side, had hunted about until he found what he was in evident search
of--another trail, leading in the opposite direction from that our
friends had been following.

"Yaquis come 'long here--go up to mountain, then come back 'gin, same
way like, then go like so," and Buck Tooth held out his arm stiffly,
extending two fingers of his hand wide apart like a fork.

"I see what he means!" exclaimed Snake Purdee.  "They doubled on their
track for part of the way back, and then branched off from the trail,
thinking to fool us.  But they didn't."

"It looks that way," agreed Lieutenant Snow.  "This trail Buck Tooth
discovered is much the fresher.  We ought to follow that."

And this they did, after a hasty meal.

Once more they were after the Yaquis, and late that night one of the
scouts in the lead car riding back at full speed with the news:

"They're right ahead of us!"

"Wow!" yelled Bud.

"Hurray!" shouted Dick.

"Get ready for the fight!" cried Nort.

"Wait a minute now, boys!" advised Snake.  "You may have a proper part
in the fracas, but remember we're with the United States troops, and
under the leadership of Captain Marshall.  We must do as he says."

"Oh, I guess the Captain will give the boys a chance," said Lieutenant
Snow with a smile, as he gave an order to the buglar.

The stragglers rode in, the troops were quickly formed for immediate
action, and other scouts were sent out to report on the location and
disposition of the Yaquis, which were about three miles in advance, the
first scout said.

"Did you see anything of Rosemary or Floyd?" asked Bud anxiously.

"No.  I wasn't close enough for that.  But the beggars are legging it
for all they're worth!"

"Then let's get after them!" cried the Captain.  "We don't want them to
get away!"

The pace had not been fast, so the horses were comparatively fresh, and
they were now urged into a trot, while skirmishers were sent on ahead
to receive the first reports of the advanced scouts.

Suddenly, as the sun was beginning to dip below the horizon, some of
the scouts came riding back, pointing down into a small, rocky valley,
while the foremost yelled:

"They're making a stand down there!"

"Come on!" cried Captain Marshall, and, a few minutes later the fight
against the Yaquis began.

CHAPTER XX

THE WHITE FLAG

The boy ranchers--at least two of them,--were much disappointed at the
manner in which this fight against the Yaquis started.  And I think I
need not say that the two I mean were Dick and Nort.  Bud, while he had
never before taken part in a fight against Indians, did not expect so
much of the romantically picturesque and so was not so disappointed.

But like most healthy lads Nort and Dick, in their early days, had read
many books about the west, stories of adventures among the cowboys,
miners and Indians--especially the latter.  And all the stories had to
do with the dashing manner in which the redmen fought, when they fought
in the open.  Of course, when they had the chance, the Indians
preferred to sneak up on their victims and take them unawares.  It was
easier than standing up against gunfire.

But when the Indians had fought there was a dash and spirit about their
attack that made the blood run faster in the veins.  The redmen would
begin circling about the band they were to attack, riding their ponies
faster and faster as they approached, leaning over on the far side, to
bring the animal's body between themselves and the hail of bullets.
Then the doughty Indian, hanging to his saddle blanket by one
moccasined foot would fire from under his pony's neck, dashing away in
time to escape the white man's bullet.

That was warfare to make any real lad wish to toss aside his school
books and hike for the great WEST!

And it was by anticipating such scenes as this that Nort and Dick were
disappointed.  But, in a way they had been prepared for it by seeing
what manner of Indians the Yaquis were.  No warpaint, no feathered
headdresses, no necklaces of bears' claws, and of course no bows and
arrows.

It must be admitted that the stories on which Nort and Dick had fed
their imaginations were true enough about the time they were written.
But the romantic Indians died off, or were confined on reservations,
and those who occasionally sneaked over the border from Mexico, to make
raids by which they gathered in cattle, ponies and weapons, were not of
this class.

"It's like making an attack on a bunch of Greasers!" declared Nort, in
some disgust, as the fight opened.

But just then a bullet sang uncomfortably close to his head, and as he
ducked down--too late of course had the shot been true--Bud laughed and
said:

"Don't lose sight of the fact that they can shoot!"

Indeed the Yaquis, thus forced to make a stand and fight, were not
going to give up easily.  The soldiers, the outfit from Diamond X and
the boy ranchers were to have no easy time of it.

It was inspiring to witness the manner in which the troopers went about
the business of rounding up the renegade Yaquis.  At the first
intimation that there was to be serious fighting, when the band had
gotten close enough for effective work, the horses were sent back to be
out of danger from the bullets.  The animals belonging to Bud, Nort,
Dick and their friends were taken in charge by some of the troopers.
For it was vitally necessary that means of retreat or of advance be
preserved.  And of course there was no thought of retreat on the part
of our friends.

Buck Tooth, the old Indian, slid from his pony with a sigh of relief.
He did not care for riding.  He liked an automobile, but he was too fat
to sit in comfort on a rangy cow pony.

"Keep head down!" he advised Nort, as he saw the lad apparently duck a
bullet.

"Guess that's good advice," admitted the lad with a sharp intaking of
his breath.

"Do same like soldiers," went on Buck Tooth.

And, as I have said, the example of the troopers was one to be
followed.  This was not the first time they had been in Indian fights,
and against more worthy foes of the redman type.  Each trooper picked
out such natural shelter as was available, and then began looking over
or around it for a sight of some human target at which to aim.

This sort of warfare would be carried on until there was a chance to
rush the Yaquis, when the horses could be brought up for this purpose,
or the charge made on foot.  The Indians, exercising as great care for
their steeds as had the white men, had also sent the ponies to the rear.

The place of the fight was about the middle of a small valley, closed
in at either end by broken hills of rock, while rocks and great
boulders were scattered over the floor of the vale, thus affording
natural shelter for both sides.  The rising ground at the rear of each
party prevented the chance of a rapid retreat, and it was evident that
the fight would go to a "finish."

Just how large the party of Yaquis was could not be told, but Captain
Marshall believed he had more men than were rallied to the support of
Paz, the notorious leader of the Mexicans.

"But I haven't seen Rosemary or Floyd," remarked Nort, as he wormed
himself into a hollow place behind a rock, not far from Dick and Bud.

"Well, they are probably back in the rear.  That's where they generally
keep their captives," explained Dick.  "If they see the fight going
against them they'll send word back and some party will scoot out with
our friends."

"Then we'll have the chasing to do all over again," ruefully observed
Nort.

"Oh, I guess Captain Marshall knows a trick or two," commented Bud.
"Look, he's sending some of his men out now to try and get in the rear
of the Yaquis."

Dick and Nort turned to see a detachment of the troopers making their
way on hands and knees out among the rocks.  Their object was what Bud
had stated--to get in the rear of the Indians and not only attack them
from that vantage point but also to prevent a retreat with the
captives, in case Rosemary and Floyd were at that point.

And now the fight began in earnest.

With each party in a position advantageous to it the first few minutes
of attack and defense were marked only by firing that accomplished
nothing.

That is to say there was an exchange of bullets, most of which
spattered against the rooks, sending up sprays of vicious lead or
showers of pulverized stone, but inflicting no dangerous wounds.  One
of the troopers was temporarily blinded by some of this stone dust
getting into his eyes when a bullet struck the rock just over his head,
and several others, including Lieutenant Snow, were "creased" by
bullets when they exposed an arm or leg.  But these were only trifles
in the day's adventure.

If the Yaquis were not as romantic, tricky and brave as the old Apaches
or Sioux, they were no quitters, and they seemed to be well directed.
For after the first scattered firing on their part, they began a
fusillade which increased in intensity.

"They aren't saving ammunition," commented Snake, as he drew a quick
sight on an exposed head, and had the satisfaction of seeing it drop
back out of sight in a manner that told of a hit.

"I guess they know it's a case of shoot or be shot," remarked Yellin'
Kid, his tones low, for a wonder.

It must be stated that the troopers and those with them fought under a
better system, and were better trained, to say nothing of being better
individual marksmen.  For this reason the casualties on the side of the
Yaquis soon began to mount up.  Occasional yells, and the spasmodic
leaping up of some "warrior" as he was hit after a careless exposure of
limb or body, told that the renegades were paying toll.

On the other hand more than one trooper was hit, two being killed not
far from Bud and his cousins.

Nor did our heroes escape.  For Nort received a nasty, but not
dangerous wound in the left leg, while Dick, incautiously looking from
behind his rock, to see the effect of one of his shots, felt a bullet
clip the lobe of his right ear, bringing pain and plenty of blood.

At first Bud and Nort thought Dick had been killed, for he fell back
with a groan and his neck was stained a bright red, his ear bleeding
freely.  But after the momentary shock the lad raised himself--still
keeping back of his rock, and cried:

"I'm all right.  That ear always was too long!"

"Good stuff, kid!" cried one of the troopers.  "Here, wind some of this
on," and he tossed over a roll of antiseptic bandage.

Minor hurts were thus quickly bound up, and Bud, having received a
painful wound in the right hand, had to retire from the fight.  He did
not actually go to the rear, however, but remained with Nort and Dick,
handing them cartridges to reload their weapons.

"Gosh!  This is rotten!" bewailed Bud, looking at his bandaged hand.
It was dismay not at the nature of the wound, but because he could no
longer "pepper" the Yaquis.

And the Indians were being attacked with a vengeance and were being
"peppered" to such good advantage that some of them rose up and started
to run to the rear.  This was the last running they did, however, for
the unerring rifles of the troopers picked them off.

And then the strategy of Captain Marshall had its effect.  For suddenly
the troopers he had sent to attack the rear of the Yaquis opened up a
fire and this, being augmented by shots from the main body, soon threw
the Indians into such confusion that the end was only a question of
minutes.

And it came suddenly.  For just as Captain Marshall was preparing to
order a charge, Snake gave a yell and shouted:

"The white flag!  They're quitting!"




CHAPTER XXI

THE TRICK DISCOVERED

Truly enough, this had happened.  On top of one of the jagged rocks,
behind which they had conducted the defense that had failed, stood a
ragged Yaqui Indian.  To and fro, on the end of his gun, he waved not
exactly a white flag, but a dirty rag that once might have been white.
Objects of this hue did not long remain like the driven snow among the
Yaquis.

"Cease firing!" blared the bugle, and the spiteful rattle of the
soldiers' guns stopped abruptly.

"Cover the beggar, some of you," ordered Captain Marshall, "and a few
of you get ready in case this is a trick and they try a rush.  I'll
look into this."

"Let me go!" pleaded Lieutenant Snow eagerly.  "I can sling their lingo
a bit, Captain."

"Very well," assented the commander.  "But watch yourself, Mart.  I
don't trust the devils, though if they try any of their tricks we'll
wipe out the whole band.  I wish I had a rapid fire gun.  We made a
mistake coming off without it.  But we had to leave in a hurry."

During this brief talk, during which none of the soldiers or cowboys
exposed themselves, the figure of the Indian continued to stand in full
view and easy shot, waving the flag that told of a desire to surrender.

Or did it?  Was it but a trick?  That remained to be seen.

Seeing that his men were in readiness for quick work, Captain Marshall,
himself holding his carbine where he could easily get at it, signalled
to Lieutenant Stone to advance, under the flag of truce, to listen to
the capitulation of the Yaquis.  A trooper went with the lieutenant,
carrying one of the company guidons, which, while not exactly a flag of
truce served the purpose well enough.  Besides the outfit from the fort
and Diamond X were not surrendering.

"Had enough, Yaqui?" asked the lieutenant, as the Indian came down from
his perch, and advanced to a point midway between the hidden Mexicans
and the equally concealed troopers.  In the rear was another band of
soldiers, so, if it had been necessary, the Indians could have been
withered by a cross fire.

"We stop," grunted the Yaqui.

It was the giving up.

Then followed a talk between the officer and the representative of the
Indians.  This was not Paz, who probably was too cowardly to trust
himself in the open under the guns of his rightful enemies.

"Unconditional surrender, lay down every gun you have, march out and be
made prisoners!" was the ultimatum of Lieutenant Snow.

It was the only terms that could be offered the treacherous band that
had broken over the border from Mexico.

"And tell 'em," shouted Snake, who, with his friends had understood the
import of what was said, "tell the beggar if any harm has come to
Rosemary or Floyd, we'll kill every one of the Greasers!"

Lieutenant Snow waved his hand for silence.  He listened to something
the bearer of the flag of truce had to say, and then the officer
announced:

"The captives aren't here!"

"Aren't here!" cried Bud, Nort and Dick together.

"Don't let nim fool you!" shouted Yellin' Kid.

"Order them to march out, unarmed and then we'll search their camp,"
called Captain Marshall.

Seeing that it would be useless to prolong matters, and knowing his
entire band would be wiped out if he continued the fight, now that his
rear was attacked, Paz growled out the necessary orders to his
followers, and they came out from amid the rocks--that is those who
could walk.

They were a sorry-looking lot.  Always of a nondescript type, dirty,
ragged and greasy, the Yaquis were even worse now, for they had been on
the trail for some time, and had taken part in at least two fights.
They had had no time to recuperate since making the raid in La
Nogalique.

As they filed out, miserably enough, they were passed into a sort of
hollow square, formed by the troopers, and there each Indian was
searched for a hidden knife or revolver.  One or two were found and
confiscated amid the snarls of rage on the part of the owners, who,
doubtless, meditated treachery.

Paz and his followers having been secured, a guard placed over them,
and the wounded of the troopers being cared for as well as possible,
search was made of the place where the Yaquis had made their stand.
Several dead Indians were found, and some so badly wounded that death
was only a question of a short time.  These were made as comfortable as
possible, for though they were entitled to little consideration while
the fight was on, matters were different after the surrender.

"But where can Rosemary and Floyd be?" was the question asked over and
over again by the boy ranchers and their friends, when it was seen that
the captives were not in the Yaquis camp.  At first it was supposed
they had been sent to the rear with the Indians who were guarding the
ponies.  But there was no trace of the youth and his sister who had
been carried away.

Then the more sinister thought came.

"Could they have been made away with?"

No one asked this in so many words, but it was in the minds of all, and
a careful search was made to disclose if the ground had been recently
dug up.  Nothing of the sort was found, however, and then the boy
ranchers and their friends breathed more easily.

But though the main body of Yaquis had been captured the prisoners were
not found.  And one of the objects of the rescue party--the main object
in fact--was to locate Rosemary and Floyd.

"We've got to get it out of Paz what has happened to them, if we--if we
have to torture him!" declared Snake.  "Can't you make him talk,
Captain?"

"Well, of course we dare not, for the sake of the good name of Uncle
Sam's men, resort to torture.  But we can try some modern police
methods--putting him through the third degree, so to speak."

"That's it!" cried Bud.  "Give Paz the third degree!"

Once the prisoners were secured, the wounded attended to and the dead
buried, the whole attention of the rescue party was given to locating
Rosemary and Floyd.  That Paz knew the secret of their disappearance
could not be doubted--at least our friends did not doubt.

"Though of course," said Captain Marshall, when preparations were going
on for putting Paz through the third degree series of questions, "of
course there may have been several bands involved in this raid, and
some other body of Yaquis may have taken away the young man and his
sister."

"It was Paz, I'm sure of it!" declared Bud.

"He looks guilty!"

Certainly the Yaquis leader looked ugly and mean enough to have
perpetrated this deed.  But he maintained a scowling silence as he sat
on the ground before his captors.

"Now, Paz," began Lieutenant Snow, who acted as interpreter, "you may
as well tell the truth first as last, for we're going to get it out of
you, if we have to resort to--well, you know what I mean.  _Sabe_?"

"No _sabe_!" grunted the Indian.

Then the work began.  It was not a pleasant task, and it was only
excusable on the plea of dire necessity.  The Yaquis were entitled to
no mercy.

But through ft all Paz maintained a grim silence.  When he did speak it
was to deny that he or his followers had even seen Rosemary and Floyd,
much less had they kidnapped them for a ransom.

It remained for Buck Tooth to expose the trick.  The wily Indian,
perhaps knowing the habits of the race he had forsaken, had been
prowling about among the sullen prisoners.  He openly laughed at them
for the plight in which he found them, taunting them as cowards of the
first water.

Then, having wrought them up to the desired pitch of anger, Buck Tooth
laughed and played a trump card, so to speak.  In his own way he told a
group of the captives that not only had they been caught, to be sent
back to Mexico there to suffer long imprisonment, but the object for
which they had risked so much had been snatched from them.

"We have the boy and girl!" boasted Buck Tooth.

This was vehemently denied and then, in a burst of anger, as Buck Tooth
insisted this was so, the Yaqui blurted out the truth that Paz was
endeavoring to conceal.  Rosemary and Floyd had been taken away from
the main body by a squad under the leadership of the Indian whom
Rosemary had dubbed "Mike."

"Ugh!" grunted Buck Tooth.  He had found out what he wanted to know.
The trick was discovered.




CHAPTER XXII

ANXIOUS HOURS

Paz grunted, with characteristic Indian indifference when the work of
the third degree ceased, as Buck Tooth, accompanied by the boy
ranchers, waddled up and made known what he had found out.

"So that's what the beggar did!" exclaimed Captain Marshall, when he
understood.  "He split his forces, and sent the young man and girl
farther on up into the mountains.  Well, it means another chase!"

"And one not so easy to make," added Snake.

"Why?" asked Bud.

"Well, the trail will be worse, for one thing, and we won't have as
many men to help.  Got to send a guard back with these," and he waved
his hand to indicate the Yaquis who had been made prisoners.

"I'll spare as many of my men as possible," said the captain, "and as
soon as I get these imps where they'll be safe for the next few years,
I'll have the escort return.  They'll want to see this thing through.
I'm coming with you."

"Oh, that's good!" exclaimed Nort.  It was not that he did not depend
on the cowboys from Diamond X, but there was something about the
troopers that inspired confidence.  The cowboys, too, were glad that
they would have some regulars with them.

"And now let's get this story in proper shape," suggested the captain.
"Lieutenant Snow, you'll get ready to take as many men as you'll need
and herd the rascals back over the border, or at least to La Nogalique.
It may be that the United States Marshal there will want to deal with
them himself.  In case he does that relieves you all the sooner.  Get
in touch with the fort when you have delivered your prisoners, and
there may be orders for you."

"Yes, sir," answered the wounded lieutenant, saluting.  He had no
thought of quitting though he was painfully hurt.

Then Buck Tooth told what his taunts had forced from the captive
Yaquis, and the whole trick was plain to the experienced cowboys and
the troopers.  Paz, fearing the result of keeping the captives with
him, had sent them away when he learned that his pursuers were near.

How he learned that fact was one of the mysteries.  How the news
traveled, in that wild country, where civilized folk were often at
pains to get into communication with each other, will probably never be
known.  But in some manner Paz had become aware of the closing in on
him of the soldiers and the cowboys and he had tried to forestall their
vengeance.  But he did not reckon on the wiliness of Buck Tooth, whose
taunts had caused the truth to be blurted out.

So, while Paz and his renegades were being sent back to pay the
penalties for their uprising, Captain Marshall, with some of his picked
men, and the band from Diamond X got ready to move forward again.  One
or two of the cowboys, who had been rather badly hit by bullets, were
induced to go back for treatment.  An effort made to have Bud do the
same was met by a flat refusal.

"I've got one good hand!" the lad declared, holding up his left, "and I
can shoot an automatic with that after somebody loads it for me."

"We'll load!" offered Nort and Dick.

So the boy ranchers, like the Three Guardsmen "all for one and one for
all," stuck together.

"There's going to be hard work--and danger ahead of us," Snake had
said, and Captain Marshall bore him out in this.

"That's what we came for," declared Nort.

"Surest thing you know!" assented his brother, and Bud nodded his
assent.

So they moved forward again.

This time they were working toward a more certain object than when they
were out scouting around to pick up the trail of the Yaquis.

Now they must make their way back to where the party, with Rosemary and
Floyd as prisoners, had separated from the main body.

This was comparatively simple as regards tracing the way Paz and his
followers had descended the mountain into the valley of the plain where
the last fight and surrender had taken place.  But when the trail of
Mike and his men was located--then would come the real test.

The way grew more rough as they proceeded back along the route taken by
the fleeing main body of Yaquis.  It was an ascending trail, over a
path that was possible only to the tough western ponies.

Fortunately they had an ample supply of provisions and the water supply
was adequate, which was a vital necessity.  The only hardship in the
way of grub was on the horses, the herbage being scanty at times, so
that as much speed as was desired could not be made, detours being
necessary in order to come upon fodder for the steeds.

This caused them to spend more time on the route than they desired and
each hour of delay made the boy ranchers more and more apprehensive for
the safety of their captured cousins.  However it could not be helped.
Certain precautions must be observed if the band of rescuers was to
arrive efficient enough to cope with the Yaquis.  Though not a quarter
of the original body was now in charge of Rosemary and Floyd, they were
picked fighters, so Buck Tooth had learned.  And they probably would
make a stand in some natural fastness which vantage point would be hard
to attack and turn.

Through two long, hot weary days the march of the rescuers was kept up,
and they were all glad when night came that they might camp and be at
rest.

"But we've struck the branching trail," Bud said to his cousins.  "All
we have to do now is to keep on until we corner the beggars, and get
Rosemary and Floyd away from them."

Bud had sized up the situation correctly, though it remains to be
stated that it was easier said than done.  By carefully noting the
"sign" along the way, the cowboys and soldiers had reached the place
where the selected band had ridden away with their captives.  And this
was the trail now being followed.

There was more than hard work--hard work followed hard work--and there
was danger.  It had been hard from the very start--from the time the
boy ranchers had left after the first wild alarm over the kidnapping of
Rosemary and Floyd.  They had been keyed up to high tension all the
while, and this, in itself, if you have ever experienced it, is
wearing.  There had been absolutely no time for light enjoyment--none
of the humor of the cowboys had a chance to manifest itself.

Aside from an occasional burst into song the way had been grim and
weary.  There was nothing to lighten it, for over all hung the
apprehension that something dreadful would befall Rosemary and her
brother.

And that dread was still present.

Even at the very end of the trail it might be found that all their
efforts had been in vain, and that the Yaquis, driven into a panic of
fear, had ended the lives of their captives.

So there was this nerve-racking pall of gloom hanging over all, and to
this was added the hard physical work of keeping to a difficult trail,
with danger besetting on every hand.

That there was danger, not the most optimistic of them would have
denied.  There was danger in urging one's horse up a narrow path
overhanging some gorge.

There was danger that some lurking Yaqui, unable to keep up with the
main body of Mike's men, might send a bullet into the back of one of
the rescuers.  Or Mike could have posted a party in ambush at any one
of a dozen places along the trail, there to surprise and kill off a
number of the vengeful whites following him.

All this made it exceedingly hard for the boy ranchers and their
friends, but they were never daunted.  On they urged their weary
ponies, and the trail was as hard on horseflesh as it was on man and
youth.

Still no one complained.  Even Bud bore without remark the pain of his
wounded hand, and it was a most painful injury.  However Captain
Marshall had no small skill with what primitive remedies they had with
them, and he saved Bud from the necessity of a surgical operation
later, as the wound was kept clean, so that it healed from within.

Though once, when it had grown shut, with the possible danger of pus
forming within, and had to be opened, poor Bud saw everything getting
black before his eyes.  And it was only by gritting his teeth, and
remembering how, it was said, Indians bit bullets in twain in the
excess of their agony before uttering a groan, that the lad prevented
himself from fainting under the captain's ministrations.

So night settled down on the second day of their rush forward on the
trail of Mike and those he held captive.

"You get to bed and take it easy," Nort said to Bud, when the latter
talked of standing guard, after camp had been made.

"That's right," agreed Dick.  "There's enough of us without you."

"But I don't want to be a quitter!" Bud said.  "And we're so close to
Mike and his gang now--or we ought to be--that there may be an attack
any hour."

"The Yaquis won't attack at night," declared Rolling Stone.  "They're
too lazy!"

This, indeed, is characteristic of many Indian tribes, though perhaps
the real reason may be based on superstition instead of objection to
exertion.

However, Bud allowed himself to be pursuaded to take his ease rolled up
in his blankets.  There were no tents, and, in fact, none were really
needed, for though the nights were cooler than the days, a blanket and
a fire made every man comfortable.

So night settled down, the stars came out, the cooling wind blew the
smoke of the camp fire here and there and the posted sentries walked
their beats, waiting for what might happen.

That they were near to the hiding place of Mike, and, it was hoped, of
the captives too, could not be doubted.  The trail had become more
fresh with every mile traversed.

"He's gone into some cave to hold off as long as possible," was the
opinion of Captain Marshall.

Nort and Dick had adjoining posts.  They had been selected for the
first four hours of duty, from 8 to 12 o'clock, and it was near that
last hour when Nort, coming back from having reached the end of his
beat, called softly to his brother.

"Did you hear anything?" asked Nort.

"What do you mean?" asked Dick in turn.

"Well, like some one walking.  Listen!"




CHAPTER XXIII

THE LAST STAND

The boy ranchers--only two of them now, for Bud was taking a
much-needed rest, stood silent in the darkness, on one edge of the
camp.  They listened "with all their ears," for they were, if not
exactly in the enemy's territory, at least within striking distance of
the Yaquis, and every precaution must be taken.

So when Nort whispered to Dick that a suspicious noise had been heard,
Dick was only too ready to believe it.

"Where did you hear it?" Dick asked in a cautious voice when, after
several seconds of intent listening, neither had caught a sound.

"Off there," replied Nort rather vaguely, pointing to the darkness
ahead of them--a darkness where the rays of several camp fires did not
penetrate, and which the starlight did not seem to pierce.

"I don't hear anything," went on Dick.  "Maybe it was only the wind.
We don't want to give an alarm and--"

"Hark!" interrupted his brother in a low but tense voice.

Clearly then, to the ears of both, came the unmistakable sound of
someone or something approaching.  There was the crunching of gravel,
and the noise of some hard substance moving on a rock.

"It's the Yaquis!" whispered Nort, as he brought his rifle to bear on
the blackness in front of him.  "They're creeping up to make an attack!"

Dick also got his gun in readiness for instant action, and the boys
were just about to fire when a noise, best described as "unearthly,"
smote their ears.  It was a long drawn out cry, weird and
blood-curdling.  That it was the warwhoop of the Yaquis both boys were
beginning to believe, in spite of knowing that these Mexicans seldom if
ever used such romantic if terrible means of terrifying their enemies.

I say the boys were on the verge of accepting the noise as that, when
its character suddenly changed, and the stillness of the night was
fairly shattered by a loud:

"Hee-haw!  Hee-haw!  Hee-haw!"

The reaction was so great that Nort and Dick nearly dropped their guns,
and they turned to look one at the other with sheepish grins that would
have been visible had the light been stronger.  And then, with one
voice the brothers exclaimed:

"Maud!"

It was one of the army transport mules, an animal that helped carry the
camp baggage!  She had strayed.

Again rose the cry, not so weird now that its nature was known.

"Hee-haw!  Hee-haw!"

And from the camp came a disgusted complaint from some sleepy trooper
as he shouted: "The chump who tied that mule so he could wander ought
to be made to go get him!"

There was laughter at this, for many had been awakened by the braying
of the animal.  And then one of the men in charge of the animals came
out and managed to corral the wanderer.

"Gosh!  I'm glad we didn't shoot!" exclaimed Nort, as their tour of
duty ended and their relief came.

"Same here!" added his brother.  "How they would have laughed at us if
we had plugged old Maud!"

This was the only disturbing incident of the night, the remainder of
which passed quietly.

With the first streak of dawn the troopers were up, as were the
cowboys, for Rolling Stone had said, and Buck Tooth agreed with him,
that if the Yaquis did attack it would be at dawn, since they seldom
fought after nightfall.

But no attack came, and breakfast was served, with sentries on the
watch to guard against surprise.  Some steaming hot coffee, crisp bacon
the odor of which was an aroma in the morning air, flapjacks and sour
dough bread for those who wanted it, made the meal, which well
fortified those who partook of it for the day's events, which were
destined to be strenuous.

Once again the order was:

"Forward--march!"

Again they were on the trail of the Yaquis.

As they advanced the "sign" became more pronounced that the band had
passed that way.  Whether they had the captives with them could, of
course, only be guessed at.

But the trail had been carefully scanned, and there was no evidence
that Rosemary and Floyd had been put out of the way.  As far as could
be told the captives were still the prisoners of the Indians.  And
there were no marks to show that any smaller body had branched off from
this band of Yaquis that had the unfortunate youth and maiden in charge.

So it was with the hope of finding their cousins safe, though perhaps
in dire distress, that the boy ranchers pressed on with their friends
the troopers and the cowboys.

As the trail became more pronounced, greater precautions were taken
against a surprise.  And a surprise in the rocky defiles through which
they were passing would have been well nigh fatal.  So scouts were
constantly in the lead, ready at the first suspicious sign to send back
word to the main body to be on the alert.

The morning passed without incident, save for one or two false alarms,
and there was a sigh of relief when the midday meal was served without
interruption in the shape of hostile bullets.  Then, after a brief rest
for the horses, the march was again taken up.

"I wonder when we'll find them?" asked Nort.

"It's been quite a while now," added Dick.

"Poor Rosemary," sighed Bud, trying to find an easy position for his
wounded hand.  "She must have had a tough time."

"Yet she had a lot of grit to send that message the way she did,"
commented Nort.

"Yes, only for that we wouldn't have known about it for a long
time--maybe too late," agreed Bud.

It was but a few minutes after this talk that, suddenly, a shot rang
out well up ahead.  Instantly every nerve tingled for it might mean the
beginning of the last fight.  The shot was almost at once followed by
others, and then a scout came clattering back.

"We've found 'em!" he cried.  "And it's going to be a dickens of a
fight!  They're in a regular fort!"

The firing in front became more brisk.  Clearly all the van guard was
now engaged, and quick orders were issued to send up a squad or two of
the troopers, while the main body prepared for what they hoped would be
the last battle.

Captain Marshall rapidly questioned the messenger who had come back.
The man told how he and his companions had been riding along when they
were suddenly fired upon.  The shot came from a ledge at one side of
the defile through which the trail ran, and they had a glimpse of a
Yaqui warrior shaking his fist at them in defiance as he disappeared
amid the rocks after delivering his warning shot.

Then the shooting between the outposts of the Indians and the advance
guard of the rescue party became general as the scout rode back to
report.

Captain Marshall hurried to the front with his first band of fighters,
the cowboys and our youthful heroes being bidden to remain where they
were until the officer had made an observation.  In a little while
Captain Marshall came back.

"It will be their last stand!" he exclaimed.

"How so?" asked Snake.

"Well, they're there with their backs to the wall.  They can't get out
at the rear and we're here in front to stop them if they come this way.
It will be a fight to a finish!"

And as the boy ranchers wondered at the fate of Rosemary and Floyd
there came from the front a burst of firing.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE RUSE OF ROSEMARY

Well it was that a body of fighters with the experience of the United
States troopers and the cowboys from Diamond X ranch went up against
the Yaquis, and not some brave but rash band of rescuers.  The latter
would have been defeated almost at once for the Indians had picked out
an admirable place in which to make their last stand.

They had retreated into the mountains, along a trail that only the most
hardy could follow.  Then, finding, as they doubtless did, that their
pursuers were ever at their heels, they hastened to what was,
virtually, a natural fortress--a nook among the rocky walls of the
defile.  From there they shot at the approaching troopers and cowboys.

"No useless risks!" ordered Captain Marshall, as he and his men came up
to the attack.

The Yaquis had several distinct advantages in their favor.  They were
up above the rescuers and could fire down on them, while the boy
ranchers and their friends had not only to fight but to climb up, and
the latter was a handicap.

Then the Indians had what was almost like a rocky fort to protect them,
while those making the attack had to approach pretty much in the open.
Of course there were rocks that could be used as cover, but these were
so scattered that it prevented the approach of the men in a body.
Individuals could creep from rock to rock, and so advance, but there
could be no concerted rush against the Yaquis, and that was what was
needed to overcome them.

However the fight was only in its early stages yet, and, like a
football game, one could not tell what would happen until the final
whistle was blown.  Captain Marshall was a veteran fighter and could be
depended on.  His men realized this, and so did the outfit from Diamond
X.

There was nothing very spectacular about this fight.  Little of it
could have been seen by an observer, if you except the spurts of smoke
from unseen guns and the echoes caused by the shots.  For each man, on
both sides, was firing from cover.  The Yaquis had the advantage that
their cover--a big wall of rock--sheltered many of them in an almost
straight line, and they could fire in volleys on signal, while the
soldiers and cowboys had to fire individually and at odd times, as they
made their way from one sheltering stone to another.

Thus the Yaquis could concentrate their fire on one man if they had a
glimpse of some incautiously exposed arm or leg, while no one soldier
could hope to inflict much damage on a crowd of Indians behind a thick
stone wall.

But the fight was not so unequal as seemed at first sight.  For while
the Yaquis were strongly entrenched, they were outnumbered--of that
there was little doubt.  And they were fighting picked men, who had
been in many dangerous skirmishes and fights, whereas the Indians were
at best but a sort of brigand bushwhackers.

Each side was desperate, perhaps the Indians more so, for they must
have realized that they would be given short shrift if any harm now
came to Rosemary and Floyd.  The soldiers and cowboys would not
hesitate to take swift and sure vengeance.  So the Indians must fight
to the bitter end, selling their lives as dearly as possible.

"I just wonder if Rosemary and Floyd are up in that nest of beggars?"
mused Bud, as he and his cousins were at last allowed to proceed up the
defile, toward where the Yaquis were making their last stand.  Bud had
begged so hard to be allowed to go to the front, to at least help his
cousins load their weapons if nothing else, that permission had been
granted.

The boy ranchers were close together now, each sheltered behind a rock,
and almost in line with the foremost of the attackers who were under
the shadow of the natural fort, behind the wall of which the Yaquis
were making their last stand.

"I hope they are up there," said Nort, answering Bud's question.  "If
they brought them this far they probably wouldn't do away with them
now.  They must be up there!"

"I wish we had them down here," said Dick.  "It's going to be hard work
to get the imps out of their den!"

"You supplied two good earfuls that time, kid!" said Rolling Stone.
"Ah, you will, will you!" he added quickly, and he fired at an exposed
head over the top of the wall that hid the Indians.

There was a howl of pain mingled with rage, that could be heard above
the din of the fighting.

"You nipped him!" cried Yellin' Kid.

"I tried to," grimly said Rolling Stone.

And so the fighting went on, in pot-shot fashion, with occasional
volleys from the Yaquis.

"They're only wasting their lead," spoke Captain Marshall.  "But I
wonder where they got so many cartridges?"

"Likely they made another raid," suggested Snake.

This, later, was found to be the case.  A store keeper had been killed
and his stock looted, provisions and arms being taken.

If the boy ranchers and their friends could have looked behind the
natural wall of rock, which constituted the fort that proved to be the
last stand of the Yaquis, and if they could have looked farther, into a
big cave, the mouth of which was concealed from a view below by this
same wall, their questions as to Rosemary and Floyd would have been
answered.

For the captives were there.  Weary, apprehensive, tired and fairly ill
from their hardships, Rosemary and her brother had been thrust into the
cavern when the Yaquis reached this vantage place, knowing their
pursuers were close behind them.

"Something's up!" Floyd had said as they were rudely hustled into the
hiding place.

"I hope it's the end," said Rosemary dismally.  Poor girl!  She was
about done up, and she no longer had her weapon as a means of defence.
By a ruse it had been taken from her, though she and Floyd fought
desperately to retain it.  But Mike, as one of his men snatched it
away, only laughed at them.

"The end!  What do you mean?" asked Floyd.

"I mean I think this will be the last fight.  You can tell by the way
they thrust us in here, and hurried out with their guns, that something
unusual is taking place.  I believe our rescuers are coming!"

"That's what we thought when they sent us off in charge of Mike and the
smaller gang," observed Floyd.

"Yes, but this is different!" declared Rosemary.  "They can't get out
of this place in a hurry, and once our friends, whether soldiers or
cowboys from Uncle Henry's ranch, get this far, they'll never give up
until they break through the Indians."

"If they only do!" murmured Floyd.  He was cut and bruised from a fight
he had with two of the Yaquis, when he endeavored to go to the aid of
his sister, as her weapon was wrested from her.  Floyd's left arm was
badly wrenched, so he could hardly use it.

And then, after the hurried thrusting into the cave of the captives,
had come the first shots of the soldier scouts in response to the fire
of the Yaqui sentry.

"They're here!" cried Floyd, when it became very evident that an attack
in force was going on.

"Oh!  I'm glad!" exclaimed Rosemary, and tears of relief came to sooth
her ragged nerves.

They went as close as they dared to the mouth of the cave to look at
the backs of the Yaquis who were lined up along the wall firing down on
the soldiers and cowboys.  No guard was stationed at the entrance to
the cavern--none was needed.  The rear was a wall of solid rock, as
Rosemary and her brother had discovered soon after being rushed into
it.  In front of the entrance was a rocky platform, and extending along
the outer edge of this, in the form of a semicircle, was the defending
wall of stone.

This rocky wall dropped abruptly down into the defile where the cowboys
and soldiers were making the attack.  It would be almost impossible to
descend it.  The way up was by a narrow passage which was now choked by
rocks the Indians had piled there.

On either side of the cavern's entrance the rock rose in steep slopes,
not altogether impossible of being scaled, but a hindrance to a quick
retreat.  That is what Captain Marshall meant when he said the Yaquis
were practically backed up against a stone wall.

The firing became sharper and quicker and the reports of the guns of
the attackers sounded nearer.  They were, in fact, creeping up, taking
advantage of every bit of cover.

There were casualties on both sides, Dick being put out of the game by
a bullet through his right arm.  Fortunately it only entered the flesh,
breaking no bones.  But he was ordered to the rear, much to his
disgust.  Nort and Bud still stuck, Bud helping Nort in loading.

Perhaps the situation was hardest on Rosemary and Floyd, for they were
obliged to remain in the cave, doing nothing, and fearing the worst.
If the Indians succeeded in standing off the rescuers, or in killing so
many of them that the survivors would not dare rush the place, what
would it mean to the captives?

Rosemary dared not think of it.

Then, following a period of unusually heavy firing, the plucky girl
made up her mind to act.

"Floyd!" she exclaimed, "I'm desperate!  I'm going to do something!

"Not--you're not going to--"

Floyd stumbled over expressing the fear that she was going to rush out
and throw herself over the rocky wall.

"It's just a chance," went on Rosemary, "but I'm going to take it.  A
desperate chance!"

"But what, Rosemary?"

"I'm going to play a trick on these Indians!  I think I can do it!"

"A trick?"

"Yes.  As soon as the next period of heavy firing quiets down I'm going
to rush out, yelling, and point back to the cave.  I want you to do the
same."

"But what good will it do?"

"It will give the Indians the impression that our friends--or some
one--has managed to get up the rocks, and that they are coming from the
rear.  There may be an entrance into that cave from the back.  I don't
know, and I don't believe these Indians do.  Anyhow if we rush out, all
excited, yelling as hard as we can, and pointing to the cave back of
us, I think the Yaquis will take the alarm and become so confused that
our friends, whoever they are out there, will be able to rush this
position."

As yet, you must understand, Rosemary and her brother were unaware of
the identity of the attackers.

Rosemary started up from where she was sitting in their extemporized
and miserable prison cave.  It was evidently her intention to put into
operation at once her desperate plan.

"Wait a minute!" exclaimed her brother.

"What for?" she questioned.

"I'm not so sure that it is the best thing to do," he answered.

Floyd was rather less impulsive than his sister--that is on occasions.
There were times when he could be more hot headed.

"Well, what else is there to do?" Rosemary asked.

She was going to be perfectly fair about it, and if Floyd had anything
better to offer as a suggestion she would listen to him.

"Let's think about it a bit longer," he finally said, with a long
intaking of breath, which told more plainly than words, how the
situation was oppressing him.  "I'm sure it's mighty plucky of you,
Rosemary, to lay out such a plan as this, but I don't believe I ought
to let you try it.  Something might happen."

"Something is going to happen anyhow," she said, with ominous quiet,
and a grim tightness showed in the lines of her mouth.  "I believe
these Indians have just about reached the end of their rope.  They have
been very patient with us--that is patient from their standpoint.  Now
they have met with opposition, and they must know if they are
overpowered it will be to our advantage, and that our friends, or
whoever is out there firing, will take revenge."

"That's so," agreed Floyd.

"Well then, we've just _got_ to do something!" said Rosemary,
desperately.  "And I'm going to do it."

Again she started up.

"Wait a minute!" exclaimed her brother again.

He seemed to be listening.  He leaned forward, and then softly arose
from where he was sitting and went forward.

"What is it?" asked his sister in a low voice.

"I thought I heard voices--good old United States voices, and not this
jargon of Mexican and Spanish," was the reply.  "Maybe some of the
attackers, whoever they are, have broken through."

A look of delighted joy came over the face of Rosemary.  But a moment
later it faded away and she seemed hopeless.

"It can't be," she said.  "There'd be a lot of yelling and shouting if
any of those who are attacking the Yaquis had broken through their
lines," she went on.  "There's no use waiting, Floyd.  Let's try my
plan!"

But her brother was not yet convinced.

"It will be all right if it works," he agreed.  "But if it fails, and
they only have the laugh on us, we'll be treated so much the worse.  I
don't mind on my own account--but yours!" and he glanced at his sister.

"I hadn't thought of that," spoke Rosemary in a low voice.  "If it
should--fail--why--"

She did not complete the sentence.

"It would only make them more angry, I'm afraid," went on Floyd.

There was silence, for a time, between brother and sister.  It was
broken only by occasional and distant shouts, punctuated, now and
again, by a shot.  But the heavy fusillade had subsided for a time.

"Well?" questioned Rosemary.

She was eager to get some action.

"This is what I'll do," said Floyd, after some tense consideration,
"I'll take a look around and see how matters shape up."

"Then what?" asked Rosemary.

She was evidently not going to let the matter go by default.

"Well, then if I can't see anything better to do then what you
proposed, we'll go to it!" decided Floyd.  "You sit here and I'll
scurry around.  I won't be long."

"No, please don't," begged Rosemary.  "If we're going to do anything
we'll have to do it very soon.  This can't last--much longer!"

Floyd did not stop to ask his sister just what she meant.  In fact he
did not dare question her as to what it was that could not last "much
longer."  He had a desperate fear that it was Rosemary's own spirit
that was on the point of breaking.

Up to now she had kept up her courage remarkably well.  But there was a
limit, and if the breaking point had been reached Floyd did not know
what would follow.

He shot a quick look at the girl before he started out on what he
thought might be a last desperate venture.  He felt that he might
discover something to do--some way of escape--that would not make it
necessary for his sister to virtually rush into danger.

And he was relieved when he saw the calm and cool look that was on
Rosemary's face.

"She isn't going to give up!" decided Floyd.

There was an exultant feeling in his heart.

During this talk between brother and sister the dirty Indian detailed
to guard the captives had sauntered within view of them every now and
then.  To quiet his suspicions, in case he should have any, Rosemary
and Floyd had spoken most casually on these occasions.

The lad waited until the guard had come on one of his periodic trips of
inspection and had dropped out of sight on a ledge of rock, and then
Floyd started out.

"Don't be too long!" called Rosemary in a low voice.

"I won't!" he promised.

Walking as aimlessly as he could pretend, Floyd started toward a break
in the natural wall that ran in front of the prison cavern.  He wanted
to see if he could catch a glimpse of the Yaquis below him.

"And I'd give a whole lot of money--if I had it--to see who is fighting
them," thought Floyd.  "But I haven't much left."

He glanced ruefully down at his now soiled and torn garments.  And as
he thrust his hands into his pockets he missed many a trinket and
possession.  For nearly everything had been taken away by Paz, Mike or
some of their rascally followers.

Two or three Indians, some of them wounded, were coming back "from the
front," so to speak.  One of them glanced scowlingly at Floyd, as he
passed the lad, evidently associating his wounds with the presence of
the prisoner.

"I'd give you a whole lot worse than that if I had a chance--Ugly
Face!" thought Floyd.

Another member of the renegade band grinned or--Floyd took it for a
grin--as he passed.  But none of them seemed to care where the lad went
or what he did, and for this Floyd was glad.

"I seem to be getting somewhere," he murmured.  "Whether I can hit on
any scheme to beat Rosemary's is a question, but I don't want her to
take the risk unless there's nothing else to do."

He had now reached a low spot in the natural rocky wall.  He felt that
if he could once get a glimpse at this point he might see something
that would help him and Rosemary.

And to his great delight, when he had sauntered, as casually as he
could make it, to an observation point, what he saw made him gasp for
breath.

For, grouped closely together, below him, on a sort of big table of
rock, were a number of the Yaquis.  They appeared to be holding a sort
of council or parley, and were gathered about an Indian to whom Mike
and Paz often delegated certain duties.

But this was not what caused the heart of Floyd to thump so desperately
against his ribs, making such a noise, he wildly feared, that the
pounding would be heard by some passing Indian.

What caused him fairly to gasp for breath was the sight of a great
boulder, poised on the edge of the natural wall, and hanging almost
directly over the group of talking Indians.

"If I can push that rock down on them it will do the trick!" thought
Floyd.  "It'll put some of 'em out of business, and the rest will be so
frightened that they'll retreat.  Then whoever is out there trying to
break through to help us, will have matters their own way.  That's what
I'll do.  Ill pry that rock loose and let it dash 'em on the heads."

It was a horrible thing to think of, much more horrible to do, but the
situation of Rosemary and Floyd was desperate indeed.  The end seemed
to justify the means.

"The point is," mused Floyd, "can I shove that rock down?"

Looking about him he saw that he was not observed.  He quickly made his
way nearer to the rock, and then, reaching out his hands, he pushed.

Gently at first he exerted the pressure, and then putting more power
into the shove he thrust with all his might.

"It's giving!  It's giving!" thought Floyd, with a desperate catch of
his breath.  "I can shove it down on 'em and dash 'em all up!"

He exerted all his strength.  The rock was moving, and even with all
the villainies the Indians had to their discredit Floyd's nerve almost
failed him as he saw the great boulder sway as if for the plunge.

But to his chagrin he felt the rock move back toward him again.  He
tried to hold it away--to thrust it from him--but nature, in the guise
of the attraction of gravitation--pulled the rock back into the
socket-shaped bed where it had rested so long.

It rolled back with a grinding sound, and Floyd feared, for a moment
that he had loosened it so that it would topple back and fall upon his
feet.

But this did not happen.  The great half-round stone oscillated to and
fro and then came to rest.  Floyd had only caused it to sway a little.

"Well, I moved it!" he said with a gasp.  "I'll try again.  If I can
only get it started it will do the trick."

Again he pushed, with all his might, but again the same thing happened.
He managed to make the rock sway outward, a little farther over the
edge of the wall, but back it came again into its hollow resting place.

Then Floyd understood the nature of the matter.

"It's a balanced rock," he said to himself.  "She's been resting here
for ages, and you can move it just so far but no farther.  It would
take a team of army mules to dislodge it."

He looked over the wall again.  The Indians were still in the same
place, eagerly talking--a score or more of feet below the boy.

"It's too good a chance to miss!" whispered Floyd desperately.  "I
wonder if I can't find some sort of a lever and pry it loose."

He looked about him.  Not far away was part of a dead tree branch,
thick as his arm.

"Just what I need!" he exclaimed.

He ran to pick up the branch and, returning with it, set one end under
the balanced rock, that was still swaying slightly from his exertions.

"Now for a last try!" murmured the lad.

He bent his weight on the long end of the improvised lever.  The rock
seemed to rise from its socket bed, and to sway outward.  There was an
exultation in the boy's heart.  He thought, in another instant, that he
could send the great stone crashing down into the midst of the Yaquis.

Then, suddenly there came a sharp report, and Floyd felt himself
falling.

His first feeling was that he had been shot and that this was the end.
But he felt no pain, save a sudden bump as he sprawled on the rocks,
and then he realized what had happened.

He had pressed so heavily on the old and dried piece of wood that it
had snapped and broken with a report like that of a pistol, and he had
dropped.

"Too bad!" murmured Floyd.

As he picked himself up he saw two of the Yaqui Indians running around
a rocky corner.  They had evidently been drawn to the place by the
sound.

"No good letting them know what I tried to do," quickly decided Floyd.
"It would only make it worse for us."

Having decided on a line of action it did not take the lad an instant
to carry it out.  Quickly he picked up the broken pieces of his lever
and started back with them toward the cave where he and his sister were
held captives.

"Make fire!" he said to the Indians.  "Make fire--cook grub!"

"Ugh!" they grunted.  They evidently accepted this obvious explanation.

Their suspicions lulled, they turned and went back the way they had
come, pausing long enough, however, to watch Floyd enter the cave where
Rosemary waited.

"Well," she questioned, as he threw the broken ends of his lever on the
rocky floor.

"No go," answered Floyd despondently.  "I had a peach of a chance to
play a trump hand on them, but luck was against me."

He told what he had tried to do with the rock.

"Oh?  I--I'm almost glad it didn't succeed!" said Rosemary with a
shudder.  "It would have been--terrible!"

"Nothing is too bad for these devils!" cried Floyd.  "But I give up.  I
can't think of anything more to do."

"Then shall I try my way?" asked his sister.

"It is a desperate chance," Floyd murmured.

"But don't you think we ought to try it?  We may be able to reach the
wall, and get over, or go down the trail we came up.  It was too steep
for the horses, but maybe we can make it."

The horses had been abandoned by the Yaquis as they entrenched
themselves for this last stand.  The animals could not make the ascent.

"Well?" asked Rosemary of her brother.

"I'm with you!" he said, with a sharp intaking of his breath.

Then they got ready for the ruse Rosemary had proposed.




CHAPTER XXV

"ALL'S WELL!"

What was taking place down below, Rosemary and Floyd could only guess
at.  But that the rescuers were taking advantage of everything possible
was evident from the occasional hits they made among the Yaquis.  More
than one was killed and several wounded as they fired over the top of
the wall, or through loopholes amid the rocks.

Then, soon after the determination at which Rosemary had arrived, there
came a more violent fusillade than any that had preceded.  In this
several Indians were forced to retire because of serious wounds.  Then
the firing died away.

Though the captive lad and his sister did not know it, this sudden
cessation in the firing of the attackers was due to an order of the
commander of the troopers.  The captain was, also, nominally in command
of the boy ranchers and their friends.

"There is too much indiscriminate firing," decided Captain Marshall.
"We haven't an unlimited supply of ammunition.  We've got to go a bit
slow.  No telling how long we may have to camp on the trail of these
imps."

It was a wise determination as they all agreed, and the word went up
and down the line of attackers to be sparing of powder and lead.  This
is what caused the troopers and cowboys suddenly to cease firing,
following a desperate fusillade which they hoped would turn the tide of
battle in their favor, but it had not done so.

"We must size the situation up," decided the captain.  "Find out just
how many more rounds we have left--counting also the supply of our
friends from Diamond X," he ordered an officer.

And the taking stock of the situation was soon under way.  That the
Yaquis were as glad of the respite, as were our friends, need not be
doubted.

Advantage was taken of the lull to look after the wounded, and to bring
water to the fighting men, for they were sorely in need of drinks.  And
warm as the water was, it seemed the best that had ever trickled down
their throats.

Back in their prison, Rosemary and Floyd noted the sudden silence that
followed the brisk firing.  Brother and sister looked at each other,
and there was fear in their faces.

"Do you suppose that means they have quit?" asked the girl.

"Who?" her brother wanted to know.

"The ones who are out there trying to help us--cowboys from our uncle's
ranch, I hope."

"I hope so, too, and I hope they haven't had to quit," spoke Floyd.
"But we've got to go on with what we planned now.  I'm for it as much
as you are, Rosemary.  Something has to be done!  Are you sure you
won't weaken at the last minute, and cave in?"

"Did you ever know me to do a thing like that?" she asked with flashing
eyes.

"No, I never did."

"Well, I'm not going to start now!  Don't worry, Floyd.  Somehow I feel
sure that this will pull us through!  I thought of it in the
night--perhaps I dreamed it--and I have a feeling that it is going to
work out all right.  Don't be afraid.  Let's try it with all our might!
Are you ready?"

"As ready as I ever shall be," was the grim answer.  "But if you're
playing a 'hunch,' so to speak, that's different.  You always were
lucky!"

He laughed grimly, and Rosemary joined in.  It was the first time they
had laughed since being taken captives.

As her brother had said, Rosemary was "lucky."

For a moment brother and sister looked about them.  They must act soon,
and, after all, the consequences could not be much worse than those
which continually were hanging over them.

"Whenever you're ready--give the word!" whispered Floyd.

"Now!" suddenly called Rosemary to her brother.

"Come on!" he echoed.

Together they rushed from the cave, straight toward the band of Indians
lined up, with their backs toward them, along the wall of the
improvised fort.

What Rosemary said she never really knew.  It was a burst of wild,
hysterical yelling, such as girls and women alone are capable of.  And
as she screamed and ran she pointed back toward the cave.

As for Floyd he declared that what he yelled was something like:

"They're coming!  They're coming!  They're attacking in the rear!"

To this he added some improvised warwhoops of his own devising, and
some football yells, for he had been a cheer leader at one time for his
college team.

Whatever was said little mattered.  It was the character of the
shouting of the desperate youth and maiden, and their actions that
counted.  Coming as Rosemary's ruse did, after the hardest firing yet
on the part of the attackers, it rather got on the nerves of the Yaquis
if they had such organs, which is doubtful.

To every one of them it appeared, as Rosemary and Floyd intended it
should, that an attack from the rear was about to take place.  As
Rosemary had guessed, the Indians knew no more about the cave than she
did.  They had hastily examined it and decided there was no rear
entrance or exit, as the case might be.  But they might have overlooked
some hidden passage, and this is what all of them evidently thought had
been done.

At any rate, as Rosemary and Floyd rushed out, yelling almost like
Indians themselves, a panic started among the Yaquis.  They saw
themselves caught between two fires, with no retreat possible.

With whoops of despair some threw themselves over the cliff.  Others
rushed into the cave, while some climbed up the rocky walls at either
side.  A few remained, firing down at the attackers below.

Rosemary's yells, and those of her brother, carried to the soldiers and
cowboys.  At first they thought a sally was about to take place.

But when they saw some Indians come over the wall, one luckless imp
slipping and falling to his death, some idea of what was taking place
became manifest to Captain Marshall.

"They're in a panic!" he cried.  "Something has frightened 'em!  Come
on, men!"

He led a rush forward, just as Rosemary appeared at the top of the
wall, waving her neck handkerchief in a frenzied signal.

"There she is!  Rosemary!" cried Bud, not exactly recognizing his
cousin, but guessing the girl could be none other.

The rush of the attackers, together with the panic that had run through
the ranks of the Indians like wildfire, was all that was needed to turn
the scale.  The Yaquis, with howls of fear, not knowing what it was all
about, threw down their guns and sought for means of escape.

Mike, the leader, seemed dazed at the suddenness of it all.  But he
gathered his wits together and, seeing Rosemary at the wall, waving to
the soldiers and cowboys below, the desperate Yaquis sprang toward her.

But Floyd was watching his sister.  The lad picked up a revolver from
where it had fallen as its owner retreated and fired point blank at
Mike.  The ruffian crumpled up and went down in a heap, as Rosemary
herself, unable to stand the strain longer, sank down half fainting.

Her ruse had succeeded.  The Yaquis were on the run.

A few minutes later the place was filled with soldiers and cowboys who
made prisoners of such of the renegades as were left alive--and these
were not many, though they included Mike, who had only been wounded by
Floyd.

"Oh, Bud!  I'm so glad!  So glad!" murmured Rosemary, as her cousin put
his arm around her--only one arm for the other was still sore.

"So'm I!" murmured Bud.  "This is another cousin--Nort," and he nodded
toward his boy rancher companion.  "And there's a third one down
there--Dick--but he's hurt!"

"Badly?"

"Oh, no, just a piece of lead through his arm.  He'll be all right in a
few days.  But say, Rosemary, what did you and Floyd do to turn the
tables so quickly?"

"Rosemary did it all," Floyd said with a cheerful grin.  "It was just a
bluff!" and he told the story.

"Nerviest thing I ever heard of!" complimented Captain Marshall.

"Heap good squaw!" was Buck Tooth's opinion, and that seemed to sum it
all up.

The prisoners secured, the dead on both sides buried and the story of
the capture and rescue briefly told, arrangements were made for
returning to civilization.

The raid of the Yaquis was over, and so severe was the lesson taught
them that it was many years before another trick like that was tried.

Rosemary and Floyd, though they had suffered many hardships, were not
physically harmed, except for the youth's wrenched arm, which was
painful but not dangerous.

"Oh, but we want some water to wash in!" Rosemary confided to Bud.
"They've kept us so much on the go, ever since they captured us, that I
can't bear to think of it.  I just _dreamed_ of clean bath tubs filled
with white soap suds!"

"We'll soon be at the ranch," Bud said.

"Oh, but I can't wait until then."

"Same here!" put in Floyd.  "I don't believe a Yaqui touches water from
the time he's born until he dies."

In order to give everyone a chance to rest, it was decided to camp for
a few days in a favorable spot, which was found a few miles from where
the Indians had made their last stand--a final stand for many, as more
than a dozen were killed.

The others were sent back under guard as prisoners, Mike among them,
scowling blackly as he was led away.  A scout was sent to the nearest
place where there was a telegraph station, to send the good news back
to Diamond X.

"And now we can take it easy," observed Bud as he with his cowboy
cousins and the newly rescued captives enjoyed the first real meal
without anticipations of a fight immediately after it.

"You must have had a dreadful time, Rosemary," said Dick, whose arm was
in a sling.

"Well, it seemed so at the time, and yet I want to laugh when I think
how I fooled those Indians just by screaming."

"It isn't the first time you've brought help by screaming!" laughed
Bud.  "I remember once when I tried to kiss you--"

"Tut!  Tut!" laughed Rosemary.  "That's past history."

And so, in time, was the raid of the Yaquis.  In due season Rosemary
and her brother, with our boy heroes reached Diamond X, parting from
the soldier escort.  And once at the ranch, which had been their
objective before the kidnapping, the visitors were royally entertained.

"Well, it was the best adventure we ever had," declared Nort, and his
brother agreed with him.  But it was not to be the last of the exciting
happenings in which they were to be involved.

For these were lads of action, ever in the van when there was a chance
for a fight.  And those who wish to follow the further adventures of
Bud, Nort and Dick, may do so in the next volume of this series, which
will be entitled "The Boy Ranchers in the Flood; or Saving the Stock at
Diamond X."

In that we shall see how they fared when again called on to act their
parts in the face of danger.  But, for the present we shall leave them
to enjoy the company of Rosemary and Floyd at Diamond X and in Happy
Valley.




THE END