X.

THE SUGAR PARTY.

Time went on its course like the constant roll of waters, and seasons
came and went as usual in the Waldron Settlement.  A deep and early
snow having fallen, and remained with frequent additions, a long and
rigorous winter reigned in absolute sway.  But now, on the last of
February, the sun wheeled high on his circuits; thaws and rains ensued,
and the first robin on the leafless maple sang, sweet harbinger of
spring.  Winter recalled his tyrant ministers, or restrained them in
their wrath; and milder days and warmer skies appeared in pleasant
alternation, with many still of tempest and gloom.

The milder days multiplied; the snow had less depth on the earth, and
now came on the season of sugar making.  In all our forest region
magnificent sugar maples abounded like an orchard, and Fabens prepared
for his spring encampment in the bush.  His shanty was repaired with
new bark on the roof, and a fresh carpet of clean wheat straw on the
rough bark floor; his kettles were hung; his troughs were turned up by
the trees and cleaned of the mould and cobwebs of the last season;
sleek slanting boxes were cut in the sides of the noble maples in the
process of tapping, and spouts driven under to conduct the sap to the
troughs; and quick was his step and diligent his labor, to gather and
boil so fast that his troughs would not run over.

The camp was within hearing distance of the house, and his father,
though trembling with age, went out to keep him company, and attend to
the fire and kettles, while he was away with two pails, gathering the
delicious flowings of his maples.

And Julia, too, was there on many a pleasant afternoon, plying her busy
distaff in the shanty; and Fanny lent gladness to the scene; leaping
like a merry fawn about the little opening, and amid the clustering
bushes; her face lustrous and soft as a velvet peach; her voice
blithesome as the pee-wee's, and clear and sweet as the robin's.

"And if Clinton could be here, too!" sighed the bereaved mother.
"Dear, dear Clinton! if he could be here, O would we not be happy?"

"How I would kiss him, and say, 'Good brother,' and feed him, and
crinkle his curly hair, if he would come back!" added Fanny.

To one fond of the romance of rural life, a scene like this addresses
many attractive charms.  The evenings were clear and beautiful; a class
of the grandest constellations took their course in the sky, and rained
their holy lights, while the winds were asleep in their caves, and keen
frosts came down each night to increase the morrow's run; the days were
warm and agreeable with bracing air and kindly sunshine; and the
forests were roused from their stillness by the sound of the axe, the
shrill reports of the frost escaping from the trees, and the notes of a
few birds that carolled of the coming spring-time.

Fabens had, for some time, felt the advances of spring in his heart;
and he had a heart in the season and in its manly toils.  He remained
in the camp over night when his maples had given a copious run, and
tended his kettles, to boil and save what the bounty of Providence so
lavishly furnished.  He had no one with him but his dog, and yet he was
never alone.  His thoughts were his companions, his hopes, his pleasing
pastimes.  A veil of blinding atmosphere hung over him, and his eyes
perceived no objects beyond his camp but the solemn trees and the lofty
stars; and yet his mind was not muffled up in that veil.  When Jesus
died, the veil of God's temple was rent in twain; the veil between
earth and heaven; and though that veil would continue to hang in its
place for a time; and he could not make maps of the heavenly world, or
locate the constellations of all its starry glories, or gossip with its
unseen citizens, as with familiars here; still Faith saw light enough
streaming through the rent in the veil to raise and enlarge his soul;
and Hope saw light enough to replume her wings and re-adjust her
vision.  God embosomed him in his spiritual presence; Christ was to him
not a cold and distant phantasm, but a warm and intimate friend.  Good
spirits were all about him, he believed, though he heard not their
voices, and knew not their names; and they were coming and going on
God's errands of love and light.  A soft breath fanned his forehead; a
sweet emotion filled his heart; a burst of light broke like morning on
his mind; and he found it easy to conceive them the touch and gift of
some guardian being whom God had sent with the answers of his prayers.
And who could say but it might be the spirit of Clinton, or Matthew's
ascended mother, whom God had thus employed?

Call it not superstition, if such were his thoughts.  It is a guileless
heart, and a lofty faith that can thus sense the presence of God, and
dwell in the blissful assurance that angels guard the inhabitants of
earth, though we see and hear them not; as we believe, at noonday the
stars stand sentinels above, although they are veiled from our view.

At times, moreover, that wild encampment was the scene of social
enjoyment.  It was a custom in the settlement to give parties in the
bush, and cultivate feelings of love and friendship.  They were rude
indeed, and there was observed none of the pretence of etiquette which
passes for refinement in fashionable circles.  Still there was genuine
sentiment manifested, and an honest and simple refinement of soul,
superior to any outward elegance.  Some of the settlers, it is true,
were strangers to those religious sensibilities enjoyed by Fabens and
his family; and they read Nature and Humanity with a different eye from
his, and received different impressions.  There was that in the manner
of the Teezles, the Colwells, the Flaxmans, and others, which at times
might appear low and vulgar, to persons educated in a different sphere
of life; but even in their hearts, there was an open truthfulness which
gave signs of real nobility; and a full flowing sympathy, a solid
common sense, a love of principle, a love of the good and noble,
against which mere surface refinement and polite words, empty of soul
and meaning, would weigh but as feathers in the scale.

They possessed heart and soul in the richest raw material.  They were
full-grown, ripened specimens of aboriginal life.  They had a plump
berry, as the farmers say, and came to the sickle without cockle, or
rust, or weevil, or smut.  They were as thrifty vines, and needed only
to be trimmed and trained.  They were as virgin gold in the bullion,
and wanted to be melted and minted into coin.  They were as statues
rough-hewn at the quarry, and would have ripened to forms of majestic
beauty, with brows like Jove and Minerva; with bosoms like Venus,
cheeks like Ceres, and lips like Apollo, had the chisel of art but
sculptured them out, rounded them off, and polished them down to an
elegant, ornate life.

During the season in mention, there had been several sugar parties, and
now came Fabens' turn to reciprocate the compliment.  So, one pleasant
day, when there was a slight cessation in the run, he received a few
neighbors to his camp, to spend an afternoon and evening.

Uncle Walter and his wife came over at an early hour; Thomas Teezle and
his wife, and their bouncing, cherry-lipped daughter, Rebecca Ann, were
present, confessing to none for a lack of pleasure.  Mr. Wilson and his
wife were on hand, with kindly word and cheerful face, and tarried to
share the latest social sweet; and the son and daughter of a new
family, Lot and Nancy Nimblet, came with them, and expressed much
delight with a feast so rural and agreeable.

A new carpet of straw was spread on the shanty floor, and the neatness
of the ground before it, and around the little opening, gave evidence
of the neatness and interest of Julia Fabens.  All declared it a
pleasant afternoon, and just in the nick of time for a sugar party.
Uncle Walter was called on for a story, and he gave one of his best,
with a witch of a tongue, that fairly reversed the wheels of time, and
trundled them back to the wild, wild forest again, and tumbled them out
amid screaming panthers, and howling wolves.  Mr. and Mrs. Flaxman sang
a merry song, in a merry nasal tune.  Aunt Polly Waldron _had_ to tell
of the tory that fired her barn and ripped up her feather bed; and how
he whooped and keeled when she dropped him, and how many tories and
Indians ran away.  Then, Mr. Waldron told a story, and Major Fabens
followed.

Fabens the younger, and his sensible wife, contributed their share to
interest the party, and though they were unusually cheerful and social,
there was an elevated tone of sobriety in all they uttered, which had
its happy and refining influence on every heart.

Early in the afternoon, a kettle of sugar was set before them, and
little banks of the clearest crystal snow were placed around for
coolers, and then with wooden spoons, and grateful appetites, the feast
was enjoyed.  As the sugar but increased their relish for the evening
refreshment, they partook of that when served, with a still better
zest, and many kind expressions and feelings, and many jets of wit and
glee, were interchanged at the meal.  A pleasant plant grew in the
marshes of that country, called evan-root, which, when boiled in sap,
and tempered with cream, made a delicious beverage, tasting like
coffee; and their nice broiled venison, and Indian bread, washed down
with flowing cups of that favorite drink, was a banquet worthy of a
president.

"A president should go hungry," said Uncle Walter, "if his dainty
palate didn't relish a supper like this."

"A president should relish any food that is fit for his humblest
fellow-citizens," answered Fabens.  "And a president worthy of his
station, would honor our rude occupation as much as his own, and share
with pleasure the humblest wholesome meal.  What is a president after
all, but the servant we employ to look after our affairs, to be
respected according to his competence and faithfulness, and the amount
of service he does?  And nothing, I am sure, can be found in the
grandest entertainment to exhibit refinement, and call forth honor, so
well as the _heart_ with which it is given and enjoyed."

"I guess Troffater would kindy like to be here," said Colwell.  "I seen
him when I was comin', and he looked sour, and said he wasn't invited.
Did ye mean to make a bridge o' his nose?"

"I would do Troffater a kindness as soon as anybody," answered Fabens;
"but his shocking levity, I have often told him, displeases us, and his
company was not desired.  He is old enough to speak with cleaner lips.
If I could hope to improve him any, I would invite and visit him often.
We do mean to visit his family, and ask them to our house."

"He's havin' the sulks the natteral way," said Colwell.

"He's mad as a March hare, and says, he axes no odds o' Mat Fabens,"
added Teezle.

"Speak low," said Wilson, "I'll warrant, he's near us this very minute;
he's olers spookin' about, and eaves-droppin'."

"Let him spook about and eaves-drop," said Fabens, "I owe him nothing,
but pity for his disposition, and I would say all I have said, and
more, to his face.  There is one comfort!  God has power to give him a
better heart, and I hope some day he will."

"I dun know about that," said Colwell.  "Mebby he can, but it will take
more brimstun than the critter's worth to cleanse his rotten sperit."

"And they'll have to break in an egg or two after that, I guess, to
make it white and clear, as Aunt Polly does her sugar," added Teezle.

"Don't make light of it," said Fabens.  "With God all things good are
possible.  I would not add a single pain to his misery.  Who of us--"

"There! there, see that light in the bushes yonder!" screamed Nancy
Nimblet, who had been frightened by the idea that they were watched,
and had been looking around the camp for sights of alarm.  "That light
yonder!--what is it?--what is it?"

"A Jack-o'-lantern, may be, and may be somethin' wuss," said Colwell,
rising.

"A ball of fire!--what can it be? see, it comes towards us!" added
Uncle Walter.

"It's right where we found little Clinton's hat," cried Mrs. Fabens,
pale with terror.  "O, dear, what can it be?  He couldn't have been
murdered, my dear Clinton couldn't have been murdered, and that
appeared to reveal his fate!"

"I'll warrant that's it!" answered Teezle.  "Square Peasley seen a
light, and heerd a gugglin' groan where the pedlar had his throat cut
in Cloverdale, you know."

"See there! see there!--it comes nearer!--look at it now; it has eyes,
and ears!--see its awful nose and mouth," cried Aunt Polly Waldron.

"What shall we do?" screamed Nancy Nimblet, all in a tremble.  "It will
hurt us!--it will kill us! where shall I go?"

"Be quiet, be calm, it cannot hurt you," said Fabens soothingly; "it
can't hurt any one.  God wouldn't let it."

"Awful!" shrieked Mr. and Mrs. Flaxman in one nasal; scream, "let us
run, let us run!"

"It's an evil spirit," said Wilson.

"The old pot-metal Cuss himself has come for us!" cried Uncle Walter.
"If I know anything about the Devil, that's him; that's his head and
ears, and eyes and teeth, I'll bet a turkey they are!"

"No, no, it cannot be an evil spirit or the Devil," said Fabens,
calmly.  "The Devil would not appear in such a form to us, and God will
guard us from evil spirits."

An agony of terror shook the whole company.  Stern and brave Uncle
Walter, who could stand before wolves and bears; who could beard the
fierce panther in his den, and count his snarling teeth,--even he
believed in ghosts, and was afraid of sights and apparitions.  It was a
horrible object, spirit, devil, or whatever it might be.  It looked
like a ball of fire, and had features of a grim half-human thing, with
huge ears, a wide mouth and grinning rows of monstrous teeth; and they
fancied they saw a black body and long tail below it.  As they gazed in
a transport of terror, Fabens escaped unobserved from the company,
passed softly around through the woods, and coming up behind the foul
fiend, he grasped its dark form in his arms, and found as he suspected,
that it was no other devil than little tantalizing Troffater, with a
carved squash shell, set out with an ox's ears, on his head, bearing
his idea of a devil's image, and lighted within by a brilliant candle!

The terror of the company soon subsided, and Fabens admonished them
against yielding again to such senseless fears; while they all departed
for their homes, and the poor transgressor was discharged with a
reprimand so sharpened by kindness that it seemed to cleave his heart.




XI.

FABENS PROMOTED TO HONOR.

In four years more, the Waldron Settlement had grown to quite a colony;
for the area of civilization extended from the Cayuga to the Owasco,
and ten miles north and south; and though the population numbered
several hundred families, and the inroads of fashion and pride began to
be perceptible there, still it remained a neighborhood; and with few
exceptions, the people exchanged neighborly offices and loves
throughout the settlement.

The inhabitants now felt the importance of their flourishing community,
and made a movement to be organized into a township, and have town
officers, and better regulations.  That movement was successful, and
the town took the name of Summerfield, and a warm and summer-green town
it was as the Lake Country had to show.

Walter Mowry was elected the first Supervisor, and Matthew Fabens, the
first Justice of the Peace.

At this late period, public offices are so plenty, and so often held by
persons whose devotion to party, or whose failure in other pursuits is
their only recommendation, that the plain and humble office of Justice
of the Peace receives little respect, and would find few candidates,
but for the lucrative interests which induce many to ask it.  It was
not so, forty years ago in the Lake Country.  At that primitive period,
that responsible office was given to no one who had not moral
qualifications to recommend him; and the person who held it was honored
as possessing capabilities equal to his duties, and holding along with
these the affection and faith of the town.

When the organization was first proposed, and the several offices were
named, the eyes of the settlement, with two or three exceptions, were
turned to Fabens, as the man best qualified to administer justice and
peace among them; and to elect him to that station was simply to say
'thus shall it be with the man whom we delight to honor.'

Of written laws, and their points and subtleties, Fabens confessed
himself ignorant.  Coke and Blackstone were never on his shelves.  He
had read a stray leaf from Hooker, and these words were incorporated as
so many notes of divine music in his soul--"No less can be said of Law,
than that her seat is the bosom of God, her voice is the harmony of the
world.  All things in heaven and earth do her homage; the very least,
as feeling her care; the greatest, as not exempted from her power.
Both angels and men, and creatures of whatsoever condition, though each
in different sort and manner; yet each and all with uniform consent
admiring her as the mother of their peace and joy;"--and this was his
idea of law, and about all he had gathered on law from books.

And as for the responsibilities committed to his trust, he fain would
have refused them, and proposed another candidate for the office; but
knowing the simple principles of justice; having a heart attuned to the
harmony of earth and heaven; having Peace as an angel dwelling in his
soul; knowing and loving what was right and lovely between man and man,
he discharged his duties with distinguished success, and his influence
went far to lift up his people to the light and sphere of spiritual
peace.

He still carried on the labors of his fine farm, with the duties of his
office, and made his own private house the seat of that justice which
once in a long while he was compelled to search out and sustain.

The manner and spirit of his administration were therefore patriarchal,
as those which the poet describes of the venerable Albert, of Wyoming;
and to the present day, traditions are preserved, and incidents related
in that peaceful town, which prove the practical wisdom and eminent
justice of "Old Squire Fabens."

Those early and eager pioneers of new countries, the lawyers, found
their way to Summerfield; that is, two or three unruly members of the
profession, while yet Squire Fabens held the wand of peace.  They had
not been long there, however, before they joined Troffater, Adonijah
Nixon, and Simon Bogle, to oppose his administration; and made very
desperate efforts to elect another in his stead.

As for the lawyers, we are not at all surprised by their opposition.
He destroyed their business, and they played as checks and
interruptions of that harmony to which his life was tuned.  And as for
the troublesome little bandy Troffater, his ill-will was expected, as a
real compliment to the wisdom and justice of the magistrate.  We have
heard of an Irishman at Donnybrook Fair, who was likely to be
disappointed of his addicted battle, finding no one to answer his
challenge; and who cried to the crowd, "I'll thank any gentleman, just
once to tread on the tail o' my coat, that my sport may begin!"  A
similar character was Tilly Troffater, and never more thankful was he
than when opportunity encouraged his quarrelsome mood; and never more
amazed or provoked at the manner in which the laws were administered,
than when his broils were suppressed while rising, and his litigations
closed as soon as he began them.

The hardest thing, under heaven, did it seem for a lawsuit to make any
progress, while Matthew Fabens was Justice of the Peace, in
Summerfield.  Pestilent Tilly was always scheming to provoke such
evils, and was always threatening his neighbors with a lawsuit.
Sometimes he would come post-haste for a warrant, or summons, or
attachment; again, he would be in hot distress to swear his life was in
danger, or his squalid character was at stake; or his neighbor's pigs
had rooted up a few weeds in his garden, or some mischievous boy had
thrown a stone through a paper pane of his window; or mounted his most
personable scare-crow on his chimney-top, arrayed in a potato necklace,
and holding a dead snake in hand; or he had secrets to disclose which
would reveal astounding villanies, that threatened the peace of the
town.

But it had always been his misfortune to fail of his designs.  Not a
scrap of a warrant or other process could he obtain.  Not the lisp of a
word or oath would the good Squire take from his lying lips.  "Get rid
of your passion; go home, and work, and help me keep the peace," was
Fabens' reply to all quarrelsome fellow-citizens.

And yet, the happy fortune to sustain his long administration, without
having to confess a case of law had been brought to trial before him,
was not reserved for Squire Fabens.  Numberless little difficulties had
been dragged into notice by three or four uncomfortable bodies, who
sought the excitement of a quarrel to rally the lagging pleasures of
indolence; and a few of these demanded his attention.  But he had ever
found it for the good of the parties in trouble, as for the general
welfare, and his own satisfaction, to calm the raging waters of
passion, by counsel, kind and wise; reconcile the antagonists, and
bring them to an amicable peace, without the sifting of testimony, and
the labors of litigation.




XII.

A LAWSUIT.

At length a crime was committed in Summerfield, which a summary process
could not despatch, and a sense of duty impelled Squire Fabens to
permit it to be tried before him, that the offender might receive his
punishment, and be set forth as an example of warning to all
evil-doers.  One afternoon in August, when farmers had finished their
wheat harvest, and were enjoying a few days of relaxation before
seeding their fallows with winter grain, Simon Bogle came all in a hot
hurry to the Justice, for a warrant against Jared Sculpin, and--"Are
you certain," asked Fabens, after hearing his long and incoherent
story, and learning the name of the accused neighbor, "are you certain
that your log-chain was not mislaid, or dropped in some place where the
leaves might have covered it?  This is a very serious charge for
neighbor to bring against neighbor.  You ought to be very certain that
it was stolen, Mr. Bogle, before you accuse any one."

"Certain!" cried Bogle; "I couldn't be more so, I guess, if I'd seen it
took, with my own eyes, I guess.  The neighbors all talk about it too,
I guess.  And there's--"

"But there ought to be no guess-work in this case.  Are you not
wronging Mr. Sculpin, to charge him with the theft, unless some
competent witness will say he saw him take it, or you can prove the
chain found in his possession is yours, while he fails to show, in
defence, that you did not lend it to him?"

"Lend it to 'im!--Lend it to 'im, eh?  Mercy knows, I wouldn't lend 'im
a halter to hang himself, since he blunted my iron wedges, and broomed
up my beetle so!  And I guess, you wouldn't talk about lendin', if the
chain had been hooked from you!"

"But I don't like this hurry and passion you manifest.  Get rid of this
before you think of bringing a neighbor to justice.  We become criminal
ourselves just so far as we harbor passion and vengeance while calling
criminals to account."

"Wal, will ye give me a warrant? tell me that," said Bogle in a huff.
"Tell me, Square, if you'll give me a warrant.  Cause I _ken_ go to
Sempronus, I guess, and git one of Square Moss, if ye don't."

"I tell you this, neighbor Bogle," replied Squire Fabens.  "This is a
very serious affair you have brought before me.  I want time to
consider it, and you must go home and think it all over calmly, and
sleep on it; and then if you think something must be done in law, come
to me to-morrow with your witnesses, and we'll see what must be done."

"Jest as I expected," cried Bogle, turning on his heel in a swelling
rage.  "Jest as I expected.  You're as fit for a Square as my dog
Pomp--jest about!  I'll go to Square Moss.  Ye needn't trouble yourself
any more.  He'll give me a warrant, I guess.  And if I don't vote agin
you next year, then my name aint Simon Bogle!"

Away he trudged in a gnashing rage, muttering back his threats and
reproaches, and Fabens turned into the house and enjoyed his early tea.
By the time Bogle was home, however, he had altered his mind, and went
and consulted his witnesses, and ascertained more definitely what was
surmised, and what could be proved.  Passing Troffater's on his way,
that incarnate mischief came out, and hailed him, saying, "Here, ho!
Bogle--hello there!  How d'ye dew? come back, come back, and see a
feller!  Don't be scornful!"

"I aint scornful.  I'm in a hurry," grumbled Bogle.

"Wal, come back a minute--a man broke his neck in a hurry.  What you
goin' to dew with Sculpin, eh?  He hooked your log-chain, I heern,"
said Troffater.

"I'm goin' to see Square Fabens agin to-morrow, and try and fetch the
feller to justice.  Sculpin _may_ be sorry for this.  I know what I ken
prove," said Bogle.

"I don't b'lieve the Square will try 'im.  I never could git a hearin'
of 'im.  He's stiff as steelyards, and short as pie-crust since he got
in office.  But mebby he'll knuckle a little to you.  If he will, put
Sculpin through a course of sprouts, and larn 'im better'n to hook
log-chains.  But I'm sorry I know anything about it; _I_ don't want to
go to court," said Troffater, with a mysterious elongation of his
little monkey face, and significant rollings and crossings of his black
and blue eyes.

"But what do you know, Troffater?" asked Bogie, with new light
animating his anxious eye and cheek.  "What do you know?  There's
somethin' to help me on a bit, I guess."

"O, I'm sorry I spoke," said Troffater, and spit through his teeth.  "I
don't know nothin' about it.  I don't want to go afore Fabens, and be
obleeged to look 'im in the face.  I wish I'd never seen Sculpin, nor
his little thievin' capers."

"Don't bother me, now," said Bogle.  "If ye know anything--and I bleeve
ye dew--out with it, and be my witness.  I'm afraid it'll give me a
sweat to beat 'im arter all.  Out with it, Tilly."

"O, go long! go long!" said Troffater.  "I hope you'll lick the rascal.
He's guilty's a dog.  But don't ax _me_, now, what _I_ know!  I
wouldn't go afore Fabens for a fat turkey, I wouldn't.  And then agin,
why should I want to hurt Sculpin, or lay a straw in his way?  Mebby
he'll dew better, sense the trap liked to ketch 'im; and I'm sure I
don't want to expose him."

"But tell me what you know, if you stay away from court," said Bogle.
"Tell me, and relieve my mind."

"Go long, I say, and don't ax me agin, for I don't know nothin'--that
I'd like to tell in court."

"I shall suppeeny you!" cried Bogle, departing in a huff.

"Don't ye dew it, Bogle!  O, don't ye dew it for all the world, Bogle!
I shall hev a caniption fit if ye dew!" shouted Troffater after him.

The next day Bogle came before the justice with evidence against
Sculpin, which Fabens regretted to believe was but too well founded;
and he issued a warrant, and a week from that day the action was
brought to trial.

The crowd of spectators was large, and the interest felt by all, at
least, curious and wakeful.  Squire Fabens took his magisterial seat
with an air of unaffected gravity, glanced around the assembly with a
mild, intelligent eye, and presented before them a noble form and
reverend mien, which inspired the virtuous, with new admiration for
goodness, and filled the vicious with secret remorse and apparent shame
for the evil of their doings.

Cicero Bray, Esq., appeared as counsel for the plaintiff, and C. Fox
Faddle, Esq., was counsel for the prisoner.

Lawyer Bray was a mountainous man, about thirty-five years old; and he
had impudence ingrained with his brawny meat and muscles, and his
tongue, let loose, would run like a mill-stream.  His head rose a
little above his ears, and was huge of girth in a horizontal measure.
His hair was a sort of wolf's gray, was clipped all over within an inch
of his head, and stood up like the bristles on a wild boar's back.  His
brows were bushy, and jutted, roof-like, over his deeply-sunken eyes;
his nose was bluff as a bull-dog's; his cheek-bones were rough and
high; his eyes were wide-set; his mouth was cut square across almost
from ear to ear; his chin was square and massy; he had an Adam's apple
as large as a gilly-flower ripening on his throat; his hands were large
and bony, and his voice "grated harsh thunder," as Milton said of the
gates of hell.

Lawyer Bray was prompt and saucy in court, and often won his case in
other towns by the thunder of his voice and the force of his action
while on the floor.  He could always read an abundance of law to
sustain any point he argued, although the law quoted might not be found
written in the book.  He was a capital shot, and kept a pair of the
fleetest hounds, and often hauled in his shingle and hunted week in and
week out, leaving business to follow suit.  He made light of religious
and sacred things; he could curse the sky when it thundered, and swear
the lights blue with the boldest voluble tongue; and yet he would
appeal to God to judge him in a plea, and silence, and exclude a
witness for any unpopular religious belief.  He rose to an extensive
business in the towns about, at last; and is quoted at this day, for
some wild gale of a speech, or some saucy joke, or strange adventure.

Lawyer Faddle was equally original.  He was as tall as Bray, whenever
he straightened up in an animated speech; but his long form commonly
bent over, and described a segment of a rainbow.  His head was small,
and his hair long and thin, and light and shiny as flax; his eyes were
almost white, and were set obliquely; his nose was long, aquiline, and
pinched together in the nostrils; his teeth were long and broad, and
those above shut over upon his lower lip and kept it in a constant
chafe.  His voice was clear enough, and it never failed in a speech;
but it seemed to reside in his little thirsty throat, and it piped like
a killdeer's in its proudest swell.

Lawyer Faddle excited some mirth for his originalities, and more
contempt for his vices among the farmers of Summerfield.  The opinion
of the town at that time may be given in the language of Uncle Walter,
who declared he was "hollow and foul as a sooty stove-pipe."

Lawyer Faddle however succeeded in creating an extensive business in
time, though most of his cases an honorable lawyer would have scorned;
and he reared a large family, and wanted to figure in later times as
one of the aristocracy of Summerfield.

Cicero Bray opened the case by a lengthened speech of very ambitious
eloquence, paying several unfelt compliments to the 'justice' and
'wisdom' of the 'worthy magistrate;' while he glanced through the
course of the trial, with an air and tone of triumph, stating in
thunder what he should undertake to sustain in evidence; and after a
most exhausting peroration, he hauled in his ragged voice, and arrested
its rumbling echoes, and gave way for a brief remark from the counsel
for the prisoner.  A son of the plaintiff, Welcome Bogle, was then
introduced to the stand, and testified that his father had owned a
log-chain with the initials of his name, "S. B." marked on one of the
hooks; and the chain in court being shown him, he said with audible and
honest emphasis, "Yes, that's the article."  He was cross-examined,
with considerable tact and much severity by C. Fox Faddle, Esq.; but he
stood the trial with remarkable composure and consistency, making no
variation of the facts testified, although he gave them in different
connections and words.

'Becca Ann Teezle was next introduced.  She had again and again
declared she was not afraid of a lawyer, and on this occasion her words
proved true.  Without the slightest diffidence, but with a boldness
rather which encouraged the other witnesses, and with a toss of the
head that Lawyer Faddle did not like, she said, "she had been out in
the woods pasture picking blackberries, and saw Mr. Sculpin pass that
way from the direction of Mr. Bogle's barn, with a chain on his back."

When cross-examined, she stated that "it was slung over his right
shoulder, and under his left arm, and it was _not_ a trace chain, nor a
halter chain, nor a breast chain, as Mr. C. Fox Faddle endeavored to
have it appear, but a log-chain; yes, _sir_, a log chain, for I saw it
with my own eyes."

"Then you sometimes see with eyes not your own, do you, Miss Teezle?"
said Lawyer Faddle with a comical leer, and a peculiar pipe of that
killdeer voice.

"Yes, I take owl's eyes when I want to look at a lawyer."

"Why do you do that, Miss Teezle? what can owls see that you cannot see
with your _own_ eyes, Miss Teezle?" asked the lawyer, attempting to
turn the laugh back from himself upon her.

"They can see _low fowl_ creatures in the dark," replied the blooming
maiden.

"Enough of this," said the lawyer; "and if Miss Rebecca Ann saw these
things with her own eyes, can she name any circumstances?  Did you
notice Mr. Sculpin very particularly?  Did he seem confused and
agitated when you met him? or was he calm,--was he possessed?"

"He was _possessed_--at least of the chain."

"Indeed, Miss Teezle, and you are certain of this; and now can you tell
me if it was when you were going _after_ the berries, that you saw him;
or _after_ you had picked them, and had started _after_ home?"

"It was _after_ we had been _after_ the berries, and _after_ we had
started _after_ home."

"Yes; and did you notice the _gait_ in which he moved along; notice it
with your own eyes, Rebecca?"

"He was in the _gate_ of the woods pasture south of Mr. Bogle's when we
saw him last."

"Yes, and you are so wise and discerning, you can tell whether his
course across the field, was straight or crooked?"

"Crooked, sir."

"About how crooked? can you tell this court, Miss Teezle?"

"Crooked as your questions, sir," the confident girl replied; and
though the lawyer appealed to the court several times to "silence the
insolence" of this witness before she was through; the court protected
the witness and rebuked the lawyer for impertinent questions, and the
insolence he charged upon her.

Nancy Nimblet was called, and she testified that "She was with 'Becca
Ann Teezle, on the time specified, and she remembered it too, as if it
was yesterday; and the prisoner came from the direction of the
complainant's barn, with a log-chain round him, over his right
shoulder, and under his left arm."  Lawyer Faddle declining her
cross-examination, Adonijah Nixon was called.  He testified that Mr.
Bogle and he were second cousins.  Cicero Bray objected to this as not
relevant; C. Fox Faddle insisted that it was relevant, and after some
arguing and sparring, the justice ruled it out.  Then Mr. Nixon said,
"on Simon's having expressed to me a suspicion that Jared had taken the
chain, I went with him to Jared's house and found the chain which you
see before you."

Seneca Waldron and Crispus Flaxman were called; but their evidence was
challenged and ruled out for non-age.

G. W. Pugg was called, and no one answered.  G. W. _Pugg_, repeated the
magistrate, slighting the initials and laying most emphasis on the
name.  No one answered; but two persons in the corner, a father and
son, exchanged significant glances and looked very acute and wise.  The
Squire raised his voice, and let it fall like an auctioneer's hammer on
the name.

"G. W. _Pugg_--is Mr. _Pugg_ in the room?"

At that imperative question, the gray-skirted, bushy-headed,
grog-bruising hunter of a father in the corner, rose and said, "Call
'im George _Washintun_, then I guess he'll cum!"

"_George_ WASHINGTON PUGG; will you come and testify?" said the Squire
with an emphasis on all the names, but rising and fairly hammering the
last; when a greedy-eyed, brockle-faced, over-grown blade of seventeen
opened up like a flax-brake, and loped forward over chairs and benches,
responding in a houndish flat-and-treble voice, "_I_ reckon I'll
_doo't_!  O yis, I reckon I _will_, Square Fabens."

The business of the court then proceeded, and when his evidence was
taken, Tilly Troffater mounted the stand, with an affected hesitancy,
and a genuine restlessness of his little earthen eyes; eager to indulge
his meddlesome humor, anxious for revenge upon, he little cared whom,
and yet awed to a look of shuffling shame, by the commanding mien of
the justice.  Clambering to his place, he was questioned by the court.

"Well, friend Troffater, what do you know of the action pending?"

"I telled Bogle I was sorry _I_ knew anything for I didn't want to come
to court," said the witness.

"But, what do you know, Mr. Troffater, that would tend to convict the
prisoner?  Tell us _that_," said the court.

"I don't want to tell," said the witness.  "Let the critter go clear,
for all me.  I wouldn't lay a straw afore im.  Mebby that's the last o'
his thievin' capers.  If 'tis, _I_ wouldn't tell what I know for all on
airth."

"You do know something, Mr. Troffater," interrupted Cicero Bray, Esq.,
obstreperously; "you know something, upon which we greatly depend to
convict the prisoner, and vindicate the majesty of law, and I insist
upon your evidence, sir."

"_Insist_, then, dew ye!" asked Troffater, gathering up into a comical
attitude; crossing and flashing his black and blue eyes, spitting
through his teeth, and ranging the stand, like a dancing bear.
"_Insist_, dew ye, eh?  Wal, I spose then I must free my mind; but,
think I'd ruther not."

"Go on, go on, Mr. Troffater, and bother us no longer in this way,"
said the court.

"Wal, I spose I must, if Mr. _Cis-a-roe_ there raily _insists_.  All I
know about Sculpin is, one night I went down there, and we got to
playin' cairds, and he acted green as a mess o' cowslops at fust, and
then he cheated; and--O, I can't, I can't tell the story.  I wouldn't
hurt Sculpin for the world.  Carry me off, and stick me in jail, if you
want to.  I _won't_ tell, so there!  I'll go to jail fust, and let the
pismires carry me out o' the keyhole!--But what's this, I say?  Mister
_Cis-ai-roe_ Bray, Esquare, insists that I _shall_ tell.  Wal, then, as
I was goin' to say, he cheated, and so, so, I cheated a little tew, and
by'n by, he got mad, and knocked me into a next-week sleep, and in that
sleep I seen a dream, and in that dream I seen him steal the log-chain.
And now, if ye'll hand over my witness fee, I'll be out o' this
quicker'n ye ken say Jack Robison."

Needless, indeed, were the task, if possible, to describe the sensation
created by this amazing disclosure; and we may only add in conclusion,
that the prisoner was convicted on other testimony; and after an
earnest admonition from the justice, on the turpitude of crime and its
dreadful miseries, Jared Sculpin was sentenced to give Simon Bogle one
good day's work, and one good fleece of wool for his time lost in
hunting the chain, and in bringing the offender to justice; to carry
the chain on his back through the main travelled road, in open
daylight, and humbly ask Simon Bogle's pardon.

The terms of the sentence were promptly and fully complied with, and it
was ever afterward said of Jared Sculpin, that he was an altered man,
and a virtuous citizen.




XIII.

HAPPINESS.

For agreeable cares, and solid interests and pleasures, the life of the
farmer is one of the first to choose.  It is indeed a labor, but a
labor peculiarly blest for its manly pursuits and ennobling mental
exercises.  Every farmer should be educated in useful knowledge, and
elevated tastes and sentiments: every farmer should have a religion of
the head, and heart, and life.

The farmer goes out upon his fertile fields and plants, and stands by
his own work to behold the growing increase which the Lord waters and
gives.  Surrounded by symbols of the Father, he has but to open his
eyes, and read the signs of His wisdom, providence, power and love.  He
stands in a temple of beauty and worship.  His subjects of thought are
the sky and mountain, the woods and waters, the genial fallow, the
growing crop, the ripening grain.  His companions are legion, for all
things in Nature flock to his fellowship; his orchestra is the air and
forest; his singers, the bobolink, bluebird and robin, who may be
fancied incarnate with spirits from the next region, paradise, come
down to gladden his heart with God's hallelujahs, and cheer his mind in
the rural toils.  God may appear most intimately with him all his days;
he may plough God's fallows; he may plant sweet affections, and harvest
ripe graces and joys; and every step on the green hills, and through
the warbling groves, may seem a step toward heaven.

Matthew Fabens was a farmer in genuine heart and soul.  Of mere book
learning, he did not speak, although he was quite a reader; and in many
acquirements which the world calls knowledge, he was limited as a
child.  But for acquaintance with a few fine histories and stories, and
with the ways and wonders of God; for a knowledge of Nature and
Scripture; for an enlightened reading of the lessons of Providence and
human life, he might have been accounted wiser than many who possessed
the wisdom of the schools, and looked down with vain contempt on his
humble sphere.  One of the few lovers of learning he was, who could
say, with the shepherd David, "O, God, Thou hast taught me from my
youth, and hitherto have I declared thy wonders!"

Nature surrounded him with symbols, and by the light of Christianity he
sought their interpretation.  And to his admiring mind, the presence,
the beauty, and sublimity of God continually addressed their
revelations; and he discovered in the water a mirror of this form; in
the sun, a symbol of His light; in the thunder, an echo of His voice;
in the wind, a delegate of His spirit and power; in the mountain, a
ladder to His sanctuary; and in the rain and dew, the medium of His
favor, and the means of His love.

Yet, with all his faith, wisdom, and virtue, he was by no means
perfect.  Several of the frailties of humanity he had failed to
overcome, and a few of its sinful impulses he found the discipline of
life no more than competent to rule.  He was honest and upright to a
nice conviction, and a large and gracious heart lay beating in his
breast; but brief moments would now and then take him by surprise, in
which he sighed for another and more pretending sphere; and he
regretted to feel growing almost imperceptibly upon him, an
unwarrantable love of show and praise.  Still, perhaps we should regard
these and other little errors more as misfortunes than sins, and
attribute them measurably to the effect of growing fortune, and the
influence of the world with which he had more and more to do.

Nor did such a faith in the Father, nor such an estate of beauty and
affluence, render his life a perpetual or unqualified joy.  Men would
not be men if perfect joy and peace were theirs, and the glowing robes
of angels dressed them.  He had never prayed to be taken out of the
world of trials and griefs; but to be kept from iniquity.  Religion had
not power to remove all sorrows from his life; but he prayed it might
aid him to overcome them; to rise above them stronger and better, for
the strength and courage required and employed to quell their stout
assaults.  That early, and most trying, unaccountable sorrow of his
life, the loss of his beloved Clinton, still chastened his joy, and
returned at times in all the freshness of its agony: and it was
rendered more poignant and lasting by the painful mystery which
concealed his fate, and fed suspense, and excited solicitous thoughts
and cares.

But faith had a power so to lift and sustain the troubled spirit, and
draw it away from communion with its griefs, he enjoyed a preponderance
of elevated bliss.  He had loved his parents with an affection which
could endure the loss of their society only with the hope of having
them restored to him hereafter; and many of his pleasures had been
sobered, and life itself became more serious, and at times more
desolate, since they both had been gathered to the grave.  But there
was a serene and unsubduable joy of the spirit abiding all the assaults
of sorrow, that shone forth like gold from the fire of the refiner, and
glowed like cheerful sunshine through the dusky wings of a storm.

His home had still remaining much solid happiness, for Julia lived to
participate his fortune, to share his affliction, and strengthen his
hopes; and the genial ardors of her youth, with love of Nature, and
delight in rural fellowships, though calmed and refined by suffering,
were yet her being's light and joy.  Her simple home, and its peaceful
scenes, and lovely enjoyments, were symbols to her mind, not
unprophetic of the home of the soul on high.

It was a simple home, for their new frame house was not then commenced,
except in the piles of boards and shingles that were gathering around
the barn; but what if there was no embroidered muslin, or garish damask
at the windows, and they looked through little narrow panes of blue and
blistered glass?  Did not their eyes find a recompense in the twinkling
wings and warbling songs that flitted and floated in the air around?
and in glorious landscapes of fields, and waters, and woods, that a
glance could catch and hold through the smallest light!  Did not the
curtains of verdure beneath and about, and the infinite canopy of
splendid sky above, make the bravest of all ambitious ornaments hung by
man or woman's hands, look little and coarse as a rag of baize?

One only sorrow remained for Julia to conquer; and how could the
triumph be won?  She sorrowed still for the loss of her lovely
first-born.  She could not doubt but God permitted it in love.  Perhaps
had Clinton been spared, he might have imbibed some sentiment of evil,
which would have poisoned his beautiful nature and prompted him away
into paths of sin.  Young Walter Mowry was a prodigal, and likely to
bring down his poor old mother in sorrow to the grave.  George Richmond
had no idea of the value of the money left him as a father's
hard-earned legacy; no self-reliance; and was likely to die miserable
and poor.  Perhaps, had Clinton lived to enjoy the blessings of such a
home, he had been a poor prodigal, or met misfortunes and griefs.

Then she must acknowledge, that while her heart had been afflicted, it
had been softened and refined; while her faith had been tried, it had
grown strong and buoyant as an eagle's wings.  Heaven seemed all about
her now, as it had not seemed before her bereavement; the lights of its
holy joy came gleaming through the veil; and its pure inhabitants were
felt to range around, and sympathize, and bless.

As a central bliss of existence, Fanny had grown to early womanhood,
while her mother seemed still young to be her companion, and Fanny was
blooming as the flowers and trees that had been her communicants, pure
as the fountains that mirrored her loveliness, and blithe as the birds
that welcomed her rural walks.  Fanny stood above a medium height, and
though she stooped a little at the wool-wheel, and in a ramble on the
hills, she presented a comely figure and interesting mien.

She was too white to please all tastes; her hair was almost a
cream-color; yet it was long, abundant and glossy, and was greatly
admired by some.  Her eyes were the lightest sky-blue, yet they were
full and quick, and flashed the fire of a luminous soul; and not glassy
and languid, as blue eyes often are.  She had a nose, mouth and teeth,
like her father's, with her mother's cheeks, all ruddy-red with her
mother's maiden blushes.  She had hands and feet for a Bloomer, had
Bloomers bloomed in her time.  She had a round, clear, hilarious voice,
that gave the birds lessons in melody, softened and sweetened the
gentlest gales, and gladdened the day and the night on the farm.  She
loved her home and friends; she loved Irving, and Scott, and Goldsmith;
she loved Beattie's Minstrel, Milton's Comus, and Campbell's Wyoming;
she loved the garden and fields; she loved the woods, and lake, and
sky; she loved bee-balm and clover; she loved double-pinks, and
double-roses; she tasted the fragrance of peaches and apples, with a
purer zest than that which relished their pleasant pulps; and every
lovely and tender creature found in her a friend.

In Fanny, her mother found more joy--upon Fanny her mother centered
more lavish affection than she could have afforded or realized, had
another grown by her tide, to divide the endearments of the household.
But, O, the agony she would sometimes feel at the recollection of that
year of sorrow!  How it would bow her spirit, and run thrilling along
the delicate fibres of her heart!  That night of woe!  That panther
scream!  That dream of Troffater!  That recovered hat, now sacredly
treasured to remind her of her idol!  That lingering, sad suspense!
Those sleepless nights, and comfortless days!  How could she forget
them, nor shudder in convulsions of anguish, as often as they rolled
back like lava-floods on her soul?

And the suspense which still haunted her!  The dream and dying words of
her mother breathed hope to struggling desire, but reason banished
assurance as soon as it rose, and how dreadful the suspense that
supported the mystery!  Could she have known that he was devoured by a
wolf or panther, and suffered no more, what an occasion of joy it had
been! what relief to sorrow, what an end to disappointments, compared
with this dreary and brooding uncertainty, which preyed upon her nature
like a never-dying worm!  How precious must have been the faith which
could mitigate a sorrow like that, and introduce the suffering heart to
seasons of joy and intervals of peace!




XIV.

THE COLD SEASONS.

For a good, long period, fruitful seasons and liberal blessings came on
the Lake Country.  The last was a year of unusual abundance.  Plenty
poured her horn at every happy farmer's.  Barns looked as if ready to
burst with fulness, and stacks of hay and grain studded the pleasant
fields.  Cribs were piled full of corn, and cellars were stowed with
provisions.

But earth would be heaven too soon if all evil and vicissitude were
ended.  Checks upon our prosperity must fall, and changes tax and
interrupt our gains; and he is not most of a man who meets least evil,
and loses least of the reward of toil; but he who endures with the
manliest courage, the mightiest will to overcome, and most dexterous
hand to manage for decided good, all troubles that assail him.

In the autumn of that abundant year, it was predicted that cold seasons
were near at hand.  The Indians saw their approach in the fur of the
foxes, and the masonry of beavers.  Farmers were confirmed in the
prophecy by the extra stores of the bees, and extra husks on the ears
of corn.  A cold and snowy winter would certainly come, and they were
but too truly assured that a cold spring and summer would follow.
Several people heeded the warning, and hauled extra supplies of
fire-wood, kept larger stores of provisions, and lived more
thoughtfully and saving.  Fabens took forethought, and prepared for the
winter.  He sold but little of his abundance, saying, "If cold seasons
were to follow, stores of provisions were better to lay up than money
or notes."  He talked with his neighbors on the subject, and a number
heeded his advice.  He proposed making wood bees for several of the
poor, and succeeded in seeing ample piles of beech and maple at their
doors.  He got up a committee to visit the poor throughout the winter,
and see that no child of God suffered in so bountiful a world.  Some
people thought he was taking a great deal of trouble on his hands,
without the prospect of any reward; but he assured them that, with
every fire of comfort he built on a poor man's hearth, he built a new
fire of pleasure in his own cheerful heart; and in the thing itself
which they called trouble, he received such full and flowing tides of
bliss, as made him think heaven could begin on earth.  "It is not the
crusty turtle," said he one day to Wilson, "it is not the crusty
turtle, that slinks into his selfish shell, and twinkles so coldly his
little haughty eye, that receives or communicates most pleasure or
delight.  No, it is the kindly lamb, that gives you his fleece for a
winter garment; it is the sweet-hearted robin, that carries the seeds
of abundance over God's plantations, and sings of His love by the poor
man's cabin, and feeds and covers the babes in the woods."

There were some who laughed at his superstition for believing things in
nature could warn men of the weather a month ahead; and they made no
preparation for a change.  But he remained confident, and believed God
was speaking to him in symbols to set his house in order.

"God must stoop a good 'eal, I reckon, to become an almanic maker,"
said Colwell.

"God forges the snow-flake, and sprinkles down every drop of rain,"
said Fabens.  "God teaches the squirrels to prepare for winter, and
instructs the ant, and beaver, and bee; and why would it be stooping
for him to teach as, by signs in nature, to be ready for the changes he
may bring?  He does his own work, and speaks his own mind on this world
every single day; and if we look for his signs we shall be acquainted
with his ways."

The prediction began to fulfil.  On the last day of October a
snow-storm fell, and Gloom cast her shadow on the chilling scene.
Fabens called Fanny to the window to gaze at the scudding clouds and
driving snow.  With wondering eyes and open mouth, she stared and
sighed on the dreary, howling winter.  "We must train you, my dear,"
said he, "to court the winter blast, and laugh, and be thankful amid
storms.  That goodness of our Father which pours in the rain, blooms in
the flowers of summer, and smiles in the sweet spring mornings, speaks
also in the wind, floats on the clouds, and sifts softly down in the
white, white snows of winter."

That is called the cold winter to this day.  It was deep, and long, and
dreary.  Snow that fell in October was not melted away till the last
April rains dissolved it.  Wild animals died of cold and hunger; sheep
and cattle perished in numbers in the warmest pens; tame and wild fowls
were killed by the cutting frosts; and several families suffered
extremely, notwithstanding the committee kept astir on the busiest
labors of love.  Fabens' woods were easiest to enter, and by the
exertions of many, a road was every week opened to them, and the
destitute were furnished free with new supplies.  Yet, such was the
pinch of one long storm, that Dickey Shymer burned up the bark he
designed to sell for grog; and the poor mischief of a Troffater, having
not so much as bark, burned his best bedstead, then burned his
eel-rack, and was unstocking his musket for a last lonely fagot, when
Fabens drove up with a towering load of green maple wood.  Grog-dealers
were kept from freezing and starving, but they did no business to speak
of that winter.  Even Tilly, with his desperate bandy legs, could not
lead his gang to worry a way often to a tavern.  They were forced to
live soberly.

The spring at last came on, and by the tenth of May it was quite warm;
and many believed the cold season story was told; and some laughed at
Fabens and others, for sowing the last fall so many acres of wheat, and
putting into the ground now such crops of peas, potatoes, and oats.
Some sold off grain they had laid up in store for a famine, and the May
sun shone so warmly, they planted considerable corn, expecting
speculation.

The corn came up finely, and looked thrifty and dark.  The forests were
heavy with foliage.  Fruit trees and meadows contended for the fairest
blossoms.  Dairies were diminished, so great was the prospect of summer
grain; and Hope smiled sweetly on Summerfield.  But clouds came over
when the corn was at the first hoeing, and terror and disappointment
stormed upon the land.  Snow fell three feet deep on a level, and the
cold stung all nature with a chill, that seemed blown from the lips of
February.

The sun again shone, and the snow went off; but the corn drooped, and
the leaves of the trees withered, as if a fire had scorched them.  And
the season proved a cold and frosty one; and many there were that
wished they had sown winter grain, and oats, and peas; ploughed up less
green sward, and kept larger dairies.  Another cold winter and summer
followed, and drearier days were never seen in the Lake Country.  A few
speculators thrived, and the forehanded had chances to make much money;
but the poor, and those who had laid up small supplies before, and
lived sparingly, were overtaken as by a wild storm on a moor, and
suffered greatly.

Mr. and Mrs. Fabens made every exertion in their power to mitigate the
griefs of the neighborhood; and they influenced several to join them in
missions and labors of relief and love.  Agreements were made, that
they would sell all they could spare at the lowest possible prices, be
lenient about pay, inculcate and practise the sternest economy, and
regard speculators, in that time, as foes and oppressors of the people.

More forethought was exercised, and the last of the cold seasons was
met with preparations that mitigated and cheered the grievous glooms.
Dairies were enlarged, corn was abandoned, and the hardier grains
supplied; and though suffering and anxiety abounded, the people were
enabled to escape a famine; and with hearts poured out in thanks, they
welcomed the return of seasons warm and fruitful.

There were many good people staggered by that stern and afflictive
vicissitude.  They could not conceive why it came.  They could not
reconcile it with the goodness of God.  They saw not why, if He was
good, there should be winter and storms at all; and not perpetual
sunshine and summer.  They questioned Fabens on the subject.  Mr.
Nimblet questioned him, and Colwell asked him to "clear up the
character of his God."  Mr. Nimblet had heard Fabens express a hope
that God would overrule evil for good, questioned him on that hope, and
adduced the cold seasons as illustrations.

"And how can you explain these things in accordance with such a hope,
Squire Fabens?" asked he.  "And why are there so many sufferings in
which we can see no good?"

"Because with our blind eyes we cannot see the result of all that
happens," said Fabens, "does it follow that we never shall behold them
issuing in good?"

"O no; but why should we have winter at all, when continual summer
would be so much more pleasant?"

"To me perpetual summer would not be more pleasant.  We are so
constituted that diversity of air, weather and prospects, is
indispensable to our enjoyment, and progress.  Would you appreciate the
beauty and blessing of spring, summer and autumn, you must experience
in their unfailing turn, the gloomy rigors of winter."

"But why have these last been colder than others, causing so much
suffering and need?"

"I cannot see all the Divine design, but I can see a lesson of good in
the cold seasons.  We learn wisdom, and get strength and breadth of
life by suffering.  These last winters have taught many of us wisdom
and forethought; made us prudent; showed us how dependent we are, and
yet learned us self-dependence.  After this I'll warrant, the people of
Summerfield will do and save more in the summer, to lay up comforts for
the winter; and provide for unseen needs.  And I feel in my heart a
warmer sympathy for suffering, and know a little of the satisfaction
one enjoys assisting his neighbors; while I see our neighborhood bound
together in stronger bonds of love, by the concern which those bitter
cold storms forced us to take of one another.  What would become of
charity if there were no wants to relieve? or hope, if we could not
keep looking for pleasanter springs and more fruitful summers?"

"But, cold summers came, and the corn was all cut off, giving nobody
good for the labor of ploughing and planting."

"Good was done to our lands, neighbor Nimblet, good was certainly done
to our lands.  We had run our corn lands too hard; fruitful seasons
tempted us to imprudence, and we were running them all out.  They have
had a long rest now and will be more productive.  Beside, we have found
out that there are many honest ways to get a living, and have learned
how to shift from right hand to left.  A knack like that is well worth
learning."

"From lessons of evil?"

"Yes, from lessons of evil.  Would the maples stand the storms as they
do, and grow all the more; would the oaks get so great, if they sprung
from a city hot-house?"

"Are you as happy as you would be, Squire, if you could remember no
affliction?"

"I enjoy happiness of a higher, sweeter and solider kind, I assure you,
as I think of all past sorrows.  Who can have so sweet an enjoyment of
health, as one that has recovered from sickness, and walks out in the
animating air and light?  Yes, some of my best joys come and cheer me
and strengthen me, after I have suffered.  From anguish and bereavement
the brightest views of God have shone on my soul, as you have seen
rainbows shine brightest in the darkest skies."

"I cannot see everything as you do," said Mr. Nimblet, and went his
way, while Fabens was preparing to speak of several more blessings,
that would follow the cold seasons.




XV.

A WAR OF EXTERMINATION.

The people of Summerfield were never so thankful or happy as in the
beautiful year that followed the Cold-Seasons.  Plenty returned to
abide there, and Prosperity re-appeared, leading Hope, Comfort, Peace,
and Joy in her jocund train.  Still that continued a land of the earth,
bearing the thorn as well as the rose, having briers as well as berries.

The people were greatly offended.  Wolves and foxes still infested the
woods, and many of their lambs and fowls were killed and eaten by the
animals.  They were hated with increased hatred.  Not because they were
any worse than they ever had been before; but the people grew impatient
of annoyance, and found it more and more difficult to see why wolves
and foxes were made; and why they were suffered to live, and prowl
about the abodes of men.

The birds too were very troublesome.  Woodpeckers pecked the trees, and
robins plucked the first ripe cherries.  Hawks pounced upon the
chickens, and crows and blackbirds pulled the corn.  What were they all
made for, and poised upon wings, with an omnipresence to annoy our
race?  Robins were good to eat, and they were more harmless, than
others; but why were blackbirds let loose on earth? and for what did
crows and hawks take flight in our air?  Why were the brutal beasts and
troublesome fowls, saved out of the things that were drowned in Noah's
flood?

Fabens confessed he could not see for what good purpose wolves and
foxes were made; farther than the vagabond sort of happiness they might
enjoy, and the discipline they gave to man in griefs and vexations.
The predatory birds he thought were made equally in vain.  He was tired
all out with their felon ravages.  He judged at last that wolves and
foxes, and the blackbirds, and birds of prey, ought to be exterminated.
Nothing now could so benefit the town, as a war of extermination, He
could not raise a perfect crop of corn; he could not enjoy his ox-heart
cherries; he could not raise a full brood of chickens, nor keep what
were raised; he could not trust his geese from his door, nor turn his
sheep and lambs into his fresh woods pasture, without suffering
depredations; and something must be done to destroy the evil beasts and
birds.

"We told you the first winter you was here, Fabens, that you would have
to come to that," said Colwell.  "It is high time a town meeting was
called, and a general plan hit on to kill off the critters.  I have my
plan about it, and I have told it to a good many who fall in with me."

"What is your plan?  The woods are alive with foxes, and there are a
great many wolves yet away back in the swamps and hills, while the air
is black with crows and blackbirds.  How can we lessen their numbers
much?"

"Club together and buy at the apothecaries a hundred dollars worth of
pison; fix it in scraps of meat, and scatter it through and through the
woods; and if it don't make the animals scarce, I'll quit a guessin'.
Then git up a hunt for the birds--a univarsal hunt, and have judges and
give premiums to them that count the most game; continue the hunt a
week or fortnight for two or three years runnin', and the birds won't
pester us much after that."

"The plan is a good one, and I'll do my part to carry it into
execution.  I am all out of patience with the creatures.  If we do not
kill more of them, they will get to be worse than Egypt's plagues."

A town meeting was called, and Colwell's plan was adopted.  A large sum
was contributed to procure poison; and bird hunts were arranged.  The
poison was scattered abroad, and hundreds of foxes and wolves lay dead
all over the woods and swamps; while the money was returned with
interest to the people, by the sale of furs gathered from their bodies.
The bird hunts came off with equal success, and there followed a marked
cessation of annoyance.

Only now and then a robin molested a fruit tree; and the tap of the
woodpecker was seldom heard.  Hawks and crows that were left, looked so
wistful and lonely they were not begrudged the little they ventured at
times to take.  Blackbirds troubled the corn but little, and were more
reserved of their mannerless clack.  The fowls could repose at night
without fear of foxes; and lambs might wander in the wide woods
pasture, and lie down unharmed by wolves.

It could not be denied however that the fields and Woods were less
cheerful, if they were more safe.  Some could not sense the change,
except in an increase of harvests, cattle and fowls; others again, more
spiritual in feeling, hearing and sight, discerned a gloom in the air,
and a gloom on every scene, that seemed ominous of woe.  Fanny Fabens
took all that gloom to her heart, and she seemed another being.  Her
nature was glad and joyous, as a grove full of robins; but now she grew
sad, and wept and moaned, where once she laughed and sang.  She could
hardly account for all her grief; she seemed to inhale it from the air,
imbibe it from the light, and taste it in the breath of the woods, and
the odor of the flowers.

But the death of the birds she knew was the beginning of her sorrows.
She wept the loss of her favorite robin, from the ash tree in the
middle meadow; and it was no longer a bliss, but a grief, to lie in
that lovely shade, and sing her jocund songs, and scent the clover
blooms.  She missed the little sparrow that had come three years in
succession, and reared three broods in a season, from a nest in the
honeysuckle that curtained her window.  She missed the robins from the
cherry-trees, and the cherries palled on her tongue.  She missed the
bluebirds from the cornfield, and the yellow-birds from the flax; she
missed the meadow-larks from the lawns, and the quails from the oats
and wheat; she missed the bobolinks from the hayfields, and the jays
from the girdling; she missed the ground-birds from the pastures, and
thrushes and sweet swamp-robins from the woods; and the poor girl
wandered about for months very sad and lonely, singing no songs and
sharing no delights.

Mrs. Fabens felt the bereavement quite as keenly as Fanny, and she
declared, if the ox-heart cherries were fairer and more abundant now,
their sweetness was bitter to her taste, and it seemed like devouring
so much beauty and song to eat them; for beauty had been banished and
song silenced, to bring them to such a yield.  Fabens could not deny
that the gloom invaded his heart also, and he took no comfort in the
cherries, while he missed the music of the birds, and missed the songs
of joy that the birds prompted Fanny to sing.

Yet, to him it seemed a just and victorious warfare, and he exchanged
congratulations with his neighbors.  He was pleased to get free from
plagues, and he thought that relief was a good achieved of a real evil.
His next argument with Mr. Nimblet, was less confidently urged, while
Mr. Nimblet brought new illustrations to his aid.  Fabens, indeed,
staggered at the reasons that now opposed his view.  Prowling beasts of
prey were evil as anything that had started up to devour his idea, and
good to all must come, he thought, for sweeping them away.

Another season bloomed, and the birds were very few, and the bark of
the fox, and the howl of the wolf, were very seldom heard.  But now was
the beginning of plagues more appalling.  Flies that had served the
robins for food, swarmed forth unmolested, and stung the cherry-trees,
so that they bore little fruit at all, and that little was wormy and
worthless.  And worms that had served all the birds of the air with
meat, now multiplied greatly, and cut down all the vines, and destroyed
double the corn that the fowls had taken; while caterpillars and
locusts trimmed the orchards, and plagued the oats and wheat.

"I begin to think that the poor birds were our friends, after all, and
we shall now get our pay for killing them," said Fabens to Colwell, one
day, while talking of the new annoyance.

"Prospects for crops never looked so squally afore," said Colwell.  "I
can stand crows and blackbirds, I can stomach wolves and foxes,
better'n them nasty worms."

"We called that evil which God sent for good," said Fabens.

"I know not what we are coming to," sighed neighbor Nimblet.

"But, we done some good, our lambs and geese are safe, sense we pisoned
the animals," said Colwell, cheering up his heart.

"I have noticed that the woods looked very yellow of late," said
neighbor Nimblet.  "What can be the cause of that?  My maple orchard,
my chestnut woods, my cedar swamp and pine groves, look as though they
were dying."

"I have noticed it," said Fabens; "but I did not think to examine till
yesterday.  My most valuable pines and cedars, and my chestnuts and
sugar maples are dying.  And come to examine them, I find the wood-mice
and rabbits have girdled them.  This is something I never saw before.
The woods fairly crawl with creatures that are destroying them.  And we
are at fault for it all, neighbor Nimblet.  Say what you will, wolves
and foxes were our friends.  They destroyed vermin and rabbits, and
protected our woods.  But because they took a goose, and a lamb, once
in a while, in part payment for the good they did, we saw in them
nothing but evil, we hated them and killed them.  Now, creatures more
destructive come forth, destroying all before them."

"It cannot be quite so bad, Squire," replied Mr. Nimblet.

"It is the solemn truth, bad as it is, and I know it, and we are having
our punishment for our error," rejoined Squire Fabens.

"I must go and see," said Mr. Nimblet; and the conversation ended.

He went to see his woods, and found it even so; and he was greatly
grieved, for much valuable property was wasting as in a fire.  It
proved a greater calamity than the cold seasons.  It was long before
the fine forests of Summerfield recovered from their wounds.

But that scourge was a good lesson, from which all took profit in the
end.  Men learned more of the designs of God, saw more good in all His
works, let the birds and animals live, valued more preciously what was
left them, enjoyed more wisely and sweetly such blessings as came, and
were more thankful.

There were none who took more instruction from that lesson than Mr. and
Mrs. Fabens.  It elevated their views, it increased their faith, it
enlarged the sphere of their spirits, and cleared up more of the
mystery of evil.  All of that mystery they did not expect to see
unveiled below.  It was not a possible thing to make mortal men see and
understand it.  But if the dark cloud still spread its dubious dusk on
the sky, more and more of it melted into the rainbow as they gazed; and
while part of that bow was still involved in the cloud, and part hidden
away far below the horizon, enough was still glowing in glory on their
sight, and enough gleaming and breaking through the darkness, to enable
them to know it would burst at last on their blessed eyes, in a perfect
circle of the light of love.

"We should all be happier and more fortunate," said Mrs. Fabens, "if we
had faith to see a blessing of God in more of the things we regard as
evil.  It requires great faith, I know, to be reconciled under all
griefs, and see a good design in all that afflicts us.  It has been
hard for me to see why God made wolves and foxes, and how they could
minister good to man.  They may be evil, for all I know, but if they do
not fulfil a good design, why has it proved an evil to kill them?"

"It does, indeed, require great faith to accept your suggestion; but
that faith must be the true one after all," said the Squire.  "They
made incursions on our folds.  They took now and then a lamb, or fowl;
but how much less have they taken than enough to pay them for the good
they did.  How few of us would do the same good to them for the same
small reward.  We are impatient of griefs and vexations.  We chafe, and
foam, and champ the bit that curbs in our passions, and reins us around
the wisest way.  We think it hard that wolves should sometimes bring us
a disguised blessing.  We find it difficult to discover the good design
of apparent ill.  But at last we shall see how evil may issue in good.
The end will reveal the good design of all.  As I understand it, evil
is the imperfection which necessarily follows our nature.  The moral
difference between an imperfect world and a perfect God.  The shadow of
the Tree of Life.  The cloud that veils the Mercy-Seat.  The sad and
the bitter, the dark and dreary, that serve but to reveal the joyful
and sweet, the bright, and glad, and beautiful.

"And we know by experience, Julia, that the evils of this world may be
turned into a high and fruitful discipline; and from that discipline we
may rise to a life of maturer powers, and more ample and energetic
character; with thriftier faith and greener hope; and clustering graces
all around the heart, of juicier pulp and rarer flavor."




XVI.

THE MINISTER.

It was now past the middle of September, and the farmers of Summerfield
had finished their fall seeding; most of them had spread their flax;
some, cut their corn, gathered their pumpkins, and dug their potatoes:
and all were enjoying a September of the soul.

Fabens was enjoying it out on his accustomed seat, beneath a favorite
shade-tree, in the green mown meadow before his home; and indulging one
of those golden reveries that rise in the autumn time.  The June-like
lustre of the glowing sky; the beauty of the fields now blooming in
second verdure, like aged souls with new hopes and loves in the light
of Christianity; the affluence of orchards, dropping the burden,
diffusing the fragrance of their mellow fruit; the opulence of
woodlands, exhibiting signs of the first frost, yet still withholding
the wealth of their bright foliage; the pride of his gallant horses,
liberated from the plough, and galloping here and there, on sports of
majesty in the upland pasture; the appearance of fine cattle grazing on
the distant mead; the sight of yellow stubble-fields, sleeping in
remoter view; the neatness and abundance of his farm-yard, proclaimed
by the lordly cock in a rousing and resonant crow; the odor of hay and
grain from his barn near by; the quiet and cosy comfort of his home;
the presence of Julia and Fanny, the one reading David from that noble
old ode called the Sixty-fifth Psalm, and the other at his side,
embracing his neck in a clasp of leaning affection: those pleasant
sights that regaled his gaze, and those ardent emotions of gratitude
that thrilled him through and through in the sweet contemplation,
directed his thoughts to the God who gave them, and he thanked him for
his bounty; attained still more lofty conceptions of his love; and, as
Julia concluded the psalm, repeated the words, "Praise waiteth for
Thee, O God!  Thou crownest the year with thy goodness, and thy paths
drop fatness.  They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness, and the
little hills rejoice on every side.  Praise waiteth for Thee!"

As he concluded the pious apostrophe, a stranger, till then unobserved,
stepped before him, and inquired if it was Squire Fabens of Summerfield
whom he had the honor to address.  Being answered in the affirmative,
the stranger continued--"I know one Daniel Fabens on the Hudson, at
whose house I have often tarried, and aware that I was about to visit
the Lake Country, he informed me of you, sir, and insisted on my giving
you a call."

"Daniel Fabens?--Daniel Fabens;--Let me see.  O, it must be my Uncle
Abraham's son; he had a Daniel; the only one of the name I know of.  It
must be he."

"I think he called you Uncle, sir."

"No, cousin.  Our fathers were brothers.  I am often called Uncle by
cousins and neighbors.  But it's of no consequence, sir.  You are just
as welcome.  I was only casting in my mind what Fabens it could be.  I
am glad to see a friend from the Hudson, sir; and what may I call your
name?"

"My name is Lovelight.  I am a minister of Christ.  I have a message to
your country."

"I took you for a minister.  You are welcome to Summerfield; and to a
home with us while you tarry.  This is my wife, sir, and that is my
daughter.  Walk into the house, walk in; and I will take care of your
horse: you both look weary."

The horse was unsaddled, and washed with cool water from the well, and
turned into a field of fresh clover; and the stranger followed Mrs.
Fabens and Fanny into the house; and, after resting and bathing, a good
supper, with a dessert of peaches and cream, was taken.  Evening came
on, and with it a long conversation, and before they retired, the hour
was approaching midnight.

"As you are a minister, sir, will you tell me of what persuasion?"
asked Fabens, while they conversed.

"The persuasion of Christmas I believe," said the minister with a
gentle affability.  "I think little of sects.  They are too exclusive
and formal.  I love the church of Christ.  That is catholic and real;
that embraces the good of all sects, and is the mother of us all."

"I agree with you there.  A sect is a body too little and low for the
spirit of Christ.  But I didn't know but you held to one of the
particular creeds of Christians."

"The Bible is my creed and counsel."

"That is right.  But you preach a doctrine peculiar to some one of the
Christian denominations, I suppose?  I am not particular to know,
however.  It was only my curiosity."

"I am not particular to conceal my views.  I would be glad to preach in
your neighborhood, and allow you to judge of my doctrine.  I would be
glad to preach next Sunday."

"The only meeting-house in town, I am sorry to say, is occupied every
Sunday.  I have no doubt but Mr. Darling, our minister, would be glad
to have the people hear you.  He is a good man; and, if he is a
sectarian, he is not so exclusive as many."

"I would not ask him to give up his pulpit to a stranger.  It would not
be best, I think, to apply to him.  Have you not a school-house, or
barn, that would convene the people with comfort?  I am used to such
temples of worship."

"Our school-house is small, and our barns are full; and I am sorry it
happens so, for I want to hear your message."

"Then I will preach in the open air.  Fix me a stand under your
shade-tree, and I'll want no better place.  I'll be in God's free
temple then--a fit place for God's free gospel."

"It shall be done for you; and I will send around notice far and near.
And shall we hear something against the sects, and their cant and
dogmas?"

"No, not at present, from me.  Truth will wage its own warfare when
given fair play; and while I leave truth to conquer, I denounce less,
and invite the more.  Set the Infinite Good before the people, and
invite them to rise and accept it; and they are very sure, sooner or
later, to come.  This was Christ's way.  He opened heaven on earth, and
invited men to prepare and receive its light and joy to their mourning
souls.  'Repent,' said he, 'for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.'"

"If the people heard more of this preaching," said Fabens, "they would
rouse from their indifference, and live a heavenly life."

"The world has been denounced for indifference," said the Minister;
"but the world is not all to blame.  The gospel it hears is too seldom
of the inviting kind, adapted to its wants, addressed to its affections
and reason.  Men have been fed on the letter, while needing the spirit
and truth which the letter conceals.  Preachers have spun too much
gossamer and tinsel; and woven too little solid bang-up and beaver for
wear and comfort.  The people have been served with too many custards
and candies of entertainment, while hungering hotly for the bread of
life."

"Very true," said Fabens.  "I have felt this hunger myself, though our
preacher here has given us very good fare."

"In consequence of this error," said the Minister, "many good people
have taken the impression that there is nothing in religion worthy of
their first concern.  That it has not a spirit which will act on a week
day; and neither food nor clothing for the soul can be found among its
provisions.--Why, sir, religion is a legacy of infinite love to a world
groaning in sin.  It has power to change this earth to a paradise, and
transfigure its inhabitants to angels.  It is the one thing needful for
every-day life; the principal requisite for a true integrity and honor;
the actual virtue; the legitimate hope; the perfect charity; the
paramount peace; the kingdom of heaven at hand.  As men permit its warm
influence to stream down into their hearts, they will kindle and rise
to a new and noble life, and walk and live in heaven."

"I am confident of that," said Fabens, "and I am glad you are out on a
mission of this gospel.  I am sure we need it enough in this
neighborhood."

"Christians should be all on fire with the spirit of this religion
now," said the Minister.  "They should give it forth to the world as a
vital heat warming up the temple of the heart like a furnace; a light,
flooding every niche and cranny of that temple with full illumination;
a fountain, watering all its sanctities and graces; and music, filling
it to overflow with the voice of heavenly song."

"Give me that religion," said Fabens, "and I shall be rich and high
indeed.  But I cannot hope to enjoy it in such full and actual life."

"The world is like you," said the Minister.  "It wants hopefulness.  It
wants hope in God, and faith in his providence.  Here is the grand
want; hope in God and faith in his providence.  God is doing his work
in this world at this hour; his spirit moves on the waters now,
bringing peace out of discord, and light out of darkness; and the
people should know and feel it as a vital truth.  When they do, they
will rely on his love, and enjoy his religion."

"I wish you would give us a sermon on this subject," said Fabens.

"I will," said the Minister, and they concluded the conversation,
attended prayers and retired to rest.

Arrangements were made, and notice, circulated for the meeting.  The
hour of the meeting came, and it was a placid and splendid hour as ever
gilded a country Sabbath.




XVII.

THE MEETING.

A country Sabbath! who can go out of the city and enjoy that even in
imagination, without bringing the day, and all its placid light, and
all its green and tranquil blessings home with him in his soul?  It
steals upon you like the floating raptures of a trance, and O! there
are such smiles and splendors of God in the sky; there is such a spirit
of worship in the hushed and reverent air; there are such songs of
praise from all the temples of Nature rising on wings of holy melody to
heaven; and you behold such comely forms and faces descending the green
hills, and emerging from the woods and lanes: you forget this
prison-durance, and seem to walk in a higher sphere.

The Minister was a little man, of perfect form, lithe as a spirit;
ardent, open, affable; with a high and swelling forehead; a deep, warm,
lustrous eye that darted forth the living fire of intelligence and
love; a long thin nose, winding in a slight and not ungraceful curve
toward the right shoulder; an eloquent gesture, a clarion voice, and a
face benignant and bland as the mild morning star.

A large concourse of people assembled to hear him, and after the usual
service of introduction, he rose, and casting those kindling eyes
around on the audience a moment, in a voice round and clear as a forest
warbler's, he said, "_The Spirit of God moved on the face of the
waters._"  This was his text, and,--"I suppose it is commonly
conceded," said he, "that the book of Genesis is the most ancient, if
not most sublime of all the writings that enrich the world.  The
learned have cited the first verses of this book as specimens of
sublimity unequalled by any language.  And though the prophets, and the
gospel authors outsoar Moses, I think, in the morally sublime; yet
there are two or three touches in Genesis that roll and roar like
Niagara before me, and stir me so strongly, fill me so full, and lift
me so high, I find it an effort to rise to any grander conception than
they give.

"The verse on creation; the void and formless earth rolling off in
darkness; the Spirit of God on the waters; the mandate for light; the
dividing of the floods; the fixing of the firmaments; the lifting of
the sun and moon to the heavens; the arrangement of day and night; the
bringing of the seasons; the making of man: all sweep before our mind
in visions of awe, and might, and gloom; magnificence, glory, peace and
love; and we may study the chapter till we shall seem to be there in
the midst of the awful scene, and find ourselves throbbing and swaying
with a rapt spirit, and a bounding heart.

"'The Spirit of God moved on the face of the waters.'  This, my
friends, is an assurance of God's Providence, only surpassed by the
highest announcements of Christ.  And the text has moved me profoundly,
and come in a thousand times to exalt my faith amid trials, and sooth
my griefs, and calm my solicitudes, when anguish has pierced me, and
storms have raged.  The text finds a thousand illustrations.  The world
was called from chaos, and warring elements, and confused and
conflicting principles have not yet been restrained from their fury, or
soothed to perfect peace.  There are wars among the waters of nature;
there are wars among the waters of the moral world; there are wars of
passion in our souls, and we lose our confidence often, and often our
peace and rest.  But 'the Spirit of God moves on the face of the
waters;' and they who believe this, will never feel forsaken, or lose
their balance or their hope.

"_The Spirit of God moves on the waters as they flow in the course of
Nature_; and at this very hour He is present in all her stirring
scenes, commanding her mighty forces, preserving her general harmony,
and leading all her rushing rivers of motion, power and life, into one
wide ocean of purity and peace.  And this is that gracious Providence
asserted in the text, and announced so often by the Savior.  It
requires a lofty faith to discover that Providence, at all times; to
detect its personal presence, and rest in its parental love.  What a
time it was in the beginning, while the earth was formless and void,
and darkness brooded over the seas that embosomed her--if we could have
witnessed the scene--what a time to shake and shatter this faith!  And
during long ages afterward, while the land was forming in little
islands above the waters, how impossible it would have been for one of
us to see the Divine Presence on the waters, look for harmony, beauty,
life and peace to be brought out of all!

"And then in times of confusion, we have seen, when storms have fallen,
when winds have howled, and the waters roared with trouble; what an
effort was required to believe the Lord was in the storm speaking
peace; and the Spirit of God moved on the face of the waters!

"Then, there are storms we know of, but cannot see at all times.
Electric and magnetic storms, when all the vital forces of nature are
in commotion, and wars are waged from pole to pole: when the thunders
growl, and lightnings flash, and the ruddy aurora dances and flames.
What apparent confusion reigns!  You think the thunder, lightning and
aurora, are announcements of war and commotion scarcely yet begun, and
you fear and tremble.

"But how will knowledge and faith disperse these terrors, and reduce
their confusion to harmony and rest!  The very war of waters at the
creation was their effort after peace.  When the world stood in islands
above the lonely seas, the Spirit of God was on the waters, bringing
forth continents in order and beauty, and preparing for these times of
wide-spread lands, and gay-green verdures; and nations on all, with
intelligence, commerce and joy.  And the terrible storms we have
witnessed, were the movement of God's Spirit, restoring equilibrium in
nature; while, instead of announcing conflict and trouble to come, the
lightning and aurora were the reports of peace; saying, the electric
and magnetic storms were over, and their forces were at rest.

"Again; '_the Spirit of God moves on the waters as they flow in the
course of History._'

"We study history with trifling purpose, if its high philosophy does
not raise us behind the scenes of strife and peace, advance and
retreat, rest and revolution, to discover that God moves on the waters
controlling their general course."

The Minister cited a few great epochs and movements of history, as
illustrations.  Some were secular, and some were sacred.  He pointed to
the wars of Alexander, in which the oriental nations must have seen
nothing but chaos, desolation, and woe.  Yet, over all those warring
waters the Spirit of God moved, and the races of men rose ennobled from
them.  Horrible sins were committed by that warrior, and God brought
him and them to a terrible judgment.  Yet God turned the curses to
blessings.  The young, warm, vigorous blood of Greece, and her splendid
literature, and magnificent arts were carried into the heart of Asia,
and raised those old dotard nations to a second youth; inspired them
with power and light; flooded their lands with new and noble ideas, and
brought sluggish and unsocial peoples into commerce, unity, progress,
and hope.

"And pass to another scene," said the Minister, rising with his subject
and kindling to a glow.  "Pass to another scene.  Enter Jerusalem.  Go
about Judea after the martyrdom of Stephen, and see what chaos, terror,
and despair succeed.  Even the Jews are divided into cliques and
juntos, at war with each other, and enraged at their rulers.  And where
are the poor trembling Christians, that on the day of Pentecost flocked
in such thousands and such joy to the lifted banner of the Cross?  And
how stands their faith in this terrible hour?  It is sorely tried and
belabored.  Persecution kindles her fiery torches, and a wild tumult of
warring evils reigns.  They are scattered abroad.  They flee for their
lives to distant cities, and many lie down in despair and death.

"And yet what seeds of blessing were blown about by those wicked winds;
and what love was brought from persecution!  The Christians were
scattered all over the Roman empire, and every one became a missionary
to the Gentiles, to give the word, and diffuse the power of eternal
life.  And thus was Divine Providence manifested in defeating the
designs of evil; in commanding the waters of rage and fury, and
bringing harmony, truth, and blessing out of all.  And signs of a like
Providence have been repeated throughout the whole course of history,
and man has risen from every conflict wiser, stronger, and more mature
in the graces of many-sided life.

"The period succeeding the fall of the Roman empire was another chaos
of upheaval, confusion, war, and night.  The Christian element had been
poured into the Roman, which had long effervesced with the leaven of
Greece and the oriental world.  Then wave after wave of barbarian
power, fury, and life, came pouring into all, and threatening to drown
the world, like another flood, and sweep away the monuments,
institutions, and ideas of all past time.  The rolling in of those
savage waves was like pouring rivers of acid into seas of alkali, and
the waters of society rose and roared in foaming strife.  Yet, black as
was the sky, through all the dark ages, the light of the Lord shone
above the darkness; and wild and terrible as was the war of waters, the
Spirit of the Lord moved upon them, and brought to our times the social
life, liberty, and harmony we see.

"And some of the grandest characters of history have been called out in
times of conflict and revolution; and this shows the revelation of the
Lord in all.  Milton, Washington, Patrick Henry, were not the weakly
blossoms of a hot-house, nor the stately flowers that decked a velvet
lawn, or blushed in a sunny garden.  No! they were live, indomitable
oaks, that grew amid rocks, and from warring winds, and dashing waters,
received strength to deepen their hardy roots, and lift to heaven their
green and magnificent branches.

"And as in Nature and History," said the Minister, "_so in Individual
Life we may say the same_.  The Providence of God regards the sparrow's
flight and the insect's joy; it clothes the grass, and arrays the
lilies in glory, and therefore is mindful of you and me, and works for
our good.  'The Spirit of God moves on the waters,' as they flow in the
course of Individual Life.

"We often see darkness above us.  We often hear the powers of apparent
chaos roaring like hungry dragons around.  We are often the sport of
whirling eddies, and the rage of furious rapids and falls.  We wind our
cold, dark way at times, as if passing under the falls of Niagara,
roofed over with roaring waters, and startled with bursts of spray, and
shrieks and whistlings of sound from chasms and gulfs beneath; where
one false step would send us to destruction.

"And yet, as we have trusted our faith and hope, we have heard the
voice of the Lord above the noise of waters; and felt that his Spirit
moved near us, breathing love and speaking peace.  We have said with
George Fox, 'There is an ocean of darkness and death; but withal an
infinite ocean of light and love flows over the darkness.'

"And what if we cannot always behold the light above the clouds?  What
if the time frequently comes in trials, bereavements and disasters,
when all around and above, is dark, dark; and we see not how our
prayers for light can be answered, or in what way God can educe a good
from evil?  Experience and faith assure us that the light will come,
and the good be made manifest.

"I may safely assert," said the Minister, "that the highest and
sweetest of all the blessings God his poured upon me, have rained down
in storms of affliction.  That the brightest days have dawned on the
darkest nights.  That the roundest and ruddiest rainbows have beamed
from the gloomiest clouds.  I have had the profoundest sense of the
love of God, and the nearness of His Spirit, not in days of sunshine
and pleasure, when the waters have flowed in placid, tranquillity, and
there were slumber and rest on the world.  But in hours of trial and
trouble, I have felt most of His love, and seemed most lovingly folded
in His Spirit; in hours of sickness, in hours of need, afar from all my
kindred, cut off from the staff and stay of worldly pleasure and joy.
Then, O, then, the Spirit of God has moved on the waters, and spoken
peace!  And from afflictions, I have risen to higher faith, and more
strength of character, and broader aims and views of life.

"And this has been the experience of others I have visited and heard.
It has not been amid affluence, it has not been on the smoothly-rolling
current of worldly prosperity, that I have found people most keenly
alive to a sense of God's goodness, or the presence of His Spirit.  I
have found great faith and gratitude; I have found warm and devoted
Christians amid affluence; but I think on the whole, I have found the
profoundest sense of the Divine Goodness and Presence among the humble,
among the poor and afflicted; and I am often reminded of an apostle's
words; 'God hath chosen the poor of this world rich in faith.'  *  *  *

"And this reminds me of Job, and the faith that led him to hear the
voice of the Divine Spirit in the whirlwind, and on the stormy flood;
and from whirlwinds and floods, to get messages of love and peace.

"But with the aid of all these illustrations," said the Minister,
closing his sermon, "what _can_ we conceive of God's providential love?
It is a thought beyond conception, it is a light transcending vision.
There is no object on earth or in heaven, that can well represent the
truth of its wisdom, the touch of its tenderness, or the attraction of
its power.  The sun is but a taper, reflecting its glory; the sea is
but a globule, describing its breadth and depth.  It runs the circle of
the universe, without interruption, and without end.  It is particular
as it is impartial; it is melting and sweet, as it is mighty and
sublime; and it holds you and me, and it holds the littlest babe, and
the littlest bird and flower, in an infinite Father's heart!"

He pronounced the benediction, and the audience went their way to
rejoice in the light that seemed sent down from heaven.

He gave another message in Summerfield, and departed on another call of
his mission.  His visit to the Lake Country was an era in the life of
Matthew Fabens.  His views and illustrations suggested new trains of
thought and reflection; but they only confirmed his faith in Christ's
doctrine of Providence, and opened his ear to loftier and more
melodious notes of that infinite harmony, in which he believed the
universe of God was bound.  Mrs. Fabens had joys that flowing tears
expressed, and Fanny was not an unsympathizing hearer.




XVIII.

THE SECOND MEETING AND ITS FRUITS.

In his second sermon, the Minister set forth one or two practical views
of Christianity, and dwelt upon them with an earnest soul, and a happy
selection of illustrations from the Scriptures.  He cited incidents
from history also; and appealed to his audience with such persuasive
eloquence, he left a deep impression on their minds and hearts.

Fabens had before thought of those things, and endeavored to rule his
conduct by such a spirit.  He had studied the example of Joseph with
his brethren; of Elisha with the Assyrians, of David with Saul, of
Christ with his enemies, of Schuyler with Burgoyne, and Washington with
the Tory.  In numberless instances of his life, the power of such
examples had been exhibited in his private conduct, and in his
decisions as a magistrate.

Still his faith in the power of kindness as applied to the vicious and
criminal, was not so strong or perfect as he would desire.  Some cases
of offence there were, in the treatment of which, for a good effect
upon others, he held doubted the success of that principle.  The
teachings of God, he confessed, had a lesson to strengthen that faith.
All his own little errors had been treated with kindness from Heaven.
True, he had always been miserable as often as he had sinned; but then
the gracious rains were not withheld, nor the kind sunlight
extinguished; nor the harvests blighted, nor the bloom of woods, nor
the fragrance of flowers denied, because he had been sinful and
unthankful.  God had chastened him in kindness; and he loved virtue all
the more, and increased in the ardors of devotion.  He prayed for more
faith in the power of benevolent principles and deeds; and hoped at
length for a perfection, in which he could actually turn the left
cheek, when the right had been smitten.  The words of the Minister
increased his confidence in moral power, and rendered more lovely than
ever he regarded them before, many of the Saviour's precepts.

The subject engrossed his thoughts and feelings, when, one evening,
going to his barn with a lantern to close the door, he found a neighbor
in his granary measuring wheat!  A second glance assured him it was
Tilly Troffater, his enemy; the mysterious, meddlesome, lying little
bandy Troffater, and he was stealing wheat!

Some of the neighbors had long surmised that Tilly owed the Squire a
groundless and secret grudge, as he did many others in the town.  He
always seemed to be cooking spleen and getting up grudges.  He enjoyed
apparent slights, and fancied insults, as a hungry dog his dinner; they
helped him so much in hatching quarrels and perpetrating spites and
revenges.  But he always seemed to fear the Squire, and drop his
cockerel crest, whenever he met his glances; and no one suspected he
would dare to step so far upon his premises, even to execute revenge,
much less, to rob or steal.  He had often said he would never stand
before Squire Fabens, and be obliged to look him in the face.  But
alas, here he was overtaken in a crime!  And what on earth could the
creature do?  He would have given the apple of his eye to be anywhere
else at that moment.

He had an enormous bag, but as yet, there was only a little in it.
Fabens approached him, called him _neighbor_ Troffater, got hold of his
hiding hand, and shook it with a frank and earnest grasp, that would
have hurt a tenderer palm, and inquired after his health and that of
his family.  Troffater straightened, and swelled, and blowed; and
cocked and crossed his black and blue eyes; but answered not a word.
Now was the time to test the power of kindness, and he gave it a trial.

He was glad, he said, that he happened to come with a light, for it was
very difficult to measure wheat in the dark; and began himself to fill
up the bag.  Troffater looked more sullen and evil for a while, but he
soon began to wilt, and open his mouth with apologies.  He declared, as
true as he lived, he would not have taken over half a bushel, and would
have returned again every kernel he borrowed.  Fabens replied that it
would grieve him to know that any neighbor of his was in need of what
he could so easily spare; and for fear Troffater might suffer, and be
tempted again to do what must be so painful to his heart, he filled the
large bag and tied it, saying, "There neighbor Troffater, you are very
welcome to that bag-full."

He insisted, however, that Troffater should go into the house, and see
his folks, and take supper with them.  The bolt of a galvanic battery
could not have convulsed the little culprit with a more terrible shock
than such a word; he looked as though he would slink through the floor,
and actually craved a blow to brace up his nerves, and knit his joints,
and rally his skulking spirit.  He begged permission to be gone
immediately.  But no, he could not get off with so light a punishment.
He must go in and see Mrs. Fabens and Fanny, and take supper with them.
He dared not disobey, and he trudged sneakingly in like a whipped
spaniel.

"O, it is Mr. Troffater come to see us!" said Mrs. Fabens, smiling a
kind welcome as he entered the door.  "We were wondering who it could
be with Mr. Fabens in the barn-yard.  How do you do, Mr. Troffater?
How is Mrs. Troffater? and how are the family?  It is such a pleasant
evening, why did not Mrs. Troffater come over with you and spend the
evening?  She has not made me a visit in a long, long while."

"How are Ruth and Josephine?  Did I not see them crossing our pasture
towards Mr. Teezle's to-day?  I hope they have not forgotten that they
owe me a visit," said Fanny, with a voice more musical than the
meadowlark's, and a smile more gentle and subduing than the moonlight
melting on the wall.

But Troffater was silent.  His throat was so dry, and his tongue so
thick, he could utter nothing in return.  His silence surprised them,
and they feared he had been injured, or was in a fit, until a glance
from Fabens checked their surprise and inquiries; and then they treated
him as if he had joined in conversation, and nothing unusual had
happened.  A good supper was set before him, and a good family took
seats around him, and Mrs. Fabens and Fanny more than once expressed
the wish that Mrs. Troffater and the girls had come along.  But
Troffater enjoyed neither conversation, nor comfort, nor supper.  He
tried to eat, but he made a pig's mess of the fine and bountiful dishes
they set before him.  He crossed and recrossed his earthen eyes.  He
sweat, and hitched, and wheezed: he dropped his knife on the floor, and
stuck his elbow in Fanny's butter; he attempted to sever a cold
chicken's wing, and upset a plate full of biscuit and butter, apple,
honey, and pie, in his lap; he blew his tea long after it was cool, and
blew hot and cold drops into Mrs. Fabens' face; and mixed everything
together as he ate.  And then he ate but little; his throat was so dry
he found it difficult to swallow.

After supper they returned to the barn, and there Fabens told him in
private what he thought of his crime.  He talked very frankly.  He used
neither oil nor honey with his words.  He warned him against the
wickedness of crime, and against its awful punishments.  He cited a few
warnings of the Scriptures against the wicked and the sinner.  Yet he
spoke kindly, and admonished him as a friend and brother.

Troffater went into convulsions of agony.  Streams of fire seemed
surging through all his arteries, burning up his heart, and covering
his head and face with blisters.  He hung his head, and knocked his
knees together.  He gasped, and hemmed, and groaned.  Tears at last
came to his relief, and he wept like a child.  Fabens assured him, if
he would promise upon honor, that he would, from that time, abandon
criminal desires and acts, he would always treat him kindly, and never
expose him.  A pledge was given with more soul in its declarations than
had ever before been extorted from the mischief.

Troffater, however, still begged for one mitigation of his
punishment--a single one.  He begged to empty the bag of wheat into the
granary, and go home without a quart.  But Fabens was inexorable.
Troffater said it would choke him to eat the flour, after what had
happened.  But Fabens expressed no fear or pity.  Troffater said he
would give up trapping and hunting, and go right to work and earn some
wheat.  Fabens advised him to do it; but said he must take home that
bag full, to keep them in bread till he could earn more.  Troffater
replied that they had enough for two or three bakings, and asked if he
might not let the bag stand, and come to-morrow, and work till he had
earned it, and then take it home.  But Fabens was still inexorable.  If
Troffater would come to-morrow and help him three or four days, he
would pay him in wheat; but that bag-full he was welcome to, and he
must take it home that night.

"I ken not carry it," cried Tilly; "there's three bushels and a haff;
and it'll break my back, if I try to tuck it hum."

"I did not think of that.  It will be too heavy for one load; but I
will tell you how you can manage it," said Fabens.  "We will turn half
of it into your other bag, that lies out there by the fence, and you
can carry it half at a time, and then get it home before eleven
o'clock."

Then came another scourge like molten lead upon him.  He had hoped that
Fabens would not discover the other bag; but now the worst was known;
and taking the fiery chastisement, he submitted, insisting on coming to
work, and declaring he would take no more pay for his work; while the
Squire declared if he worked he should have his pay.  He carried away
the wheat, and never again was detected in crime committed after that
night.  It could hardly be expected by any man that his character would
be completely changed, or his punishment entirely remitted at once.
But he was a better neighbor, and more inclined to employment; and he
abandoned his love of lying, law, and litigation.




XIX.

THE HARVEST LUNCH.

Bearing witness of prospering hopes and growing joys, nearly a
twelvemonth passed away, and Fabens commenced his wheat harvest.  The
last fall seeding was more extensive than that of any former year; the
snows came on early, and in kindly coverings, protected the tender
blades through the winter.  Spring rains fell in timely showers to wash
it from mould, and revive it from the withering of frost and wind.  The
summer appeared early, as one of Nature's most genial and gentle, and
he looked around on harvests large and white.

He went forth to his fields, with many men, and great preparations.
The songs of the reapers were never more cheerful.  The melting hours
of July were never more manfully met.  The home of our farmer had
seldom less shadow with its light.  Laborers found rarely a more
liberal employer than he.  He was generous in the wages he gave; he
allowed more resting hours than any of his neighbors; he was less
exacting in his demands; he always reserved the finest lambs and
chickens to supply his table in that season; he had the best of spruce
beer in Summerfield, and the clearest crystal water.  And while with
these mitigations, the toils of the harvesters were still hot and heavy
to be borne, there was that in their fare, in their songs, and
animation, which told of as much happiness, as may crown the tasks of
labor.

To all his sympathies for the laborers, to all his efforts to cheer
them, and temper their fatigues, and give them relief and refreshment,
Mrs. Fabens and Fanny responded with expressions, more meaning than
words.  From the midst of the forenoon labors, they invited their help
to refreshments under some green shade tree in the field; and in the
long afternoon, three hours before supper, a refreshing lunch was again
set before them, which would have answered well for supper; and it
brought vigor once more to weary arms, and vigor to weary hearts; and
called forth thanks from minds that abounded in gratitude, as in labor.
Long and affectionately were they remembered by their men, as the
bringers of joy and ministers of comfort, where joy and comfort were
often craved in vain.

On one sweet afternoon, toward the last of the month, and the last of
the harvest, a cool bland breeze swept over from the north, and
rendered the time delightful.  The sun still shone, and it was large
and yellow as in October, but the breath of the north stole the sting
of fire from its beams, and rallied a thrill of life and joy through
the drooping hearts of beasts and men.

It was a pleasant hour to be enjoyed out of door, and it was welcomed
as a blessing, by those who had kept in the shade; and Mrs. Fabens and
her daughter hurried their preparations to be early in the field, with
the evening meal.

"The men want to finish if they can, this week," said Mrs. Fabens, "and
they have worked hard, very hard, since morning, and we must give them
a good luncheon this time."

"We will take extra pains," responded Fanny, "and see how cheerful we
can make them.  It is so cool and pleasant out now, they will enjoy it,
and we shall enjoy it better than usual, as Cousin William will be with
us; and let it be something more than bread and butter.  I feel so
sorry for them, while they work so hard in the scorching sun to make us
happy!  Too much care cannot be done to refresh them, and warm up their
hearts."

"Then, William has returned from Auburn, has he?  Well, he shall see
that country people can be happy and free-hearted, if they have _not_
the city refinements.  And we shall again find that the greatest good
and joy on earth, we take in the good we do to others.  They shall have
something that will do them good."

"George Ludlow looked up to me so thankful, when I turned his bowl of
coffee," said Fanny, "and it seemed to taste so good, and revive him
so, I felt more than paid; I was myself refreshed by my trouble."

"It does them all good, not only to be refreshed with what nature
requires, but to know that we care for them.  These little acts of
kindness can never be felt, except in pleasure by us, while they will
direct a stray feeling of happiness to more than one deserving heart.
It is a refreshment of the soul, to poor and rich, to know that others
care for them.  What should we live for, if not to lighten each other's
labors, and make each other happy?"

"If what father believes is true, and it looks quite rational, we
praise God most, when we are most like him, and are faithful and
free-hearted to his children.  And who of us desires more praise from
those we wait on, than a look of gratitude, and the assurance that we
have given a blessing?  But, George _did_ look so thankful!  Poor
George, how hard he has worked to be somebody in the world!"

"They all looked thankful, and what was better, they rose and went to
work again with a lighter step, as though they felt younger and
stronger.  But, George has given you several such looks of late, and
sometimes when your eyes were another way.  I begin to think he means
something."

"How you talk, mother!--What, looked at me several times?  And when my
eyes were another way?" returned Fanny, blushing like a quince blossom.

"Well, he cannot mean anything more than thanks for our small
attentions."

"George is a fine young man," said Mrs. Fabens, "if the Cressey girls,
and Desdemona Faddle do feel above him.  They will set their caps in
vain for Merchant Fairbanks, for he detests their foolish pride and
finery as much as any one, and laughs in his sleeves, I'll warrant, at
their dangling curls, and their silly lisping talk, when they try to
speak polite to him; although he likes to flirt with them, and make
them think he is ready to die for them."

"And why should _they_ feel themselves better than George?" asked
Fanny.  "They don't astonish the world with good looks, or refinement
of manners or mind.  Their fathers are rich I know, and they have
nothing to do but dress, and study etiquette.  They can hardly stoop to
what they call common people.  But I don't envy them at all.  They were
always disliked at school, and were always at the foot of their class.
If I were going to feel large and boast, I would want something besides
wealth to feel large about.  I am sure I would sooner envy George
Ludlow, if he is not handsome, and is poor, and works out to support
his father and mother.  He knows something, and has riches of the heart
I believe.  But I cannot think why he should look at me, as you say,
mother."

"I like your ideas of greatness, Fanny," replied Mrs. Fabens, "I like
your ideas of greatness, and am glad you do not join those foolish
girls in a pride that would despise such a young man.  True greatness
is of the mind, and riches are of the heart.  But let us hurry with our
refreshments, for it is beautiful out now, and they must be hungry, and
we will enjoy it with them."

They plied themselves briskly, and about four o'clock the white cloths
were laid under a cool maple shade-tree, and on them was spread a
sumptuous lunch of fricasseed chickens, to be taken leisurely with
flowing cups of coffee, and followed with saucers of raspberries and
cream, and large and luscious pieces of blackberry pie.  The look of
thankfulness and cheer which the men all returned for such a
refreshment, more than rewarded them, and sweet was the gratification
with which they themselves and the good-hearted Fabens partook of the
rural meal.

The presence of William Fabens also, enhanced the interest of the hour,
and furnished conversation which all were glad to hear.  William Fabens
was a cousin of the Squire's, whom he had not seen before that month,
since they were boys in Cloverdale.  William had gone to New York city
about the time Matthew went to Summerfield; and was now an intelligent
merchant still in trade, and was out on his first visit to the Lake
Country.  He appeared much like the Squire, only a little more stately
and active, and he possessed great practical wisdom and fine common
sense.  He carried a rich country nature to the city, and he had
cultured it finely, and it was bearing fair and mellow fruit.  He had a
double life in consequence, and country life _citified_, perfected his
capabilities and joys.

He had found that life in the country and town, was life in very
different spheres, with different manifestations, and each a different
set of lights and shadows.  Life in the country was more natural,
spontaneous and quiet; life in the town was more artistic, ambitious,
and flushed with fever heats.  Life in the country was picturesque,
like the green, lovely landscapes in which it bloomed; life in the town
was statuesque, like the flocking forms that pressed upon its sight and
jostled it on its crowded way.  Life in the country breathed in music;
life in the town abounded in incidents and actions.

He remembered with grateful pleasure the noble occupations and
amusements of country life.  But he had profited well, and not lost, by
the change.  If it was a noble theme to study material nature in the
landscape and sky, he found it still more noble to study moral nature
in man; and man as he moved in the town, and acted in the drama of life
that was daily brought before him.  If it was delightful to read Milton
or Beattie in a cornfield, in a clover meadow, under a tree, or on the
haymow; it was more delightful to his mind to read the same author in a
city, where, seeing more of men, he could understand him better.  And
whatever was beautiful in country life he carried with him to the town,
with its green and radiant pictures still glowing on his heart, and its
morning melodies still murmuring through his soul.  And he could act
out in deeds, what once he meditated in ideas.  He was constantly
called, by irresistible voices, to go out of himself, and out of his
fixed and finite conceits and opinions, and mix with other souls; and
transform his conceits to comprehensive conceptions, and enlarge his
opinions to universal views.

From this rich and varied experience, and from these elevated ideas,
William Fabens spoke, as he conversed with his cousin and the
harvesters, while taking the harvest lunch.

"I suppose by this time, William, you are pretty well weaned of the
country," said the Squire, after a changing conversation on several
themes.

"O no, not at all," said William, "not at all.  My love of the country
is fresh and warm as ever.  It is a singular fact, that almost all my
dreams are laid in the country, on the old farm.  I am often in the
country in my mind, and receive much of my mental, as my physical
sustenance, from country stores."

"I thought you would turn your back on the country and never think of
its homely scenes again," said the Squire.

"I like the city in many respects better," said William; "so much
better, that I prefer living there nine months in the year.  But give
me the country in the summer.  In night dreams and day dreams, I return
to the old homestead, to renew my youth, and refresh my sympathies and
tastes.  I think of the pride of the summer landscapes; and the pomp of
summer sunsets.  I sit in the shade of my old favorite trees and woods;
I bathe my heart once more in the moonlight; my ears seem to tell me
again of all the melodies of morning; the babbling brook; the lowing
herd; the cowbell's simple chime; the murmur of bees and insects; the
choral concerts that ring through the woods; and I am there, young and
blooming as ever, and what Beattie's 'Minstrel' saw and heard, I seem
to see and hear once more."

"I know not how it may be in cities," said the Squire; "but I have
often noticed in our villages, that the countryman gets laughed at for
his greenness.  This never disturbed me.  I have felt that we were
inferior to none of their village bloods.  Better be green on the
surface than rotten at the core.  And I have remembered how many great
men of the world were bred in the country."

"The cities are often guilty of the same," said William, "forgetting
how many angels they entertain unawares.  Did ever a mortal man look
more of the rustic clown than the country boy, Sam Johnson, when he
first went to London?  And could he not make dictionaries, and write
Rasselas?"

"And who can imagine a more ludicrous object," asked the Squire, "than
shabby, and chubby, and warty little Oliver Goldsmith, when he first
waddled, staring and gaping, through Green-Arbor Court, and up
Fishstreet Hill?  And has he not given us prose and poetry that will
live as long as the English tongue is known?"

"We might have laughed at Shakspeare," added William, "when, a green
country runaway, he first entered the metropolis; we might have laughed
at Dryden, coming up from the provinces in his coarse Norwich drugget
and wooden shoes--over thirty years old, and not yet aware that he
could write a line of verse.  But for all that, did not Shakspeare
write Hamlet? and Dryden give laws and models for English heroic verse?"

"And some might have thanked the Dumfries gentry for putting the rustic
Burns in the kitchen with the servants to eat," added the Squire; "but
did not Burns make a song there, to shame his proud insulters; and did
he not sing--

  'A man's a man for a' that.'

The temptations of the city are the most that I should fear."

"They are many and great," said William; "and I do not wonder that so
many perish in the ordeal.  Yet I know that people need not fall, if
they will open their eyes, and act out their country nature.  Evil
affords a high and noble discipline when we meet it like men, and
overcome its onsets.  When men and women from the country have finished
a course of city life, with warm hearts remaining in them, unsullied by
corruptions they have seen, they are found to possess all the more
strength of will, elevation of mind, and grace and grandeur of life,
from the school from which they graduate.  Each exercise of strength we
take in resisting temptation, is the moral gymnastics that redoubles
that power against the next encounter, and adds muscle and fire to all
the capabilities of life.  Each exercise of sense we take to
discriminate between true and false life, true and false pleasure, true
and false charmers, is a training of the intellect and judgment to more
delicate discernments, and more virtuous and vital joys.  A man enters
the city as Hercules entered the world; the characters that go forth to
meet him are like the true and false goddesses that met that hero and
determined his choice; and that fine old fable shows that even the
exercise of mind which is impelled by the two voices, will add new
strength to one's being, cut out the blurs from his eyes, and make the
judgment more active and perception more keen."

"That is all very true," said the Squire; "and your own life is an
illustration.  But if I should enter a city to live, I fear it would
cool off my sympathies, and harden my heart."

"I should not fear that of you, Matthew," said William; "although it is
the case with thousands.  We need not be cooled or hardened.  We see
more of the evil side of life, to be sure; but it does not harden all.
John Howard and Elizabeth Fry saw more of the evils of life than most
city people.  They visited the very dens of suffering want and
imprisoned crime; but to them such sights were nobly instructive, and
they grew great-hearted and noble while reading the lessons.  Their
sympathies were softened and warmed; their interest in humanity was
redoubled, and their love for our race quickened and expanded, until
they found no rest so sweet, as after long rounds of philanthropic
labor; no delight so pure as kindness; no beauty so divine as charity;
and no riches so ample and enjoyable as those laid up for benevolence,
and those received back to the generous soul in return for gifts and
deeds of good."

"You delight me, William," said the Squire; "and if you will go around
lecturing the country people, you will see them all flocking to the
town."

"The more, the better for us," said William.  "They are the best
materials of which the town can replenish its numbers and forces.
Their great good sense; their healthy and generous instincts; their
large and throbbing hearts; their picturesque minds and memories need
only the discipline and finish of city life, to round them up into
robust men and women of sweet and symmetrical characters, and fair and
full-blooming souls."

On this occasion George Ludlow seemed to regard Fanny Fabens with
increased attention; and as their glances more than once met, an
artless, innocent blush would express on each face the timidity of
their natures, if not the emotions of their hearts.

The truth to tell, George had contracted for Fanny an affection which
he dared to disclose no more significantly, than by those expressions
of the eye and face, which would not be concealed; and since the
conversation in the house, he had scarcely been absent from her
thoughts.  She considered his pure life and enlightened mind, and
inquired, "Where is the young man that has more nobleness than he?"
She thought of his kindness to his parents, and admired the example.
She called to mind his love of nature, and books, his efforts of
improvement, even amid tasks of diligent toil; and she honored him in
her soul; honored him the more for his own honor of his calling; and
began to return a kindling flame of that affection, which she conceived
he might indulge for her.  But a few words were exchanged between them,
however, and it remains for some future chapter to relate the result of
those growing loves.

The men rose from their luncheon, when a cool and reviving hour had
been taken, and while the women were departing with William to the
house, and while Fabens remained under the maple, Merchant Fairbanks
came up, and after the usual salutations, he talked a moment with the
ladies, and then made Fabens an offer for his wheat crop, and commenced
a pleasant talk.




XX.

MERCHANT FAIRBANKS.

Merchant Fairbanks sold goods in Summerfield, and undertook large
dealings with the farmers there; buying their crops and bartering in
smaller transactions, for butter and cheese, wool and feathers, wood
and ashes, eggs and paper rags.  He had tarried in town only two or
three years, and few were intimately acquainted with him, although many
supposed that they knew him well; and few men enjoyed more confidence
or love.

He possessed a tall and imposing person; a face that all declared
"fine," and "noble;" a large and glowing chestnut eye; a serene and
inspiring presence; and hair so dark, that it reflected at times stray
tints of purple, and was lustrous and smooth as a blackbird's wing, He
was scrupulous in the arrangement of his attire, and still there was a
studied contrivance of modest dignity about it all, that attracted
attention, and set off his honors.

He was an instant and accurate judge of character; he discerned by a
glance of his quick perceptions the lights and shadows of the human
mind, and was accomplished in manners that won the esteem of the
people, and enlisted them warmly in his favor.  He remembered little
things, to accomplish great ones; he would call to your recollection
some trifling fact of which you supposed all beside yourself
unconscious, that would flatter your self-esteem in spite of you, and
win for himself your approbation.  He remembered the names of his
customers and acquaintances, and called them emphatically, if he had
seen them never but once before; he was particular to salute each man
with his title, and whether that title was military, religious or
judicial, if he was in any doubt of its particular elevation, he would
be sure and get it so high that, when mistaken, a captain could answer
to the appellation of major; a justice to that of judge; a meek
disciple to that of deacon, and a preacher to that of doctor.

He knew many children in town, he spoke all their names, and told of
some good-looking relative or friend of his on the Hudson, whom they
strikingly resembled.  He distinctly professed private religious and
political opinions of his own, while he knew there were the best of
people in all parties and persuasions, and put every one at perfect
ease with whom he conversed, convincing them that controversy was
unprofitable, and the slight difference between them, after all, would
be more in talk than in truth.  He was a popular merchant, and the
central attraction of several gay circles in the town.

With her searching discernment, Mrs. Fabens had discovered in him more
than one design which she pronounced artful; she studied his character,
and told her husband and daughter in confidence, she believed him a
cunning flatterer, and a cheat; and that he would not always sail in
smooth water in Summerfield.

But Fabens would hardly listen for a moment to her surmises.  He had
dealt with Merchant Fairbanks considerably; he had always believed him
honest and manly, and he joined the multitude in much of the praise
which they bestowed upon him.

As for Fanny, though she had not given the gentleman a great many
thoughts, she regarded him favorably, and found him a most mannerly
salesman, an affable and gallant man.  She thought him far better than
many who ran after him, and she was in no wise averse to consider him
her friend.

"But you may depend upon it," said Mrs. Fabens to her husband,
seriously--"depend upon it, he is not so particular and loud, in
calling you 'Squire' for nothing; and it cannot be always a mistake,
when he says 'Judge Fabens;' nor does he consult your opinion on so
many things, because the opinion has the value of a straw in his
estimation.  He may never injure you, and I will not fear that he can;
but it will be well to reserve a little confidence till he is better
known, and not be too quickly carried away with him."

But Fabens was still confident that Fairbanks was honorable and worthy
of respect and trust; he was often at his store; he often relied on his
integrity for important considerations; and he was well assured that he
was a man of merit and justice, and entitled to his enviable name.  And
so marked was his confidence, it had induced Fairbanks to come without
hesitation again to buy all the wheat he could sell, and ask to have
credit till January.  He offered a fairer price than Fabens had hoped
to obtain that season, and he engaged it on the desired time.

Fairbanks was unusually social and winning that afternoon, when he
found them rising from the lunch in the field; and he conversed freely
and pleasantly with Mrs. Fabens and her daughter, as they departed for
the house; and then turned to Fabens and conversed a long while, saying
at last--"That is your _only daughter_, I believe, Judge?"

"Yes, and only child, now, I suppose, that we have on earth," answered
Fabens.

"You may think I am too free, comparative stranger as I am, in my
conversation with her," said Fairbanks.

"O, no; I like to see folks familiar and friendly.  Familiarity is the
life of company, while stiffness and formality give it a chill which is
quite disagreeable to me," said Fabens.

"Perhaps I should not be so familiar to her; but she reminds me so much
of a dear sister of mine on the Hudson, that I feel attracted towards
her; and it seemed every moment as if my sister was going to speak to
me.  She is a good sister, too, and quite intelligent, if I am her
brother; and I think I have a right to say it.  And there is that same
trembling modesty, that same blushing innocence and blooming beauty, to
remind me of my sister; and had her hair been a shade or two darker,
and her teeth not so ivory white; I believe I should have forgotten I
was talking to a stranger.  You will pardon my frankness, Squire, I
know you will.  I am apt to talk right out just as I happen to feel."

"Certainly, certainly, Mr. Fairbanks.  I always admired frankness.
Perhaps you say too much of our daughter; but she is a very good sort
of a girl; and we tried, as far as we were able, to give her a
common-sense view of things, and have her respectable.  I am thankful
that she is not as brazen as some girls; and good health has flushed
her face with fresh and blooming looks."

"You needn't fear for _that_ girl--pardon my freedom, Squire.  No young
lady of such a turned forehead, and such eyes and address, ever came
short of what good parents desired."

"Then you are a phrenologist, Mr. Fairbanks?"

"I have studied such things considerably, and am not often mistaken.
High and full in all the frontal and coronal regions--such heads are
never given to flirts or fools."

"She is just as the Lord has permitted her to be; and we are thankful
that she has filled our home with so much light and joy."

"I know she must be dutiful; and at the same time wishing to know the
whys and wherefores of things, she asks a few questions, I suspect,
that she may know something, and have an opinion of her own."

"She never did a thing, as I recollect, that caused us an hour's
regret; but, as you say, she wishes to know things for herself; and
sometimes, when we have been tired and dull, she has wearied us with
questions.  She has a great mind to acquire knowledge, and have an
intelligent opinion; and we ought never to be impatient with her, or
refuse an answer."

"She may thank father and mother for that disposition, I suspect.  How
much she looks like her mother!  And still she has your forehead, and
eyes, _almost_--if I remember right; and I should know she was your
daughter, if I met her in France."

"Her eyes are much lighter and bluer than mine; but they may resemble
them in shape and size.  As for her hair--"

"I was just a-going to ask where she got that fairy flaxen hair?"

"We cannot tell where the color came from, except from our white blood.
My hair was light when a boy."

"That then accounts for hers."

"But never so milk-white as hers."

"Hers will grow dark, you may depend; it will be dark as yours when as
old.  But what if it is not?  I should like it all the better as it is;
it is handsome _enough_, and it is not so common as brown or black."

"But here it is nearly dark, and I have not had the manners to invite
you to the house.  Come, go in with me, and take a dish of tea."

"O Squire, I beg you to excuse me.  I have some business at home that I
must attend to to-night, and I must go.  But that is the way with me,
always!  When I am in good company, I never know how time flits by, nor
where to break off my talk.  Come over and see me, Squire!  Do come and
see me.  Good night."  And as Fairbanks went for his horse to go home,
Fabens ordered his men to quit work, and they all returned to the house
in excellent spirits for supper and sleep.

Fabens had made it the effort of his life to resist flattery, and
preserve a decent self-respect without a vain emotion; but it never
grieved him to call him Squire; and there was much in what Fairbanks
said and suggested, which he thought evinced uncommon discernment, and
a clear and discriminating mind; and he was happy in the belief that it
came right up from his heart, warm and sincere.  He determined that he
would not allow his own heart to take any flattery from what he had
heard; yet what was said of Fanny--and her father and mother
also!--could not be displeasing, coming as it did from one of an
elevated station and mind: and he concluded that it was right for him
to be encouraged by the compliments, and congratulated himself on the
happiness of such a family and such a friend.

He enjoyed a fine conversation with his cousin William that evening;
and showed him his farm, and visited with him all he could, the next
day; and the day following, William departed for the city, leaving many
warm regards behind, and carrying home a large supply of sweet country
summer in his soul.




XXI.

THE HUSKING.

In modern times the Husking Party has gone out of fashion in
Summerfield; but in ancient times, while the manners of the people
remained primitive and pure, this festival (for festival it was)
continued of great account.  It was sometimes held in barns, and
sometimes in the open fields; and the attendance of good wives and
maidens, and the occurrence of music and dancing at the close, was no
unusual joy.  We may call it a 'movable feast,' for every autumn it
moved the rounds of the Settlement; and now in rare October, and near
the wane of the month, it came Fabens' turn to hold it again.

It was one of those golden weeks when the pleasantest house seems a
prison, and you feel as if you must live day and night out of doors.
The breeze from the cool Cayuga never fanned the brow nor tingled the
blood with a more hilarious spirit; and the orchards were never more
fragrant, nor the silver moon more round or fair.

Fabens marshalled his corn 'stouts,' like a legion of soldiers in a
hollow square, on the green mown meadow in front of his house, a
quarter of a mile away; and sent invitations far and near for a very
large gathering.  He was particular even to invite Tilly Troffater and
his family; and a great number came.  They came at half-past six; and
as the last sat down to the husking, the mild and majestic moon rose
smiling over the Owasco woods, and flooded the skies, and kindled the
dews with her mellow beams.  Uncle Walter and Mr. Waldron were the
first on the ground; and Wilson and Troffater did not linger long
behind.  A number of women were present; and a whole bevy of jocund
boys enjoyed it.  The greetings were warm and brief, and the songs and
stories commenced quite early.  Colwell had been on a bee hunt, he
said, that day, in the Richmond Openings, and discovered three swarms,
and almost traced another.  Uncle Walter had been husking the corn he
had topped and left on the hill.  Mr. Nimblet had harrowed in a
late-sown fallow.  Troffater had looked to his traps, and spent the
rest of the day fishing on the lake.  Most of the women had been drying
apples and coloring flannel.

Fanny Fabens and Nancy Nimblet sang the 'Silver Moon;' and all
confessed it was never sung better.  Uncle Walter told a panther story,
with thrilling additions they never had heard before; sent cutting
little tremors of terror trembling through their hearts, and made them
thank their stars that those perilous days were over.  Troffater told
his "Jemmy Harvey" story, saying "Jemmy was green as a mess o' cowslops
and the priest tuck forty dollars for pardoning his sins, and left him
without a shiner to tuck himself hum agin;" then he crossed and cocked
his black and blue eyes and laughed in convulsions at the story, while
they laughed at the manner in which the story was told.  Teezle told a
story about the Indians and Tories "that cut up such didoes in the
revolution down there in the Diliway."  Colwell repeated the story of
Milo Dale, the money-digger.

Then Squire Fabens told a story of a man who was caught in his
neighbor's granary borrowing wheat, and who was given a bag full and
his supper in the bargain, and sent home, promising he'd never do the
like again.

"A sap-headed fool, I guess it was, that found him, and let him slip
off in that way," said Colwell.

"That may be; but he did one wise act of his life, in his treatment to
the borrower, and I dare say that man will never violate his vow,"
answered Fabens.

"I don't know about that," said Teezle.  "I should be afraid on't, and
lock up my grainery olers after."

"The person did not lock his granary, and no borrower I dare say has
set foot in it since."

"_Thief_, why didn't ye say?" inquired Colwell.

"O, he did not mean to steal," answered Fabens.  "His family were
hungry, and he was too bashful to ask for it, and was taking the wheat
only till after the next year's harvest.  The exposure of his error
might have ruined him; and he might have been driven to a desperate
life of crime.  Now I think he must be a better man than before
overtaken by temptation."

"Yes,--but--the scamp orto've been punished," rejoined Colwell.  "I
don't b'lieve in lettin' such scamps off without their punishment."

By this time the company were enlisted in the discussion, and more than
one remarked that he ought to have been punished; yet no one surmised
that the culprit sat in their midst, and was tortured by their words.
Troffater knew not where to turn his little earthen eyes, for fear of
encountering accusers; and he fixed them on the moon, and whistled a
snatch or two of his addicted music; then bit his lips, and blowed, and
hitched around on his seat, and blushed like a jack-o'-lantern.

"Yes, the scamp orto've been punished, I say," repeated Colwell.

"Think he was not punished then?" asked Fabens.  "I think he was a
little!  If I had stood in his shoes, I am sure I should rather have
been basted, or anything else, than served as he was."

"But he got away from the law," said Colwell.

"Not the living law, let me tell you," answered Fabens.  "Not away from
God's law written on his heart, and threading the bone and marrow of
his being.  To get away from that law, he had first to escape the reach
of God's hand, and run away from his own body and spirit.  That was not
so easy a feat, Mr. Colwell.

"For the sake of our good social law, it may have been the person's
duty to drag the poor man to light, and give him open justice; but he
probably judged in that case, that the social law was better served and
guarded in its spirit, if not in its letter, than if the offender had
been exposed and imprisoned, to be let loose again with vengeance
against the law, and against mankind.

"I venture to assert that the treatment cured the error, and the
borrower will not violate the law again; while he might have run riot
in open crime, had he been openly dealt with.  The majesty of the law
then was vindicated, and the injury done the system was repaired.

"And all that while he was amenable to God's living law traced all over
and around his heart; and supposing he runs abroad and treads the green
earth, and tastes the free air, and sees the bright sky; he is a
prisoner still if he lives, and has not risen in goodness beyond sight
of his sin; his body is his prison, his veins bind him down and his
nerves bar him in.  He senses his punishment keenly; it cuts to the
quick, and he grieves, and trembles and gasps, whenever his fault comes
to mind.  Let him run at large; that law of God will follow him,
watching with eyes from which no night can hide him; scourging with
whips from which no shield defends."

"Squire Fabens is a very forgiving man," said Mrs. Teezle.  "He's
_very_ forgiving, and I think he's right."

"I claim no merit for that," said Fabens.  "It is easy and right to
forgive others.  God himself forgives very freely.  But the man has one
enemy who may never forgive him in this world, and may not forgive him
at Judgment till long after God has forgiven him.  Though this will
depend somewhat on his indolence or diligence in cultivating goodness
and truth.  That enemy is himself, and self-forgiveness is the most
difficult, as it is the last to obtain."

"That may be all so, but I'd a given him _some_, I swanny, if I had a
ketched him in my grainery," said Colwell.

"I never see it in Fabens's light afore," interrupted Teezle.

"Nor I," "nor I," added others; and the discussion ended.

Then a song was called for, and Colwell sang the 'Tea Song;' and Fanny
Fabens sang the 'Whippoorwill,' and the very air attended, to hear the
happy girl, and the insects were hushed to silence, and the moon leaned
and listened, and the woods and the lake bandied back and to the
chorus, and repeated, and prolonged her full and silvery sounds.

Then they talked old times over, and rehearsed a few personal
histories, while the yellow corn glistened in rising hills before them.
Mr. Waldron related scenes he witnessed at Bennington and Saratoga, and
told of the Captain's commission and forty dollars in silver, he
received for taking six Hessians at the battle of Trenton.  Troffater
wanted to tell what his father did in the Revolution, but he had not
courage to speak; and perhaps if he had, some one would have hinted the
current tradition, that his father was a cowboy, and stole cattle from
the Americans, and drove and sold them to the British, and then stole
them from the British and drove them back again.  The conversation soon
turned on the settlement, and the history of the oldest inhabitants.

"I tell ye what, they were rather tough times after all," said Uncle
Walter.  "I remember when I cut the first tree on my farm, and stuck
the first stake for my shanty.  I had come a good ways from home, and
it was going on night, and the wolves howled in hearing, and I begun to
feel dubious.  Uncle Waldron heard me chopping, and come, and took me
home to his little hemlock hut.  Remember it, Uncle Mose?  I slep on
the softest corner of your black muck-floor, and you said I snored like
an alligator."

"The Stringers kept bachelors-hall, they say, over on the Owasco Flats,
and baked nine crusts to one jonny cake," added Colwell.

"O, my stars!" cried Nancy Nimblet, "that must have been long before we
came here; and, pray tell, Mr. Colwell, how they managed their dough."

"Why, they wet their pounded corn in water (there was no mill in these
parts then), tossed up a hunker of a loaf, laid it down on a flat stone
by the fire, and baked a crust, then peeled it off and eat it, while
another was bakin', and so on to the ninth crust of the same smokin'
cake."

"And it was thought a scrumtious kind of a thing to visit the gals in
our buff-leather breeches in them days," said Colwell.

"O, the _buff_ breeches came long after that," said Fabens.  "We had
grown quite civilized and fashionable when we wore the yellow buffs.
Besides, in those times there were not many girls in the country to
visit.  But if the times were tough, they gave us a great deal of
comfort.  I came here with my axe on my shoulder; I cut the first tree
on my farm, too, and paid for my farm, chopping for others.  I made my
first bedstead.  There was an auger in the settlement--it was yours,
Uncle Walter, and I borrowed that and framed me a bedstead of maple
saplings, and laced in elm-bark in lieu of a cord, and it gave me many
pleasant sleeps.

"After a while, I wanted a carriage of some kind to bring in my grain,
and draw away my ashes.  So I blocked off the wheels with my axe, from
the butt of a black oak tree, and backed home boards for a box, three
miles, from the nearest saw-mill.  It did me good service, and I sold
it for a price when I bought my first wagon.  But we all took a world
of comfort; and what was pleasanter work than putting up log heaps and
brush heaps in the cool of the night, and seeing them blaze again on
our clean sweet fallows?"

"A feast on bear's meat and metheglin, at Aunt Polly's," cried Colwell.

"Picking bushels of wild strawberries, big as your thumb," added Mrs.
Colwell.

"And going four miles to raisins," added Thomas Teezle.

"And five miles to weddins, once in a while," added Mrs. Teezle.

"To those very times we are indebted," said Fabens; "to its tugging
labors and hard privations, its trials, and griefs, we are indebted for
much of the fulness of heart, and breadth of character we now possess,
and the comforts we are taking on our handsome farms.  We took muscle
and might from nature; we rounded out our life; we learned to shift for
ourselves, and feel for our neighbors; and the earth crowned our labors
with such harvests, we grew hopeful and brave.  We all of us learned
things that cannot be found in books.  Books have their value, and it
is very great.  They teach us to take the hip-lock of nature, and lead
us cross-lots to success; they increase and elevate the pleasures of
our vocation; a taste for them, is itself a blessing that sweetens our
leisure hours, attracts us from temptations, and will gladden our old
age.  But of the two, a large and wise experience is better, and comes
well before them."

As he concluded these words, the hour of the clock was told, and the
company were served to warm pumpkin-pie, that was a luxury to taste,
and refreshment to remember.  Then the young people had a play and a
dance on the green, and the old people exchanged good wishes, and all
went their ways, leaving the Fabenses happier for that reunion of
neighborly hearts, than for the multiplied piles of corn they left
glowing in the moonlight.




XXII.

GEORGE LUDLOW AND ALMON FRISBIE.

George Ludlow was introduced in a former chapter; Mrs. Fabens and her
daughter discussed his character and life.  They spoke of him as poor,
and dependent on his own hands for a living for the family; as despised
by certain young people in Summerfield who happened to stand above
need; and yet as manly and capable; a lover of nature and books.  I
need say nothing of his person, except that he was homely to a stranger
and handsome to a friend.  I need say little more of his past history
than this; he had labored for Fabens for a few weeks, and now a mutual
regard quite ripened to affection, was rising between him and Fanny.

George well knew her worth and happy fortune; he remembered that he was
poor in what the world called riches; yet, possessing a manly
self-respect, he considered himself as made in no way inferior on
account of his poverty; and observing that she reciprocated freely any
regard he gave her, he had the boldness at last to declare his
affection, and intimate the happiness it would pour into his heart and
life, some day to possess her as his wife; and it was not in her will,
nor in that of her parents, to return one word of discouragement;
although it was an opinion of theirs, to which he freely responded,
that the final decision should be deliberately weighed, and the union
set over to a time at which they would be better prepared for a happy
bridal and a happy life.

But the impressions left by Fairbanks on the mind of Fabens, after the
conversation in the harvest field, tended only to strengthen the Squire
in the opinion that his wife had misjudged the gentlemanly merchant;
and to elevate Fairbanks the more in his confidence and esteem.  And
returning to the house that evening, Fanny remarked to her mother, that
she must have judged, too hastily: "for much as I have tasked my powers
of discernment," said she, "I cannot detect the first design or word,
which would lead me to suspect that Mr. Fairbanks is deceptive.  True,
he rather addresses himself to one's self-esteem, and is open, and
ardent for a comparative stranger; but it must be a manly way of his,
which he forgets to hold in reserve; and I believe he is a gentleman.
I am sure, too, mother, that I have not allowed myself to feel
flattered by his words; nor could I ever regard him as nearer than a
friend.  A true friend to us I believe he is.  A face expressing so
much open goodness; a bearing so instinctively affable, could not
belong to a bad man."

Fairbanks was too clear-sighted not to read and know the hearts with
which he was making acquaintance; and his well-considered plans
suffered nothing for want of diligence on his part, in being brought to
a fulfilment.  Nor did he stand or act alone.

Almon Frisbie was his clerk and confidant, and talked of a friendship
that began long before they left the Hudson; and he was prompt at any
moment to receive his counsels in sacred trust, and go on all his
errands.  He was ardent and unreserved in expressing his love for
Fairbanks; and Fairbanks was free and fond in the good things he said
of Frisbie; and the people of Summerfield were very happy with such
valued acquisitions to their society; and enjoyed the pleasantest hours
whenever they numbered the merchant and clerk among their guests.

Promptly at the time agreed on, Frisbie came with the money to pay for
the delivered wheat-crop; paid the entire sum in Spanish milled
dollars; and spent an agreeable evening, discussing character, hearing
Fabens's history from before the time of his settlement there; and
giving incidents of his own life, and his adventures and experiences,
with Fairbanks.

It was a pleasant hour.  This was the second winter they were enjoying
their new house, and the change and contrast could not be forgotten.
The new house stood on a gentle eminence, a quarter of a mile from the
road, and within a distant view of the lake, which was beautiful in
summer.  There was a fine selection of all the forest trees that once
flourished on the farm, in front of the house, which had been
transplanted there twelve years before, in preparation of shade and
beauty for the dooryard; and though their verdant honors had been shed
in autumn, they reminded the hearts within of their guardian presence,
by the whisperings of love they blent with the winter blast.

The house was a high story and a half, and stood thirty-five by thirty
on the ground.  It had a north room and south room, with bedrooms
attached; it had four chambers, two large and two small, above; and a
kitchen, a tea-room, and wood-house in the rear.  It was painted white
without, with a coal-black border on the tops of the chimneys, and had
blinds of Paris green.  It had white walls and oak-grained doors and
casings in the south room, and white walls, doors and casings in the
north room.  The north room was Fanny's, and the spare bed was spread
with a blue and white carpet-coverlet, spun with her own hand, and
woven in Auburn prison; and it was hung with snow-white curtains, which
she spun and wove.  She had a stove in the north room, and a fire-board
behind, covered with trees, watered with a silver lake, and stocked
with a herd of deer, three of which were drinking from the lake.

In the south room was another bed; and that was hung with checkered
curtains; and there was an ample fireplace; and that was the family
room.  There sat the company when Frisbie made his call.

Fabens was advanced in life, and yet he looked young, as if time had
taken a ten years' rest.  Mrs. Fabens had grown round and robust; but
had not shed her blooms; while Fanny had become perfectly straight, and
her hair was two shades darker; her eyes had still more lustre; her
countenance still more life, and her voice still more music; while her
step was more elastic, and her form was more nature.

A prodigal walnut fire glowed gloriously before them; butternuts and
chestnuts were tasted, and a large dish of rosy Spitzenbergs passed
around; and while Fabens and Frisbie kept up a running talk, Mrs.
Fabens and Fanny enjoyed the hour, as one sat knitting fringe-mittens
in the corner, and the other plied her dexterous needle piecing a
bed-quilt in snow-balls by the stand; and seeming to contend with the
walnut fire, which should give forth the liveliest, warming smile, and
fill up all the room with the most comfort, joy, and peace.

"Yes, I have known Fairbanks, known him like a brother, since we were
little boys at school," said Frisbie.  "We began our A B C's together,
when Mary Sanford taught school; and I remember we said, 'A,' 'B,' 'C,'
'D,' and so on, in a loud voice, both at a time.  And that Mary
Sanford--you did not know her, did you, Squire?  She taught in the same
district five years; and it was said, she impressed much of her own
noble heart on her pupils (though of this, perhaps, it does not become
_me_ to speak;) but she married a false villain at last, and now she
lives poor and deserted, they say, away out on the White Woman's Tract,
beyond the Genesee river, with a family of children to support.

"And my heart has ached for many lovely girls who have thrown
themselves away to such scoundrels.  Her husband was brought up in the
neighborhood too, and everybody thought George Lowry was a very pink of
virtue.  That made it seem so strange.  Well, as I was going to say,
Fairbanks always seemed a brother to me; and if there could be any
fault in his treatment, he has trusted me too largely, and given me to
share too many of his gifts and gains.  But there, you never saw such a
fellow in your life!"

"In what particular?" asked Fabens; while Mrs. Fabens took a quicker
rock in her chair and scratched her forehead with her knitting needle;
and Fanny paused from her piecing to hear.

"I mean in his confidence in men, and his free-heartedness, giving away
what he has.  He would share his last crust with an enemy, and he is so
up and down honest himself, he believes the whole world honest and pure
also."

"But he seems to be a good judge of character," said Fabens, "and I
should think he would not be often deceived.  I see he notices heads
and dispositions pretty narrowly."

"He _is often_ deceived," said Frisbie, "and he has met losses and
crosses enough to make a few of his black hairs turn white.  But I tell
him it's owing to his putting too much confidence in men.  He thinks
everybody is honest because he is.  His mother used to tell him, when
he was a little boy, that he would always be poor, he was so confiding
and free-hearted."

"There is a good deal in that," said Fabens, "and it is very true, as I
have found it.  Men that can be trusted most, are commonly most
trusting, while the false and guilty are always on the lookout for
rogues.  How is Fairbanks' business now?  He has met no losses in
Summerfield, I hope."

"O, no, no!  I did not refer to anything that had taken place since he
came to this town," said Frisbie.  "Of all the world, this is just the
place for Fairbanks, and I tell him so.  Where all are honest as one's
self, there can be no trouble.  He never was doing so well, by half, as
now, I dare say.  His business is large already, and his collections
are remarkably prompt.  They seem here to like him, about as well as he
likes them."

"He seems to attend to his business pretty closely; I like that in
him," said Fabens.

"Attend to business?  Ay! if you could see all the time, how he attends
to business, Squire; how he searches and foots his legers every day,"
said Frisbie; "how he keeps things moving and straight, and pays his
notes before they come due, you would say he could not help prospering,
and you would back him for any amount he would ask.  But, here, it is
nine o'clock, already, and I must face this cold storm, that has come
up since I came."

"Don't hurry away yet," said Fabens.  "There is nothing to call you
home.  Stay all night, we will be glad to have you, and you shall have
an early start in the morning."

"O, I _must go to-night_," said Frisbie, and he took his cloak, and
concluded the conversation--"_I must go to-night_.  I told Fairbanks, I
would be home before ten, and he knows what to depend on.  We keep our
word with each other.  Come over and see us, Squire.  We have a fine
room fitted up now, in the store, where we can entertain our friends.
Fairbanks is _always_ glad to see you.  He thinks Squire Fabens about
east, and his family too!  He would feel more freedom to visit you, if
you would call on him oftener.  I never saw a man who thought more of
seeing his friends.  And so far from home as we are, you must remember
that our friends here stand in the place of the absent and dear."

Frisbie departed, and Fabens expressed the liking he had taken to the
fellow, and the increased esteem he must confess for Fairbanks.

"I am sure," said Fanny, laying aside her work, but not her smiles,
that outshone the walnut fire, nor that presence of blissful life, that
filled up all the warm room; "I am sure, there cannot be much deception
in them.  We would detect it in some way, if there was."

"Do you esteem either of them as you do George Ludlow?" asked Mrs.
Fabens.

"No, I do not in all respects," answered Fanny.  "My esteem for him, as
for them, increases.  And the way the Faddle girls treat George, makes
me think all the more of him, and desire to make him happy.  Then I
admire his sentiments and tastes, and his love of labor.  Still I would
be glad to number Mr. Fairbanks and Mr. Frisbie among my friends.  Was
the man named Lowry or Ludry that he said married his teacher?  It
sounded so much like Ludlow, it startled me."

"It was Lownsly, Lowry, or something like it," answered Mrs.
Fabens.--"There are some things which seem fair, and even generous in
them, it is true.  And Fairbanks has a way of looking very meek and
innocent; and one of two things is certain: he must be unacquainted
with the world, and incapable of a thought of deception, or else he is
an arch and dissembling rogue.  But there are some expressions about
his eyes that I cannot like; and I think there is a little blarney
about them both.  I may be wrong; I hope I am, and if I am, that I may
be forgiven.  It is unpleasant to be haunted by these suspicions.  But
there, I could help breathing as well."

Upon this, Fabens went to his barn to look after his cattle and see if
any would be likely to suffer in the storm; and finding all in
comfortable quarters, he returned, saying, "I wish I could know that
everybody in the world had as happy a home as we have to-night.  I
could then rest more warmly and sweetly.  It is bitter cold night, and
I fear many will suffer.  I am glad I made the wood-bee for poor
Troffater.  His family can have the comfort of warm fires this winter.
The neighbors turned out well, and a good big pile of beech and maple
lies at his door.  I shall sleep better for that."

They enjoyed their devotions, Fabens praying that God would bless His
beloved poor, and all who were suffering and needy; while He kept their
own hearts from unjust judgments, from deception and evil; and they
were soon wrapped warmly and well in the slumbers of the night.




XXIII.

FAIRBANKS, FRISBIE, AND FABENS.

Not another month expired before Fairbanks paid a visit to Squire
Fabens, and conversed a whole evening on topics that could not but
interest the family; and Mrs. Fabens confessed he had never appeared so
well to her mind before; and that if there were art and insinuation in
his manner that time, it was so skilfully managed and deeply concealed
she could not discover it.

Still something impressed her with the conviction that it would be
quite as well not to rely too much on his integrity, until he was
better known; and by no large trusts committed to his honor, to tempt
him to an act of vice.  But Fabens and Fanny could harbor no
suspicions; while for the latter, Fairbanks showed more regard on this
occasion than would have been compatible with a knowledge of her
engagement to Ludlow, and respect for the sanctity of plighted love.
Still, it appeared his unthinking way of indulging hearty friendship;
and indeed it rather augmented than diminished Fanny's regard for him.

When about to return, Fairbanks remarked that he had been engaged
beyond present preparations in the purchase of produce of late, and had
expended more of his money than he calculated in the beginning; and if
the Squire would lend him fifty dollars he should have it back again in
a fortnight.  The money was handed him without hesitation; and just a
week from that time, Frisbie came and paid it, saying that Fairbanks
always felt distressed when he could not take up his notes, and pay
borrowed money before he agreed to.  He spent another evening; and
among other questions, he inquired, in an innocent way, if they knew
George Ludlow.

"We know him very well.  Why, what of him?" returned Fabens.

"O, nothing," answered Frisbie; "nothing.  I happened to think of him
just now; that is all.  I believe Fairbanks saw him for the first time
in your harvest-field last summer.  He would not have remembered it, if
Ludlow had not had occasion to mention the circumstance in connection
with another affair the other day."

"Then you have seen something of him, have you?" inquired Fabens.

"O, but little, sir, very little indeed," said Frisbie.  "He came the
other day to trade out a due-bill, and--I believe Fairbanks is well
enough satisfied about him now.  We were not certain that you knew him
very well."

"There was no difficulty with him, I presume?" said Fabens, not
indifferently.

"O, no, nothing of any consequence whatever; nothing that we would
breathe abroad, or wish to remember," said Frisbie, with a meekened
look.

"May I ask if anything dishonorable on his part?" inquired Fabens.  "We
have supposed him one of our best young men--one of the _very_ best in
town; and we have known him from a child."

"I am sorry I mentioned his name: I see it disturbs you," said Frisbie.
"I would not weaken one's confidence in another for anything in the
world--unless I had the weightiest reason.  And this was nothing of
importance, for one of his friends to know."

"But may _we_ not know it, and be relieved of our anxiety?" asked
Fabens, with rising emotion.

"Why,--yes, I would as lief _you_ would know it as not," said Frisbie.
"_You_ will say it was a trifling affair, and little worth minding
after all.  Hundreds of young men do the same, and never repeat it, and
are just as well thought of, too, by a good many people.  Temptations
lie in wait to ensnare us all; and the greatest wonder is, not that now
and then one becomes criminal, but that so many people, good as you and
I, Squire Fabens, do not oftener step aside from virtue's way."

"But we thought George Ludlow the last to be tempted.  He is certainly
a most respectable young man.  His very looks bespeak an innocent
heart.  I seldom meet him without desiring to exclaim as Jesus did at
the approach of young Nathanael--'Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom
there is no guile!'  And then he is so industrious and regular," said
Fabens warmly.

"I am very glad you think and feel as you do.  It is truly refreshing
to witness such confidence in men.  And I told Fairbanks that George
looked as though he worked hard, and wanted to be respected."

"But tell me, what of his error, Mr. Frisbie?  I insist upon knowing."

"You shall know, Squire Fabens.  I would as lief _you_ would know as
not; you will not breathe it where it can hurt Ludlow.  You know we are
bound to lift up the fallen--not to crush them."

"But he has not fallen, I hope!  What was his error?"

"Do not let it trouble you, Squire, do not let it trouble you at all.
I think just as much of him, far's I know, as ever I did.  The
crime--if crime _you_ would call it, is this: he came to our store to
trade out a due-bill, as I said, and after he had gone, we missed a
pocket-handkerchief."

"He or some one else may have taken it by mistake," interrupted Mrs.
Fabens, rocking her chair in agitation.

"That is very likely, as I told Fairbanks," said Frisbie.  "And it is
best for us to think so.  We had better judge ten guilty persons
innocent, than condemn one innocent man.  It was a _silk_
pocket-handkerchief; and as it lay on the counter just before he left,
Fairbanks thought Ludlow must have taken it; and following him over to
the tailor's shop, where he left his bundle, I opened it, and found a
handkerchief, just like ours, wadded up and tucked into one end of the
wrapping paper.  _Little_ things sometimes indicate more than we wish
to believe.  But then he looked a little honest, when he came in, and
said he knew not how on earth it got there."

"I don't believe he did know," said Fabens.  "How easy it would have
been for you; or whoever put up the goods, to have put that in by
mistake."

"Just so I told Fairbanks," said Frisbie; "and it must have got there
in some such way.  It was crumpled up so, my first thought was that it
was tucked in by stealth.  I inquired of our new customer, Captain
Troffater--I believe they call him Captain, I very confidentially named
the circumstance to him, and he said it _might_ be a mistake of ours;
but he did not know about it, and it was best for merchants to keep a
sharp lookout, when they did not know who was in their store.  But
there, as--"

"I will not believe George stole it," interrupted Fabens earnestly.
"He is incapable of such an act; and it is much more reasonable to
believe it was done up by mistake."

"I have brought home things several times in that way, and nobody
suspected _I_ meant to steal," said Mrs. Fabens.  "The clerks confessed
their hurry, and their liability to make mistakes, when I returned
them."

"We do make such mistakes too often, as I told Fairbanks; and it must
be he took it in that way," concluded Frisbie.  "At any rate, I had
rather believe so, and have you _all_ believe so, than believe him
guilty.  I am sure I would not harm the fellow; and I would not weaken
your confidence in him.  I am always so grieved myself to know that a
person is not as good as I believed him to be, I would not attempt to
convince any one of confidence misplaced for the world--unless I had
the weightiest reason.  Yet, I confess it grieves me still more to see
confiding people deceived, they feel so bad after it."

Upon this, Frisbie rose and repeated his invitation to Fabens, to go
over and see them, saying, as he left the door, that "he hoped
Fairbanks would not be an old bachelor always, but get him a good wife,
and have a home, and live like somebody, that ladies and gentlemen
might visit him.  But what do you think he says, when I jog him on the
subject?  That there is only one girl in Summerfield he could like well
enough to marry, and I point in a certain direction, and tell him I can
guess who he means!

"Fairbanks is getting notional like all old bachelors.  His mother
taught him some of it.  She thought so much of him when she kept house
for him on the Hudson, she dared not let him stay away from home over
night, for fear he would have the croup.

"He grows more and more particular in his choice of friends, and sets a
higher and higher mark for the young lady of his choice.  I tell him he
is too particular.  But he must have his notions; and I will say this
for Fairbanks, whoever gets him, will get a prize worth setting her cap
for.  His mother always said, if he hadn't a happy and loving home, it
wouldn't be his fault."

Frisbie left, and while Fanny's quince-blossom blushes all rallied to
her cheeks and mounted to her forehead at the allusion in his last
words, they all wondered why any one could suspect George Ludlow of
crime, on evidence so trivial; and they thought none the less of him,
or the merchant, or the clerk.

In the course of a few weeks, Fairbanks and Frisbie came again, and
Fairbanks borrowed a hundred dollars, spent a pleasant evening, and
evinced a still warmer regard for Fanny Fabens.  A week before the
money was to be paid, he returned and said, he had it all with him, and
if the Squire wished to make immediate use of it he would insist on
paying it over; at the same time intimating the great obligation it
would confer on him to permit him the use of it a few weeks longer;
getting an extension of time till he could return from New York, and
obtaining the loan of Fabens' note, payable to his order at the bank,
for a hundred and fifty dollars.

Before the time of extension expired, the borrowed money was paid, with
interest urged, and a few handsome presents to Fanny and Mrs. Fabens,
for the accommodation.  And on being well assured that the note at the
bank had been taken up, and the signature cancelled, Fabens loaned him
another note for two hundred and fifty dollars.

In two months more, other elegant presents were made to Fanny and Mrs.
Fabens, and Fairbanks and Frisbie, together, as a token of their
particular and high esteem, presented Fabens a superb cane, of a limb
from the Liberty Tree, as they said, then waving on Boston Common;
richly mounted with silver, bearing his name, and the names of the
generous donors, on a silver eagle, set in the ivory head; with
appropriate inscriptions, and all polished like the smoothest glass.

"This gift," said Squire Fabens, so touched with emotion, he faltered
and hemmed in his speech, "this gift kindles a warm spot under my vest
here," laying his hand on his heart.  "A gift always affects me, if it
is ever so small.  And this, gentlemen, is _really_ a handsome gift
_indeed_.  I have no words to express my thanks."

"Thanks would only burden us the more, as we have been the most
obliged," said Fairbanks, with his blandest bow, and meekest smile; and
other kind words were spoken, and confident assurances repeated; and
another note obtained for three hundred dollars.  During that
delightful visit, in words employed with the most winning selection,
Fairbanks and Frisbie said so much to the Squire about his credit
abroad, about the favorable development of his head for a mercantile
life, about the advantages which he knew merchants always had over
farmers, about the pleasures of store-keeping, the opportunity of
visiting New York frequently, and making honorable acquaintances there
and elsewhere, and several other desirable objects, that when alone in
the field, they proposed to him to come with them into a grand
copartnership of the name of "Fairbanks, Frisbie and Fabens," and
assume all the business of Summerfield; he was actually taken with
agreeable surprise, his head growing giddy, as by some irresistible
charm; and he looked upon the farmer's life and labor, as the life and
labor of a drudge; glanced forth upon visions of opulence, honor and
ease; and hoped to put away, without too much sacrifice, his stony
acres, and enter upon that high and tempting course.

His mind wandered and returned, as between sleeping and waking.  He
remembered, at last, what Julia would be likely to say, if informed
immediately, and in full, of the scheme.  He remembered how diligently
she had wrought, how prudently managed, to help him to his handsome
property.  He knew with what affection she regarded that home and farm,
and every fruit-tree, and shade-tree and sugar-maple; every flower-bed,
and herb-bank, and rose-tree and vine; every comfort and convenience
around them; and how it might wring her heart, and how Fanny might weep
to see the old homestead go to another; and he concluded, it was best
on the whole, to take time for reflection, and if at last he determined
to sell, and become a merchant, he would let his family know but little
of his plan at a time, and prepare them gradually, as Fairbanks
considerately advised, to incline to his will, and consent to try the
change.

Before the end of another week, and before Fabens had decided on their
proposition, Frisbie came again for the loan of another note, of three
hundred dollars, and left, saying, "they were perfectly willing he
should take his own time, to make up his mind about coming into the new
firm; that this note should be looked after and paid as promptly as all
the others had been, and he would find that John Fairbanks as clever a
fellow as ever dealt with him."




XXIV.

A WEEK OF CASTLE BUILDING.

The last assurance of Frisbie was indeed very kind, but unnecessary;
for Squire Fabens was well convinced before the last visit, that
Fairbanks was all he had been represented to be; and that conviction
rose from a simple and cool opinion to a warm and loving faith, when he
considered all the gifts they gave; the generous solicitations, which
merchants but seldom extended to farmers; and the liberty they allowed
him, to take his own time and look the matter carefully over.

It was a mean suspicion, he thought, which could longer fear deception.
Had it been their design to deceive, why all that frankness; that fair
and candid proposing; that trusting to his own mind to weigh, and his
own time to return an answer?  Villains would have been more exacting
in their terms, and briefer in their plans and proposals.  Villains
would have talked in a lower tone, attempted to hurry him to
agreements, and hastened the signing and sealing.  With those
gentlemen, all was generous, candid, moderate, indulgent; and even if
he concluded not to accept their magnanimous offer, he should always
remember the kindness in which it was made.

A whole week was before him; yes, two or three weeks if he wanted it,
to weigh the proposal and return an answer.  He gave his whole mind to
it, and a week was found sufficient for the deliberation.  During that
week he seemed to live many years of a life, wide and wonderful;
stirring and instinct with actions, incidents and scenes; a life and
possessions, progressive as the rise of day, and rapid as the bloom of
springtime.  It was a week of Castle Building.  The days of the week
introduced a succession of views that swept in action and speech before
him like the scenes of a thrilling drama.

Scene first was opened.  It pleased his eyes, and sent blissful
sensations running around his heart.  It showed him the store of the
company, enlarged and renovated, with a capacious counting-room, and a
pleasant door in the rear, beneath a piazza opening to the cool air and
placid smile of the sweet Cayuga, as it slept or stirred, embosomed
among the lovely hills.

In that store, he saw himself, now moving in the press of business; now
examining their posted legers; and now seated in the comfortable
counting-room, counselling on their growing concerns, or conversing
with an old friend, or neighbor, as the smooth pine whittlings rolled
like ribbons from his hand; and now on the back piazza, enjoying the
air and prospect.

It was a happy change.  It was all shaded sweetly from the intolerable
sun; it was more stirring than farm work; it was more gentle, and
suited to his years.  It was cleanly; and his cool linen wristbands
would keep all the week as snowy white as Julia had done them; while
she would have lighter washings, and more leisure time.

It was a profitable change.  Money was made faster there, Not that his
soul was on fire with a passion for money; he loved money less than
most of his neighbors; he was free and manly with his money as you
would not find ten in a thousand.  Still, honest gains were pleasant to
him; the amount he had accumulated somehow prompted a desire for more;
and in a store he could gain faster, and in larger amounts, and perhaps
retire in a few years, from all business, more independent than now,
enjoy the satisfaction of giving more gracious charities, and
dispensing sweeter reliefs; and settling a handsomer sum on Fanny when
she married, and again when he died.

It was an honorable change.  Say what they would, farmers looked up to
merchants, and considered their own avocation inferior.  Many farmers
honored merchants more than those of their own sphere, and would be
glad to be merchants themselves.  As he moved about that store, or
whittled in that counting-room, or sat on that back piazza, and took of
the cool summer breeze, fresh kisses of beauty borne up from the
laughing lake, he would still be called Squire Fabens, but it would
come with more emphasis and meaning than now, while delving in the
vulgar soil.

Scene second was opened.  The store was the same, but the business
extended, calling another clerk to the counter; the seats were there,
and the pleasant views around; the company sulky, polished like a
razor, danced on its light elliptics, behind a proud pawing horse at
the post; and the sun literally revelled in the yellow gold that flamed
on the sanded sign over the door.

His eyes were still more pleased, and there flocked around his heart
sensations of more exalted bliss.  The chances of his fortune were very
large, and sure; but he would feel rich on a quarter of what would be
required in older sections, and in cities.  If he could have ten
thousand dollars, and a clear conscience and good name left, he would
feel richer than many with a million.  He would be rich enough, and
thank no man for more.  No man ought to accumulate more.  With that
fortune he could settle down, in the pleasantest home.

That home rose before him in the scene.  It stood fronting the village
green.  It supported its piazza and Paris green blinds, and was white
and modest in all appearance.  It was a two-story house of course, for
a story and a half would look too much like a squatter's home, in a
village; yet it was not over large.  A large house would give Mrs.
Fabens too much care and work, and she would not have a servant to wait
on her.  The house was just suited to his family.  It was furnished
neatly but prudently; having a sofa indeed, and one large mirror; but
brick fireplaces, frugal lamps, a plain carpet in the parlor, and maple
chairs with simple flag-seats.

In that home, how much comfort he could take when his friends gave him
calls; when Fanny and her children came home on a visit, and when some
poor weary mendicant entered for shelter, alms and rest!  To that home
he could retire in a few years, free from the cares of business,
anxious for nothing, but the good of his neighbors, still young in his
heart, and fresh in all his feelings to enjoy life's blessing and peace.

Scene third was opened.  The store remained, with an increase of
business, and an enlargement of the building.  He still continued in
business; but it was from choice, and not necessity; for all of his ten
thousand was made; and it was made so easily, and in so much less time
than he anticipated, and so pleasantly withal, he might just as well
keep on to twenty thousand; if a clear conscience might remain, and he
might be a little more happy.

Mrs. Fabens could be lady of a handsomer home, and perhaps persuaded to
keep a servant or two, and take some comfort in her old age.  His first
object should be to force happiness on her; for a better wife never
blest a devoted husband.  Mrs. Fabens should be urged to extend the
sphere of her enjoyments, and Fanny should be well provided for.  He
would try for twenty thousand.  Then a larger house could be built, and
a good horse and carriage attend at the door.

That sum was accumulated, and that home and its opulent comforts and
equipage rose in the scene.  He was glad he possessed it.  The poorest
of his friends, the most humble of his fellows were welcome as ever
there, and he was happier, showing how a rich man could unbend, and how
much more was in his power to bless them.

Now he could travel some.  Neither he nor his family has seen anything
of the world at all, and he would take them around to see it.  They
should go to Saratoga a week, thence to Albany, thence to New York, and
Philadelphia.  Perhaps they would go through the country in their own
private carriage, taking all the comfort of the journey.  It would be
grand to visit Niagara, and bring home in their souls the sublimity of
the falls.  May be they would go to Boston, and set their feet on
Bunker-hill, where his father fought in the Revolution; and if he
should ever be honored with a seat in the Legislature, or in Congress,
he would take his family with him, for he could do it as well as not.

Scene fourth was opened, and that was pleasanter than all the rest.
But he found that even twenty thousand would not be sufficient to
accomplish all his plans.  Yet, he was in no dilemma.  Fairbanks,
Frisbie and Fabens, had grown up into a mammoth business, and it would
be as easy to make his thirty thousand, as to turn his hand over.  Make
it honestly too: and the money was all made, and he said now he had
enough in all conscience, for one man to possess.  Now his comfort
would be complete.

He wondered why he should have taken it into his head to build his
house in the village, where he could not turn himself without knocking
his elbows, and where he could get no good views of nature, and hardly
land enough for a patch of green grass to spread-out washings on.

Judge Garlock had a country-seat overlooking the Cayuga, scarcely a
bow-shot from the pebbly shore, and he must have one too.  He sells his
village home, purchases ten acres on a gentle and beautiful slope,
builds him a splendid house, with polished marble mantels, with
cornices, centre-pieces, and folding-doors, furnished in several rooms
with mahogany chairs and sofas, with ottomans and divans; the large
parlor graced with a fine piano, for Fanny and her sweet daughters,
when they shall come home; and his lovely acres are made more lovely by
a profusion of trees, circles and lines of white pebble walk, pink-beds
and tulips; and flourish not long without a deer-park and duck-pond, as
symbols of ancient times.

And how his heart leaps with delight as he beholds that home in
contrast with the old ones, and imagines the comfort they will find
there.  Not the wet grass, or slumping soil of a farm, but the white
pebble path of a villa will he now tread, as he goes forth to enjoy the
morning and the night.  And while he is out, if he chooses not to sit
down in his summer-house, and read, or look over his last paper, under
one of his maples, and has nothing else to busy his thoughts, and no
one to share his company, he can fling corn to his ducks in the pool,
and feed his gentle deer, delighting to see them enjoy his care.

Who has not a right to build as handsome a house as money will buy?  He
cannot withdraw his eyes from the charming scene!  He retires and
returns again and again, to linger and look upon it.  The clear and
cool Cayuga shines beyond, as if hung for a mirror to reflect it; and
he sees the whole magnificent estate, the house and its terraces, the
grounds and trees, the walks and waters, the ducks and deers; even the
tulips and pinks, as plainly in its placid splendor, as you can see the
sun in the silver sky.

But he must turn, at least to breathe, for the fifth scene opens.
Still he remains a member of the firm of Fairbanks, Frisbie and Fabens.
Still at times he is seen in the store, waiting on customers, when the
others are absent, sitting now and then in the counting-room to counsel
or converse, or enjoying a cool hour on the back piazza.  Still he is
very happy, yet not quite satisfied.

He has run upon the idea that a high-school is wanted in Summerfield,
and that he cannot more nobly enhance his happiness than by
establishing a school of the first class, in a building erected for the
purpose, endowing it amply, and making a present of it to the town.
Ten thousand dollars more could easily be made, and it would enable him
to do that very handsome thing for Summerfield.

In comes the money without effort, and without delay; the school is
established on a pleasant eminence, in full view of his mansion, and it
makes a fine ornament to the place; while he finds it a pleasant sight
indeed, to see talented young men, and accomplished young women, going
forth from Fabens' Academy, to improve society, and ennoble their own
life with learning, and graceful manners and ways.

And while revelling in this new source of joy, his fortune continues to
grow, and the sixth scene opens.  It will be thought a novel enterprise
in that community, and he is prepared for it, and even for a few sneers
and witticisms; but these will not move him at all, and he resolves to
build a meeting-house, and call a pastor, and settle a salary upon him.
He has always supported Elder Darling's meeting--the Elder is an
excellent man, and he will continue to support him; but he is not
perfectly suited with the Elder's preaching; it wants heartier life,
and a more evangelical power and effect; and he knows of many who
hunger for a gospel of larger faith and charity; which shall feed and
refresh the people, and raise their aims and views; which shall
identify religion more with a pure and benevolent character; which
shall not be sectarian; and, free from cant and vain pretension, shall
enter into every-day life, and make smiles its hymns, and deeds of good
its prayers.  Such a minister can be procured, such a church
established.  He can establish it himself, and not mind the cost.  He
will do it, and ask no man's assistance.  Up goes a beautiful church as
there is in all the country, and on comes the eloquent preacher; and
full meetings, and joyful seasons follow.  If ever he was a man of
perfect happiness, it is now.

And what can prevent the continuance of his bliss?  The evangelical
gospel sounds sweeter than ever in his ears.  New interpretations of
Scripture enlighten him, and higher views of God and heaven open like
elysium around.  And can anything, out of heaven, flood his heart with
a fuller satisfaction, than on a still, bright, silent Sunday, such as
God gives in holiest beauty only to the country, to ride in his
carriage to that lovely church, which nestles like a white dove in
among the hills, and hear preaching that will fatten his soul with
celestial manna-dew, exchange warm greetings with hundreds who thank
him for the privilege they enjoy at his hand, and ride home, rejoicing
all the way, to be the agent by which a door is opened for light and
truth in a new region?

His happiness continues to flow.  All his reasonable expectations are
fulfilled, and he seems to live longer in a single day, on a single
Sunday now, than he once did in a twelvemonth; it makes him so happy to
know he has made many others happy.  But with the increase of fortune,
comes the increase of desire, and he finds another thing lacking; a new
project leaps into his mind, and the last scene opens.

There are a great many poor people in Summerfield.  Several causes have
combined to make them poor.  Most of them are very worthy, and have
interesting children.  All of them are God's sons and daughters, and
should not pine in want and grief amid so much wealth and country.  If
a Poor Man's Home were established on a large and productive farm, and
put under judicious management, how much suffering might be alleviated!
How many aged heads lie down on soft pillows of peace!  How many aged
hearts, unburdened of grief, and made to run over with flowing tears of
gratitude!  How many of the disabled and unfortunate, placed beyond
reach of want and misery!  How many bright children snatched from the
errors and temptations that lurk in the way of poverty, and clothed and
educated in virtues and lessons, that would place them on a footing
with rich men's children, and lead them to lives of usefulness and
honor!  How many orphans provided for, and how many widows made to sing
in their hearts for joy!

He has means sufficient to do most of the building himself, and endow
the Home; and with a little help from others, the institution is
completed; and he sees bright glancing wings of joy hovering at doors
where grief has been a constant guest; Comfort wiping tears from eyes
long accustomed to weep; and Virtue and Knowledge leading large
processions of rescued children on their heavenward way.  He is rich
and happy as he can hope or desire to be on earth, and he lies down to
sweet dreams on the last night of his Week of Castle Building, and with
those dreams the visions of affluence close.




XXV.

A WEEK OF REALITY.

During that memorable week, while those splendid scenes of fortune
passed his view as on a rolling panorama, there were moments when
Fabens felt that the scheme was too magnificent to contemplate alone,
and Mrs. Fabens and Fanny ought at once to be admitted to the blissful
secret, and participate his joy.  Then again, he happened to remember
Julia's love for the old home, and her questioning, slow-footed
caution, and he refrained from a disclosure.

But he could not refrain from sounding her mind a little, as he
returned from the field for his meals, to ascertain if his own dreams
could possibly be too extravagant, and if there were any hope of a
consent from her, provided in the end he should have an earnest desire
to accept the tempting offer.  He asked her several questions of
considerable meaning to himself, which she answered, with little
suspicion of the thoughts that lay concealed beneath the surface of the
words.

"Our fields never looked more beautiful to me, not even in June, than
they have for a few days now of this lovely weather," said Mrs. Fabens,
gazing from her favorite window upon the rich landscape in view, on the
first day of the Week of Reality.

"We are somewhat retired, and cannot see a great distance north or east
from the house, but what we can see is so bound up with all my dearest
feelings and pleasantest thoughts, I would not change it away for more
pretending views from new situations.  I love to look at our east woods
very well; and the hill pasture; and the orchard in blossom is a
charming sight, and more charming still when tossing the yellow pippins
to the sun, as in this pleasant breeze."

"You think the old farm is pretty near the centre of the world, I
suppose," said Fabens.

"It holds my heart as if balanced on the world's centre," replied Mrs.
Fabens.

"And nothing would tempt you to leave it? not even a larger house, or
nearer sights of lovely water, or pleasanter walks?"

"No, indeed!"

"But, you always thought Judge Garlock's place very handsome."

"O, it is handsome to look at as you pass; it is nearer the lake than
ours; and no doubt it is the dearest spot on earth to Mrs. Garlock, she
has lived there so long; but I would not leave this place for that."

"But you forget her splendid house, her white pebble walks, her grounds
looking like an Eden; and--"

"No doubt they are very dear to her, but I would not exchange houses,
or grounds, or gardens, or sights with her."

"Not if we had more money, to live as they do!"

"No! not for a house full of silver dollars."

"Not to have such a splendid view from your door and windows of the
silver-breasted lake, and the grand old hills beyond?"

"Hardly, if the river Jordan rolled there, and Canaan bloomed opposite;
though I always thought that would be the loveliest sight on earth.
But what are you talking about, Matthew? do we not see the lake from
our house, and the hills, too, beyond?"

"Only from a distance."

"'Distance lends enchantment to the view,' as Fanny's poet sings."

"Only in little patches; and they are dull, and without interest,
unless the sun happens to shine.  But would you not like to live there
if I was a merchant or lawyer; and had given a school, a church, and
hospital to the town, and grand folks were flocking from all quarters
to visit us?"

"No, I would not, as true as I live and breathe; not if you were King
George, and kings and queens were flocking to see you.  Nothing but
Heaven would tempt me to change away the old home; we have taken so
much comfort here.  It seems a part and parcel of myself.  I would as
soon think of changing you off for Merchant Fairbanks, because he may
be called a little handsomer, and goes dressed up like a lord every day
about his dainty store.  I would as soon think of selling Fanny, and
buying Desdemona Faddle to fill Fanny's place, just because she has a
mess of dangling curls, and paints her face, and wears more rings and
flounces."

"How you do talk!  That would be quite a different thing; wouldn't it,
Fanny?"

"No, father, I think mother is right.  I'm sure I never can love
another home as I love this.  I should feel dreadfully to hear you talk
of selling.  I never could love another home."

"Not if you had George there, to increase your happiness?"

"Another home to call father's and mother's I mean; where I could
return and enjoy all the old things that are grown so fast to my heart.
But why do you talk so, father?"

"That I was going to ask.  You have no intention of leaving here, I
hope, and why _do_ you talk so?  You act wild."

"You began the talk, Julia, and I was seeing to what a stretch you
would carry your feelings.  But here, it is time I was out in the field
at the plough again, and I will leave you now, to think it all over,
and see if there is nothing on earth that would tempt you to sell the
old home."

A drop of cold water, or the slightest shake will interrupt the
reallest seeming dream; and half of this conversation would have
brought Fabens out of what but a day before seemed a splendid reality.
He went to his plough in the light of his awakened senses, and walked
all the way on the actual, sober ground.  His gorgeous air castles
vanished like a train of fleeting clouds.  A walk in the dirty furrow
seemed long before night, a very pleasant and refreshing pastime; and
he shuddered with shame more than once to think he had been so
extravagant in many of the thoughts, that were set afloat by the
merchant's offer.  He came to himself that afternoon; and sitting down
to tea, with a glance first at the north meadow and the white ash
shade-trees blooming there; then at the east woods and orchard; then at
the blue fringes of the mountains lifted sublimely before him in the
south; then at the crystal Cayuga in the west and the green hills
sleeping beyond; he exclaimed, "I must agree with you, Julia; we have
views from our doors and windows as handsome as any I know of, and the
old farm still looks very good to me."

During that afternoon, however, Mrs. Fabens had been thinking of
Fairbanks and Frisbie, and it occurred to her that they might have said
something to her husband about selling his farm; and from that, her
mind returned to the borrowed notes.  It had been her expressed desire
that he would not contract a liability for any one, of more than fifty
dollars, without security; and now she felt painfully curious to know,
if the former notes loaned had been all taken up, why they had not been
brought to her husband, that he might positively know that his
liability had ceased.  But Fabens was so magnanimous he had thought it
unmanly to ask security of the merchant, or distrust the assurances of
men who had dealt so handsomely as they.

She wondered she had not remembered to inquire about the old notes
before, and was troubled till she could ask the question.  At night she
introduced the subject.  "It may be all right," said she, "but
something keeps whispering to me, that trouble awaits us.  We have a
comfortable property, as much as anybody ought to desire I know, but we
have all worked hard and honestly to get it, and it would be hard to be
defrauded of a hundred dollars.  I would rather give all we can spare
to the poor and needy, than to be defrauded of it."

"I confess to you, mother, what till this week I never felt," said
Fanny with emotion; "I begin to lose confidence.  I fear father is
deceived.  I don't like their coming so often.  I don't like the way
they make so many presents.  I don't like their asking for so many
notes, and I have heard too much of what begins to sound like flattery.
Oh, I hope father will not have trouble!"

"_I_ hope too, that I shall not have trouble," said Fabens with rising
agitation; "but you seem to wake me out of a singular dream.  What
_have_ I been doing?  Why have I given them power so to deceive and
defraud me, if they chance to have the wicked will?  I must go and see
if all is well.  I fear, I fear they deceived me!  What have I done?"

Early the next morning Fabens set off to see Fairbanks.  He designed
first to inquire if Fairbanks had preserved, and could produce the old
notes represented as paid, and next ascertain whether the last one left
him liable; and in his anxiety, and the wakefulness of his reason and
judgment, he gave no thought to the idea of quitting his fine old farm
for a merchant's life, except to wonder how such an idea had been
permitted to enter his head.  A cool hour's ride brought him to the
village where Fairbanks traded, and his fears were in no wise relieved,
by finding the store still closed, and failing to obtain an answer to
his rap and call.

He stepped over to the tailor's shop across the way, and there he was
informed that the store was closed by a sheriff the day before, on an
old judgment from New York, and there were not goods enough on hand to
cancel the liability.  That the neighborhood was all in excitement, for
astonishing things had come to light.  That Fairbanks had obtained
money at the banks in considerable amounts on the endorsements of
several citizens; and still was owing for two or three crops of wheat
and other produce; besides leaving a large board bill unsettled; horse
hire, cigar and liquor bills, and hired help unpaid; and with Frisbie
had left the town, no doubt, never to return!

"What _shall_ I do?--Can it be possible?--Can I believe it?  You amaze
me!  How they did deceive me!" were the answers of Fabens to each
unwelcome item of this news.

"Then they run away in your debt, too, did they, Square?" asked the
tailor, as he finished the hurried tale of recent disclosures.  "If
he's in debt to you, you've a plenty of company.  A good many were took
in by the rascals.  I begun to smell the rat after it was too late.
Each of 'em owes me now for a suit of Sunday clothes.  When I set
pressing 'em off at midnight, I little thought they would be run-away
suits, and I was working so hard for nothing.  But I must pocket the
loss, I suppose, and comfort me, remembering this is the first time a
rascal has bit me.  How much did they owe you, Square, considerable?"

"I know not as I can say positively, that they owe me anything," said
Fabens, as soon as he could crowd in a word of reply to the talkative
tailor's question; "but it must be, I shall lose by them.  I loaned my