Casting his eye upward, he saw a narrowing ladder of rope shooting to a
mere dot of a resting place twenty feet above him.  It did not look as
if a monkey could have held on there.

"Why in the ---- don't you go on!" roared Gary, who was now pale with
contained fury.

"I think the lad is sick, sir," said Duff, who happened to be near.
"See--by heavens!--he has fainted."

"The kid is shamming," growled the first mate, whose watch it now was.
"A dose of the paddle would bring him to, I'll warrant."

"I think you are right, Rucker," said Gary without paying any heed to
the second mate.  "Lay for'ard there two of you and lash him to the
topmast shrouds.  He shall have his hour up there, dead or alive, then
we'll settle his shamming."

Two sailors, seizing some loose line, ran up the foremast to where
Ralph had sunk back in a swoon, overcome by the combined effects of
illness and the terrors of his position.

Lifting him to his feet, they bound him to the topmast ratlines so that
his feet rested on the little platform.  As they came down one said to
the other:

"He ain't shamming.  The lad is sick enough for a doctor, that's what
'e is, mate."

"Shet up," quoth his companion.  "Let the captain hear you and he'll
put you on bread and water for three days, if no worse comes.  Every
tub stands on its own bottom in this craft."

Meanwhile Neb had served breakfast in the cabin.  Gary and Rucker went
down, Duff taking the first mate's place.

This was the second mate's first voyage with Captain Gary, and he
furtively sympathized with Ralph, but such is the force of discipline
on shipboard that he dared not show his feelings openly.

"It's a burning shame," thought he, "to punish a land lubber of a boy
the first day he ever spent at sea.  Sugar wouldn't melt in Gary's
mouth when I went to him for a job, but now the tune is changed.  And
to cap all, nobody seems to know where we're bound, unless it may be
Rucker.  The crew know nothing, except that we're provisioned for a
long voyage, with a lot of stuff locked up in the hold as no one has
seen yet."

He glanced up at the helpless boy, then shook his head.

"Hut tut!  Are you sick of this cruise already, Jacob Duff?  This will
never do.  You're in for it, so make the most of your luck, even if it
turns out you do have a fiend for a skipper."

When Gary and his first officer returned, Duff went below.  But as he
ate, his thoughts reverted so persistently to Ralph's predicament that
he grew impatient with himself.  After finishing his meal he lay down
in his berth and tried to sleep.  Some time had elapsed when he was
aroused by a sound of furious objurgation on deck.

He rose, took his cap and crept up the companionway.  Captain Gary was
standing by the weather rail of the quarter deck, where with clenched
hands and violent gestures, he was pouring forth a flood of profane
vituperation such as Duff had seldom heard equaled.

Before him was Ralph, still so weak as to require the support which
Long Tom was roughly giving him, yet gazing on his infuriated commander
with a steady unflinching scorn.

"Tell me you won't, eh?" stormed the captain, his feminine air and
aspect completely lost in a mien of scowling ferocity.  "By the
living--but what's the use of swearing!  Down with him to the sweat
box, and if that don't tame him we'll try the paddle afterward.

"Captain Gary," interrupted Ralph undauntedly, "if I had known you
yesterday as I know you now, I'd have seen you dead before I'd a been
here today.  I'm weak, I know; you may tie and starve me, but if you
ever have me beaten--make it a good job."

Gary seemed momentarily paralyzed at such independence, then out of
sheer amazement hissed forth sneeringly:

"Will your impudence tell me why?"

"Because I'll kill you!" exclaimed Ralph, with such concentrated energy
of tone and accent, that Duff trembled inwardly for the boy's safety.
"I know I'm in your power now, but I'd do it ten years from now if I
had to wait so long.  I never knew a mountain man to take a beating
yet, without he got even--never!"

Such unheard of insolence appeared to deprive Gary of words wherewith
to do the situation justice.

"You know what I want!" he roared at Bludson, as he left the deck.
"See that it is done!"

The boatswain at once collared Ralph and took him forward, where both
disappeared in the forecastle.

While this scene was being enacted, Rucker leaned against the stern
rail idly picking his teeth, as his dull, hard eye glanced alternately
from the vessel's course to the parties most concerned.

"What in heaven's name is it all about?" asked Duff, when the two men
were alone but for the man at the wheel, who appeared to give no heed.
"What has the boy done?"

"He's too independent," replied the first mate.  "He can't do nothing;
he couldn't even climb the fo'mast or walk the deck in a breeze.  Such
green uns has no business bein' independent aboard ship.  If I was
captain I'd a had him triced up to the mast and the paddle a going
afore now."

"The lad never saw a ship till yesterday.  Isn't it a little rough to
expect him to find his sea legs in half an hour?  He was seasick to
boot."

"Sea--thunder!  You never sailed with Captain Gary afore, did you?"
Rucker regarded his junior with a peculiar smile.  "I thought not.
Well--I have.  I'll give you a pointer.  He'd rather send this ship to
the bottom any time than stand any nonsense.  That's him; and I'm sort
o' built that way myself."

Duff made no response, and soon returned to his stateroom, where he
remained until his own watch was called.  He was a good sailor and a
nervy sort of a man, but there was something so peculiarly devilish in
the contrast presented by Gary's slight, feminine person and his
abnormal exhibition of rage that the second mate began to doubt whether
he had done wisely in shipping with an unknown captain on an unknown
voyage for the sake of mere high wages.

He finally fell asleep until wakened by the sound of two bells being
struck, followed by the hoarse cry of:

"Starb'd watch on deck, ahoy!"




CHAPTER XIV.

Bad Weather.

When the second mate reached the deck the wind had freshened still
more.  In the southwest a low lying bank of slate colored cloud was
slowly diffusing itself over that quarter of the heavens.

Under its lower edge, was a coppery hued, wind streaked border, that
glistened in a dull way.

"The barometer is falling," remarked Rucker as he prepared to go below.
"We're going to have a nasty spell, I guess.  You might take a double
reef in that jib if it gets worse.  If there's any shortnin' of sail
beyond that, call the captain."

In his walk to and fro the second mate's thoughts reverted to Ralph
occasionally and he took pains later on, to ask Neb if the boy had had
anything to eat.

"Nuttin' but braid an' water, suh.  Capn's orders."

"It's a shame," thought Duff.  "The lad's sick, so I don't reckon he's
hungry; but he ought to have something more strengthening than that.  I
wonder what kind of a hole this sweat box is?"

But as the weather grew worse, Mr. Duff's attention was necessarily
given entirely to the management of the vessel when on watch, and
during his hours off, he usually slept away his fatigue.

The storm that gradually rose lasted, with varying fury, for three
days.  The Curlew proved herself a stanch and buoyant craft, easily
controlled and as stiff under sail as a two decker.

It was well for all hands that this was so, for the cyclone was a
dangerous one, being a stray tempest from that center breeding place of
storms, the West Indies.  On the second day the two strong men who were
required to steer had to be lashed to the wheel.  Great combers
occasionally swept the decks from bow to stern.  After one of these the
little schooner would rise, staggering not unlike a drunken man, the
brine pouring in torrents from the scuppers, and the very hull
quivering from the shock of the impact of those tons of water.

The hatches were battened down and after the first day Captain Gary
never left the deck.  He had food and drink brought to him, as he swung
to the weather shrouds, where he at times lashed himself, to avoid
being washed overboard.

He was the coolest man on the ship, never losing either presence of
mind or a certain lightness of spirits, totally unlike the apparently
ungovernable fury that possessed him when crossed by any one under his
authority.  His slight figure and gloved white hands seemed endowed
with muscles of steel; he was, to all appearance, impervious to fatigue
or fear.

"He's a sailor, right," exclaimed Duff one day to Rucker, after Gary
had brought the schooner unscathed through a mountainous wave that had
threatened to overwhelm everything.  "I will say this for him, he knows
how to handle a ship."

"I should say!" declared the first mate.  "There ain't his ekal
nowhere.  I've sailed with him and I know."

When the weather moderated and the schooner, after being tidied up, was
plunging along with a double reefed fore and single reefed mainsail,
and every one was breathing freely, Duff again thought of Ralph.

"Poor fellow," said he to himself, "it's been tougher on him than any
of us.  He must have thought we were going to Davy Jones any time these
three days."

Not long after this he saw Long Tom bearing away a covered tin dish
from the galley, and hastened to join the boatswain.

"Is that the kid's grub?" he demanded, taking off the lid and surveying
the contents.  "Tis, eh?  Well, see here, Bludson, I call it a crying
shame.  Bread and water still!  Heave ahead.  I am going to see what
kind of a place this sweat box is."

The boatswain would have remonstrated, but Duff ordered him on
peremptorily.  He led the way therefore to a trap door in the floor of
the men's quarters in the forecastle.

Passing through this with a lighted lantern they pushed forward into
the very bow of the vessel, where a small space--three cornered--was
walled in.  Inside was a form crouched in a corner.

The whole area was a mere closet, not only pitch dark within, but
several feet below water level and with but a couple of inches of
planking between a prisoner and the swashing, gurgling billows outside.

"Ralph," called Duff, "are you all right, my lad?"

"Here, boy," said Tom, setting down the tin vessel, "wake up and eat a
bite.  Mayhap cap'n will let you out before long.  He's in a good humor
today."

But Ralph did not move.  Duff raised him in his arms.

The boy was insensible, either from fright, exhaustion, or the lack of
suitable food.  The mate's anger rose within him like a torrent.

"This is simply brutal!--it is infamous.  Lead the way out of here,
bos'n; or--stay!  Go to Captain Gary and say that Mr. Duff wants him to
come here right away."

"It's as much as my life's worth, sir."

"Go on I tell you!"  Duff was white to the lips, "D'ye want to see
murder done?  This lad's life is at stake, I say."

While Tom went off grumbling, the second mate bathed Ralph's face with
water from a jug he found, and chafed his hands.

"Poor fellow!  If I lose my job and am put here with him, I will speak
out.  The boy hasn't had a decent thing to eat since he came aboard."

Presently the flicker of Tom's lantern was seen again.  The captain was
behind him, and in no good humor over the message he had received.

The dash and swirl of water outside was incessant and deafening.

"Mr. Duff," said Gary in his most grating tones, "who gave you the
authority to interfere with my designs regarding this insolent
youngster?"

[Illustration: "Mr. Duff," said Gary in his most grating tones, "who
gave you the authority to interfere with my designs regarding this
insolent youngster?"]

Duff's first reply was to bring Ralph's pale, inanimate face under the
light.

"Captain Gary," said he, "I profess to be a man--not a brute.  I
recognize your authority, but when I see murder about to be done--it's
time to say something."

The captain looked around as if to find a weapon wherewith to strike
his subordinate down, while in his eye shone a dull spark.  He did not
look at Ralph, but controlled himself by a mighty effort.

"Of course," he was able to say at last, "if the kid is in any danger,
that alters the state of the case.  But I dare say he is shamming."

"Shamming!  Look at his eyes; feel of his pulse."

The captain declined these offices.  He bit his nether lip instead and
regarded Duff in a peculiar way, as the latter continued his efforts to
resuscitate the boy.

"We have no ship's doctor on board as you know," said Gary.  "However,
take him to a bunk in the men's quarters and tell the cook to make him
some broth.  He'll come round; then we will see how he behaves.  Do you
understand, Mr. Duff?"

"Aye, aye, sir.  Give the boy a chance and I think he will come out all
right."

Here Ralph showed signs of animation.  He twisted himself as if in
pain, then muttered:

"If he beats me I--I--shall--kill him!  Shan't I--grandpa?  You
drove--me--away--cause I wouldn't--cause I--wouldn't----"  He became
unintelligible for a moment, but finally burst forth with feeble energy
again.  "Let him starve me--shut me up--but--let him keep his hands
off--hands off."

The dull spark in Captain Gary's eyes seemed to enlarge and twinkle as
the boy uttered these words in a semi-drowsy, spasmodic way.  Presently
the partially rolled up eyes opened in a natural manner and blinked
feebly at the light.

At this juncture a loud cry was heard from aloft of:

"S-a-i-l h-o!"

The captain turned away as if the interruption were a welcome one to
him.

"Stow that lad and see to him," he repeated, then added sternly: "Be
assured of one thing, Mr. Duff, I will not forget your part in this
affair."

"Aye, aye, sir," replied the second mate, as the captain walked off.




CHAPTER XV.

Boarded by a Cruiser.

Ralph was borne up into the men's quarters and placed in one of the
most comfortable bunks.

Pretty soon down came Neb with a steaming dish of stewed chicken, and a
good supply of broth.  This, with a ship's biscuit and a cup of coffee,
were fed slowly to the lad by one of the sailors, until he was strong
enough to help himself.

"That's cabin grub, lad," remarked the sailor.  "Second mate ordered it
himself."

Ralph, with the horror of those three days of darkness, and pitching,
and churning seas still upon him, thanked his stars that he seemed to
have one friend on board.

Meanwhile, on deck all hands were watching the approach of a large
steamship that was bearing down upon the Curlew to windward.  The
schooner was sailing with the wind abeam.

Presently the captain, who was examining the stranger through a glass,
ordered the helmsman to "ease away a bit."

The Curlew fell off more before the wind, when it was seen that the
steamer slightly changed her course so as to meet the altered movements
of the schooner.

Gary and Rucker now put their heads together, then the first mate,
summoning the boatswain, disappeared below.

"Hold her up a little, Mr. Duff," said the captain to the second
officer, who was once more at his post.  "She is a man of war, I think,
and though I have no love for their prying ways, we must not seem to
want to avoid her, now that she evidently intends to speak us."

So the schooner's head was put to windward, and the two vessels rapidly
drew near each other.

It could soon be seen that the stranger was an armored cruiser, of
great power and speed.

"Run up the Stars and Stripes," said Gary.  "Let him see what we are.
Perhaps he'll be satisfied and pass on."

This was done, but evoked no response from the cruiser, now less than a
mile away.  Suddenly the warship swung gracefully around, showing along
her dull gray side a row of guns, while over bow and stern loomed two
immense cannon of a caliber sufficient to sink the Curlew at a single
discharge.

Several little flags followed one another up to the cruiser's mastheads.

"Get out the code, Mr. Duff," ordered the captain.  "He's signaling.
What in the mischief can he want?"

Duff plunged into the cabin, reappearing a moment later with the signal
book.  Opening this, he compared the flags as seen through the glass
with similar ones in the book, and their meanings.

"Well?" said the captain impatiently.

"He orders us to heave to under his quarter.  Says he is going to send
a boat aboard.

"The deuce he is!  Well, I suppose we might as well do as he says.
Strikes me as a pretty high handed proceeding though, in time of peace.
Look!  There go his colors at last.  British, by thunder!"

As the cross of St. George unfolded to the breeze, Captain Gary,
looking somewhat anxious, bade Duff obey the cruiser's order; then
hastened below in the wake of his first mate and boatswain.

By the time the Curlew had rounded to, a boat was leaving the warship's
side as she lay broadside, hardly a quarter of a mile off.  Though the
sea was still rough, six pair of oars brought the boat spinning over
the waves.

Two officers were in the stern sheets, one of whom--a young third
lieutenant--was soon on the deck of the schooner.

At this juncture Captain Gary reappeared, followed by Rucker.  Long Tom
had already gone forward.

"What schooner is this?" demanded the officer, after the first
salutations had passed.

"I should like to know first what right you have to ask that question,"
replied Gary in his most suave manner.  "These are times of peace, when
every one is privileged to attend to his own affairs, I believe."

"Yes, when his affairs are not injurious to others.  There is surely no
harm in asking a vessel's name."

"Is it customary to stop them on the high seas, and send a boat aboard
to find out?"

"Well, yes--under certain circumstances."  The lieutenant smiled.
"Especially so when we are under orders to that effect.  To be plain,
sir, we suspect you of being engaged in an unlawful enterprise."

As may be supposed, Duff was paying the closest attention, for he and
most others on board had shipped, not knowing the object of the voyage,
but tempted by the high wages.

"You do, eh."  It was Gary's turn to smile now.  "You men o' war's men
often make mistakes as well as other people.  This is the Curlew, four
days out of Savannah, in ballast, and bound for Bermuda."

"You are clear out of your course, if that is the case."

"The storm did that for us.  We had a three days' siege of it."

"Well, let me see your papers and take a look through the hold.  It can
do no harm."

"None in the least," replied the captain.

He then ordered the main hatch opened as he escorted the officer down
to the cabin in order to inspect the ship's papers.

Rucker followed.  Duff, impelled by curiosity, watched the opening of
the hatch, which had remained closely sealed ever since he had been
aboard.

An apparently empty hold was all that rewarded his eye, except for the
usual stores and provisions necessary for a long voyage.

"If Bermuda is really our port, we've got grub enough, and to spare,"
thought he as he returned to the quarter-deck.

Meanwhile the lieutenant, after a thorough inspection of the hold,
returned to the open air.  He still seemed unsatisfied, and cast
curious glances here and there over the vessel's trim proportions.
Finally he gave it up.

"Your papers seem to be all right," he said, "and you certainly have no
cargo, though you are provisioned for a voyage round the world, I
should say."

"Barrels of meal," said the captain.  "My owner had a lot on hand, and
thought it might fetch a better price in the Bermudas than at home.  We
can trade it for potatoes."

"Well, I wish you success," added the officer, pausing at the ladder,
and touching his cap to Gary and the mates.  "Pardon whatever
inconvenience we may have occasioned."

He went down the side, the boat pulled back to the cruiser, and the
latter steamed away westward.

The Curlew, holding east, soon helped to place her dangerous neighbor
hull down, when Captain Gary gave the order for all hands to be
summoned aft.  The crew came tumbling back into the waist, a swarthy,
brawny, reckless looking set of men.  Two of them brought Ralph up and
set him down on a coil of rope.

The warm meal, the sight of human faces, the sounds of life and light,
had already renewed his strength and spirits.  He was no longer so ill,
and the bright sunlight and the heaving waves sent a sort of thrill
through him.  The sea was not all terrible after all.

"Now, men," began the captain, when all had assumed a decorous silence,
"what do you think that war ship supposed we were?"

There was no reply to this, though the men looked at each other, then
turned to their commander, as if expecting an answer.  The captain
broke into a harsh laugh.

"Why," he continued, "they thought this ship was the famous slaver, the
Wanderer.  I guess you've all heard of the Wanderer."

Yes, they had.  Duff noticed that Rucker and Long Tom were the only two
who seemed to be indifferent to this announcement.

One or two of the sailors winked at each other as if the news that was
to come would not be very much of a surprise, after all.

"We are so far advanced on our way," continued the captain, "that I
have concluded to let you know who and what we are and where we are
bound.  In case we are liable to another overhauling you can better
assist in throwing the intermeddlers off the true scent.

"We fooled them this time, but that was because the boarding officer
was a green one.  If an old hand at the business comes aboard it may be
necessary to chuck him over the side and run for it.  Therefore it is
right you should know things, in order the more intelligently to obey
orders.

"This schooner is the Wanderer, men.  You have shipped on the Wanderer,
bound for the coast of Guinea after negroes for the Cuba market.  How
does that suit you?

"If there are any grumblers, speak up.  You've got high wages, light
work, good grub, and a chance--if you stand by the ship--to share in
the profits at the end of the voyage.  Now, what d'ye say?"

There was some muttering and laying of heads together on the part of
the crew, then one old salt pulled off his cap, ducked his head, and
after carefully transferring a quid of tobacco from his mouth to his
pocket, said:

"If so be the rest don't care, I don't.  If so be some on us had knowed
afore we shipped what kind of cargo we was after, we might have thought
twice afore we signed.  Niggers is niggers.  Some say they is humans,
some say they ain't.  But this here shippin' 'em like two legged cattle
be mighty resky nowadays.  Less'n we make a heap."

"Oh, you shut up!" interrupted the captain, laughing.  "All the
scruples any of you have is concerning the money there is in the
cruise.  Am I right?"

"Well, a man's obleeged to look out for number one, cap'n," responded
the fellow, falling back and restoring his quid to his left jaw.

Ralph seemed about to speak, but as Gary's cold, hard eye fell on the
lad, prudence bade him hold his peace.  Besides he did not more than
half comprehend the nature of the captain's explanation.

The face of the second mate was a picture of disgust and irresolution.
He said nothing, however, until the captain went below.  Then he
followed.

"Captain Gary," said he, when the two were alone in the cabin, "you
should have had my right hand sooner than have got me off on such a
cruise had I known its object before I signed with you."

"I know you," replied Gary somewhat scornfully.  "You have just about
conscience enough not to violate your word when the sacrifice would be
too great.  Of course you don't approve.  I never asked for your
approval; wouldn't give a cent for it if I had it.  But you signed--for
high wages--to go wherever I choose to sail.  Is not that so?"

"In one sense, yes.  But a slaver now is little better than a pirate.
You should have been more open."

"And you less greedy for money.  I say you are in for it.  There is no
chance to secure another mate, and I intend to see that you do your
duty."




CHAPTER XVI.

Nearing the Gold Coast.

The two men regarded each other steadily for a moment, then the mate
heaved a sigh.

"I don't care for your threats," said he.  "It's that same conscience
of mine which you think so little of that troubles me.  As long as I am
your second mate I shall do my duty.  But I give you fair warning: when
we get to port, if there is another ship where a man can get a job I
shall leave you."

"You'll leave without your pay, then," retorted the captain.

Duff, without replying, left the cabin.  He had explained his
sentiments, and that was all he could do at present.  In his succeeding
round of ship inspection he was halted in the forecastle by Ralph, who
had lain down again.

"Oh, Mr. Duff, won't you please explain to me what the captain meant
when he said we were bound after negroes for the Cuban market."

"It's plain as your nose, my lad.  We are going to the west coast of
Africa--somewhere about the Congo, I guess.  There we take on a load of
Gold Coast darkies, fetch 'em over to Cuba, run 'em in after night,
then get away--if we can.  If we get captured we'll all get a term in
Morro Castle or some other Spanish hole, and lose everything we've got.
Oh, it's a nasty business the----"

Here Mr. Duff broke off, remembering that he was saying too much before
a cabin boy.  But Ralph detained him by the sleeve.

"I thought the negroes were all freed."

"At home they are.  But in Cuba and Brazil they are not, although the
prospect is that they will be set at liberty before long.  The best
sentiment of the world is against slavery, you know.'

"And what we're up to is worse than all the rest, isn't it?"

"Yes; it is a vile business.  But look here, my lad.  Whether you like
the job or not, you've shipped, and that means everything on shipboard.
Make the best of it while you're with us; when you're away it's another
thing."

"If you think so badly of it," persisted Ralph, "why did you ship, Mr.
Duff?"

"Because, like most of the others, I went it blind for the sake of high
wages.  I had an idea we were on a smuggling trip.  I suppose you were
too green to know anything."

"I left everything to Captain Gary.  But I say, Mr. Duff, I think with
you that it is a low, mean business."

"H-s-s-h!"  The mate made a warning gesture and turned away, just as
Mr. Rucker thrust his bushy beard down the fore hatch, preceded by his
burly legs and body.

The first officer looked sharply at Ralph as the boy lay in his
hammock, which he had at last slung.

"You'll report for duty in the cabin tomorrow, my lad," said he.
"Captain's orders.  There won't be much shirking on this ship, whether
or no."

After the storm, the wind and weather remained fair for many days,
during which the Wanderer (as she was now called) glided into the
tropics, and justified her fame on the score of speed.

One day a cry of "Land ho!" was raised.  Half an hour later the
irregular heights of the Cape Verde Islands began to be visible from
the deck.  But the schooner bore away to the southeast and no close
view was obtained.

It was a lonely voyage.  Scarcely any vessels were passed, and the
captain avoided these in so far as he could.  It was his policy to
follow a route as little traveled as possible.

The glaring sun, bright skies, and even trade winds of these regions
were like a new world to Ralph.  At night the extreme brilliancy of the
stars, framed in new and strange constellations, and the vivid play of
phosphorescent waves, kept him on deck with Mr. Duff at times for hours.

These two, though so widely separated by rank, were congenial in a
furtive way.  Perhaps the mutual knowledge that both so heartily
disapproved of the object of the voyage, was a subtle link between them.

Though awkward enough at first, Ralph persevered so faithfully in
acquiring a knowledge of his new duties, that he slowly won the
approval of every one on board, unless it might have been the captain.
Gary preserved a sphinx-like attitude, never sparing the boy, never
praising him, nor manifesting by any sign an atom of that feminine
graciousness of manner that had on shore first won the lad over.

But Ralph's growing proficiency in a seaman's tasks was such, that on
Rucker's advice, he was put before the mast altogether, after one of
the sailors had broken several ribs by falling from aloft during a
squall.  The injured man, as soon as he was able, took Ralph's place in
the cabin.

As they approached the African coast, alternate fogs and calms delayed
their progress somewhat.  The fogs were a protection from prying
vessels, but the calms proved to be an unmitigated nuisance.

The ocean would be like shining glass beneath a vertical shower of the
sun's rays that, at times, rendered the deck almost unendurable.
Awnings were stretched and for hours and even days the Wanderer would
lie almost motionless, except for the impalpable swell from which the
bosom of the sea is never entirely free.

One dull, damp morning, when the decks were slippery with moisture and
a curtain of mist veiled everything beyond a hundred yards, Ralph, who
was in the foretop on the lookout, fancied that he detected a sound
somewhat different from the usual noises surrounding a vessel even in a
calm.

They were nearing the land, as the captain's last reckoning showed, yet
soundings taken not half an hour previous, had discovered no bottom at
a depth of several hundred feet.  Ralph called to a sailor below to ask
the second mate to come forward.

"Well, what now, Granger?" demanded Duff from the main deck.

Ralph had hardly explained, before the mate sprang up the rigging to
the lad's side.  The trained ear of the officer instantly divined what
might be the matter.

"Down with you, Ralph," said he, hurrying to the deck himself.  "Pipe
up all hands and shorten sail!" he shouted to the boatswain, then
emerging from the forecastle.  "Lively now!"

The schooner was under full canvas, with the purpose of making the most
of what little air might be stirring.  A moment before, the most
profound repose was reigning, but with the shrill call that instantly
rang out, all was changed to a scene of the most intense activity.

Men came tumbling up to join the watch on deck in lowering two of the
jibs, and reefing a third, while the great fore and aft sails were
reduced to less than half their size in a twinkling.

Orders came sharp and fast, three seamen in each top were hastily
lowering and lashing the topsails, when the sound heard by Ralph, and
which had rapidly increased to a sputtering roar, was split as it were
by a crash of thunder.  The fog melted away like a dissolving dream,
showing beyond the burst of sunlight, a coppery cloud that swept the
ocean to windward, driving before it a line of hissing foam.

By this time captain and first mate were up.  The Wanderer lay without
headway, though bobbing slowly as a slight whiff of air stirred the
flattened mainsail.

"Meet her!  Meet her, Mr. Duff!" shouted Gary, instantly realizing the
coming peril.

The men were tumbling from the tops, Ralph among the last, for though
ordered down by the considerate mate, he returned with the others when
the topsails were to be stowed.

Duff and two old hands were at the wheel; others were lashing loose
articles, when with a scream and a screech, the squall was upon them.

At that season and on that coast, these sudden commotions are
especially treacherous and full of peril.  Coming, as it were from
nowhere, either on the heels of fog or calm, their advent is doubly
dreaded by the unwary mariner.  When the blast struck the schooner,
over she heeled, and in a trice the lee scuppers were seething with
brine.  Each man clung to something for life, as the deck sloped like a
house roof.

"Ease her!  Ease her!" roared the captain from the main weather
bobstays.  "For your lives, men!  Shove her nose up in the wind."

The scud, as it struck the port bow, flew like shot across the deck.
So acute was the shriek of the wind, even shouted orders could hardly
be heard.

The Wanderer, trembling like a living thing, slowly--at first almost
imperceptibly--rose from the blows hammering at her sides like thunder.
There was a long moment of intense, even agonizing suspense, then she
began to forge ahead, buffeted, battered, heeling dizzily still to
leeward, yet--saved, for the time being at least.

"That was a close call, captain," remarked Duff as the two stood
together five minutes later, clinging to the weather shrouds.

"I should say so.  Who first heard the thing coming?"

"Young Granger, I believe.  There's good stuff in that lad, I make bold
to say."

These words shouted into Gary's ear, for the squall was still at its
height, caused a deep scowl to settle on the captain's brow.  He turned
away without a word.

"Gary doesn't like that boy for some reason," was the mate's inward
comment.  "I wonder why?"

After twenty minutes of wind so furious that the sea was fairly
flattened, the squall ceased almost as suddenly as it had begun, before
the great ocean billows had time to rise.  But in that short interval a
jib had been blown into ribbons and the foresail torn loose from its
treble reefing points.  A great rent was made by its violent flappings
before it could be again secured.  In the struggle one man was knocked
insensible, so severe were the surgings of the boom, as the heavy
canvas jarred the whole ship with its cannon-like reports.

One result was a fair after breeze and a clear sky.  The schooner
bowled along at a nine knot gait, while the men worked cheerily to
repair the slight injuries occasioned by the squall.

That day the trailing smoke of a steamer was indistinctly seen in the
southern horizon.  The helm was instantly put about and the Wanderer
hauled up on a northeast course, which was maintained all day.

The captain and first mate took careful reckonings more than once,
verifying each other's castings of their latitude and longitude.  It
became generally understood that land was close at hand and an air of
expectancy became general on board.

The succeeding night was cloudless in the earlier part.  Later on a
mist slowly inclosed them as they neared the coast.

Ralph sat up late, for he was vaguely excited at the prospect of
beholding what was to him a new world.  But he gave out at last and
turned in, intending, however, to be on deck at the first notice of
land.  Youth sleeps sound, and his next conscious sensation was that of
being rudely shaken.

"On deck with you, boy," said the sailor who had roused him.  "Going to
snooze all day?"

He leaped from his hammock, and ran up the companionway.  Then an
exclamation of astonishment burst from his lips.




CHAPTER XVII.

Up the River.

The Wanderer lay in a small, land locked harbor, densely surrounded by
a strange and wonderful growth of forest, that completely concealed the
shore behind.

Near by, though hidden beyond a neck of land, one could hear the roar
of breakers.  At the opposite extremity, the harbor was elongated, as
if some stream were entering beneath a giant growth of overhanging
foliage.

The little bay was no more than a quarter of a mile across, nor was
there any sign of human presence other than that presented by the
schooner and her crew.  She was anchored mid-stream, and Ralph could
perceive a sluggish, muddy current making towards an inlet that was
partially concealed by several small islets, densely covered by
mangroves.

"Granger, I want you," said the second mate from the quarter deck.
"Take three hands and make ready the ship's yawl alongside."

In obedience to this, Ralph, with the requisite aid, soon had the large
boat that rested amid-ships, swinging by a painter to the schooner's
side.  Mr. Duff then directed two pair of oars, a keg of water and some
cooked provisions and bedding to be placed aboard.

"I want you, Ralph, and you, Ben, to go along."

The Ben to whom the mate alluded was a broadfaced Englishman, who had
been the spokesman on the occasion when Gary had made known to the crew
the object and destination of his voyage.  He had expressed himself
once or twice since then unfavorably, to his mates, and had been
rebuked by Long Tom in consequence.

Duff disappeared below, but soon returned with three Winchester rifles
and the same number of cutlasses.  He handed one of each to the other
two, saying to Ralph:

"I guess you can shoot, can't you?  I hear you mountaineers are hard to
beat with a long rifle."

"I can shoot a squirrel's head off with grandfather's old gun four
times out of five.  But this here short, double barreled thing don't
look good for much."

Duff laughed, then briefly explained the purpose of the magazine and
showed him how to work the mechanism.  Ralph, though still dubious,
said nothing, and resolved to test for himself the wonderful qualities
of the modern breech loader, which the average mountaineer distrusts in
proportion to his ignorance.

The boy noticed that the most of the crew, together with the captain
and first mate, were absent.  Only Bludson, with three or four sailors,
were left on board, after Duff and his boatmen were pulling towards the
mouth of the river above.

"Now, lads," said Long Tom, "look alive.  We've got to get the hold
ready against cap'n gets back with the first batch.  We're rid of the
squeamish ones, I reckon.  'Fore they come in with their meat we'll be
loaded; that is, s'posin' they show up in time."

The boatswain grinned in a knowing, mirthless way, that his assistants
seemed to understand, for they responded in kind.  The main hatch was
then opened and an iron grating substituted.

Between the main hold and the cabin was a strong bulkhead with a double
door, strongly barred and padlocked.  This was thrown open and a four
pound howitzer mounted in the gangway in such a manner that when the
upper half of the door was thrown open, the gun could rake the hold
from end to end.

Water butts were set up where water could be handed inside by the
bucket.  From store rooms on either side of the gangway, long chains
with short fetters attached at intervals were brought out and stretched
across the hold about seven feet apart and about a foot from the floor.
Ankle cuffs that closed with spring locks were attached to these
fetters.

In these storerooms were placed the barrels of provisions that had
deceived the lieutenant.  Then Bludson and his assistants passed the
next few hours in throwing overboard the ballast that had been stowed
at Tybee Island in far away America.

Meanwhile Duff and his companions entered the river, which seemed to be
a small stream flowing deviously through a low, half swampy region,
where insects swarmed and many kinds of strange animals and bird life
were to be seen.

Ralph, to try his Winchester, shot at a blue heron on the wing and made
the feathers fly.

"Try it again," urged Duff sharply.  "Quick now."

A second shot brought down the bird, and Ralph's opinion of breech
loaders was raised at once.

For several hours they pulled up stream, the mate taking his turn at
the oars with the others.  The trees rose to a gigantic height, while
the interlacing undergrowth was at some places impenetrable.

About eleven they halted, mooring the boat to a fallen tree half
imbedded in the water.  Deep shadows from the overhanging foliage
screened them from the now scorching sunlight.  After a lunch on dried
beef and biscuit, the mate suggested a siesta for an hour or two until
it should be cool enough to proceed.  Ralph volunteered to keep watch,
though there did not seem to be much necessity for vigilance.  The
whole vast forest and all life within its folds appeared to be steeped
in tropical midday repose.

"Well," said the mate, as he and Ben bestowed themselves in the bottom
of the boat on some blankets, "if you get too sleepy call Ben.  We'll
have to cover our heads on account of these wretched gnats and
mosquitos."

While the two slumbered, Ralph amused himself at first by examining the
mechanism of his Winchester.  Tiring of this he fell into a reverie so
deep that he hardly realized that he was dozing until roused to
wakefulness by a slight pressure upon his hat, which was pulled forward
over his eyes.

His first impulse was to start up, but a long, skeleton leg with tiny
claws at the end--horribly hairy in a miniature way--slowly protruded
over the front brim of his headgear, sending a curdling chill through
his veins as he wondered what kind of a creature its owner might be.

Thoughts of the strange, poisonous insects of abnormal size, which he
had read of as being common in certain warm countries, coursed through
his mind.  If he stirred, the thing might claw or bite, and the merest
scratch was said, in some kinds of these venomous species, to be fatal.

He dared not move, but lay there in a sort of physical coma, though
with every nerve strung to the point of agonized apprehension.

After feeling first with one claw, then another, the creature began to
descend.  The first touch upon his face was indescribably loathsome to
Ralph, and as its round, egg-like body came in view, he closed his eyes
and held his breath.

Down to his breast the thing crawled, while the skin of his face
prickled sharply under an imaginary pain.  Then he opened his eyes and
beheld a gigantic spider slowly making its way down his clothing.

With a body quite as large as the egg of a hen, and legs in proportion,
it moved slowly, in a groping manner, as if uncertain of its
whereabouts.  Ralph fancied he could see its dull, cruel eyes.  He lay
as if dead, until the thing had left his person, then recovered his
breath and courage by a vigorous inhalation.

But upon his first move the creature ran along the bottom of the boat
with extraordinary rapidity, and thence along Ben's blanket and body,
pausing only as it reached the sailor's now uncovered head.

There it seemed to look back at Ralph, who did not dare attempt to kill
it, lest it should attack Ben.  To his horror the sailor stirred and
opened his eyes drowsily.

"Ben," whispered Ralph, "for goodness sake don't move, as you value
your life.  Do as I tell you.  It--it may bite you, if you stir."

Ben felt the creature as the boy had done.  He lay shivering.

Slowly the great insect turned and made its way from the sailor's neck
to the flooring, then up the side of the boat.  Ralph, seizing a rope's
end, struck a furious blow, but missed.  With lightning-like speed the
spider ran up the side of the boat, sprang upon the water where it
floated like a feather, and pushed towards shore.

But Ben had seized an oar and now came down with a splash that sent a
shower of spray about and momentarily blinded them both.

"There!  Look yonder, Ben!" cried Ralph.  "Confound the luck!"

The spider was swiftly crawling up the bank, where it quickly
disappeared beneath a tussock.

"That beats all the creatures I ever seen," said Ben.  "He must be the
great grandfather of all the spiders hereabout."

Mr. Duff, also awakened by the noise, now suggested that it was time
they were going on.  While proceeding up stream Ralph related his own
and Ben's experience with the spider, whereat the mate laughed heartily.

"I am familiar with the species," said he.  "True, they do look scary
enough, but, strange to say, they are perfectly harmless.  Instead of
teeth, their mouth is supplied with a kind of suction apparatus by
which they suck the blood from smaller insects.  But they cannot bite,
nor is their touch poisonous.  There are other, smaller kinds of
spiders about here, however, whose bite is fatal."

"We were jist as bad scared as if it had been a rattlesnake," returned
Ben.  "I could feel me bloomin' hair turnin' gray when the thing was
cocked upon me shoulder."

Towards night they came to a dozen or more small huts made of palm
leaves and elephant grass, from which issued a number of nearly naked
blacks, who made the air hideous with shouts of welcome.

Here was where they were to trade for fresh meat and vegetables--the
object of their river trip.

One tall savage, with a pair of bullock's horns as a head dress, and
with his hair reeking with grease, coiled round the same, appeared to
be the head man of the village.

He wore a long red flannel shirt as an additional badge of dignity.
The rest, men as well as women, wore little else but cloths about the
loins.

They were a jolly, sociable set though, and gave our party a hut to
themselves, after supplying them with a bountiful supper of "mealies,"
bull beef, and a kind of bread made from ground maize and the grated
buds of the cabbage palm.

After that Mr. Duff and the chief began a laborious trade for meat and
vegetables that lasted for an hour or more, and was carried on
principally by signs and gestures.  Some red blankets, beads, and cheap
hand mirrors constituted the offers on the part of the mate.

In this way several bushels of potatoes and a lot of green corn were
secured and placed by the natives in the yawl.  Meanwhile another
party, taking torches, proceeded to a corral near by, and slaughtered a
fat ox, with great dexterity.  This, in its turn, was placed in the
boat, after which all hands prepared to turn in.

"One of us must sleep in the yawl," remarked Duff, "and I guess it
ought to be the lightest sleeper."

Ben volunteered, saying that he would waken, as he expressed it, "at
the bat of a cat's eye."

Leaving Ben in the boat with a blanket and Winchester, the other two
retired to the hut prepared for their reception, and lay down, as they
thought, for the night.  Duff was soon asleep, but Ralph remained
wakeful.

To add to his restlessness he soon found his blankets alive with fleas,
from which these native huts are hardly ever free.  After fighting and
scratching for an hour or more, he got up and returned to the open air
for relief.

The scene was both weird and dismal.  The small clearing, densely
walled in by the forest where the trees sprang nearly two hundred feet
in the air, seemed to be stifling under the compression, though the
feeling was but the resulting languor of a tropic night without a
breeze.  Sundry strange and melancholy calls issued in varying cadences
from the wilderness, and an occasional splash from the river denoted
the passage of some huge marine animal.  Crocodiles were bellowing
sullenly up stream, and from the closed huts issued the sounds of heavy
slumber.

He was thinking it strange that no one should remain on guard amid a
life so savage and isolated as that of these simple people, when he was
aroused by a touch on his arm, as he sat musing on a log before the
embers of their fire.




CHAPTER XVIII.

A Brush in the Wilderness.

Ralph leaped to his feet and presented his ready rifle.  But it was
only Ben.  The sailor's rugged face wore a look of alarm.

"I'm glad ye're up," was his first remark.  "I don't like the look of
things, though what's stirrin' is more nor I can make out."

"What have yon seen--or heard, for that matter?  One can't see much
under this wall of woods all about."

"Divil a bit!  So I pricked up me ears for list'nin.  The crocydiles
kep' up such a hullabaloo I could hardly hear meself think, but somehow
I caught on to the sound of paddles a goin'.  Hist now!  Can't 'e hear
that?"

They were at one edge of the village, which was not defended by a
kraal, or stockade, as is often the custom where enemies are feared.
The dense forest undergrowth was not over thirty yards away.

They could now hear certain stealthy sounds, as of some one or
something moving within the timber.

"I will wake Mr. Duff," whispered Ralph.  "You go back to the boat,
Ben.  They may see us by the fire."

The sailor returned to his post.  The lad soon had the mate awake,
listening to his explanation of their uneasiness.

"I will rouse the chief," replied Duff.  "You had better rejoin Ben and
wait for me there.  If some enemy is really prowling around, our first
duty, after alarming these people, is to defend our boat."

"Hadn't I better remain with you?" suggested Ralph, with the idea that
the greatest danger was in lingering on shore.

"You had better obey orders, lad," returned the mate, not unkindly,
however.

Ralph accordingly gathered the bedding in a bundle and stole down to
the boat, the bow of which was drawn upon the gravelly bank.  Hardly
had he reached it when a series of hideous yells issued from the forest
on every side, and a rush of unknown forms could be dimly seen making
for the huddle of huts near the river.

Other figures of men, women, and children, naked and all but
defenseless, emerged from their egg-shaped shelters, some fighting as
best they could, others flying, and all apparently surrounded by a band
of vociferous demons.

"Ben," called Ralph, "keep the boat with your gun.  I must go and see
what has become of Mr. Duff."

He sprang ashore, but had hardly climbed the bank when the mate
appeared rifle in hand, cool and collected.

"They are surprised by some predatory party of savages," said Duff.  "I
don't think there are much if any firearms on either side, however.  I
think we had better help our dusky friends, don't you, boys?  They've
treated us white enough."

This was assented to, and the three crawled through the tall grass to
the verge of the village, where more of a massacre than a battle was
now going on.

The villagers were taken at a sad disadvantage, and were surrounded
evidently by superior numbers.  The red-shirted chief was on the point
of being clubbed by one tall savage, while desperately engaged with
another.  Ralph, seeing this, leveled his gun with a swiftness that
came of long practice amid the wilds of his native Hiawassee.

"Well done!" exclaimed the mate, as, after a sharp report, the negro
with a club dropped his weapon and hopped away with a ball in his
shoulder.  "Now, let us spread out ten paces or so apart and advance.
Pump the balls into 'em, boys, but don't hit our black friends."

"How can we tell which is which when they're all alike as two
ha'pence?" growled Ben, but he received no answer, as both Mr. Duff and
Ralph were intent on the duty before them.

The crack of the Winchesters soon diverted attention from the villagers
to an extent that enabled them to recover somewhat from their panic.
The rapid hail of balls that hardly ever missed their aim disconcerted
the enemy.

The three whites, acting under Duff's orders, kept back in the tall
elephant grass at the edge of the huts; but also within close and
deadly range.  Some of the blacks had thrown wood on the fires, and the
light was now sufficient to enable the raiders to be distinguished
clearly by their dress and adornments.

"Don't shoot to kill, if you can help it, lads," called Duff.  "Maim
'em and lame 'em if you can.  It isn't our quarrel you know, only as
we----"

Here further utterance was choked off, as a powerful negro, who had
made a detour, leaped upon the unwary mate from behind as he was
delivering his merciful order.  The knife was uplifted as the mate felt
the grip of the man upon his collar, but the blow was not struck.

Ralph's Winchester cracked and the raised arm fell shattered and
useless, while the knife dropped from the relaxing fingers.

[Illustration: Ralph's Winchester cracked and the raised arm fell
shattered and useless.]

The attacked villagers, inspirited by the assistance they were
receiving, fought with renewed energy.

In those days repeating breech loaders were much less commonly used
than in more recent years.  The savages became terror stricken at guns
which seemed to be always loaded.

A final and despairing yell gave the signal for retreat, and in a
moment or two more, none of the enemy were to be seen, except the dead
and wounded left behind.

Our three adventurers were then overwhelmed by the rude but expressive
manifestations of thanks on the part of the villagers.  The wounded
were soon despatched, and it became evident to Duff, who partially
understood their practices, that a cannibal feast would be next in
order.

The very idea sickened Ralph, though Ben announced that he had no
objections to see one "black nigger eat up another."

"Well, we have, if you haven't," said Duff, "so, as it is pretty near
day and we're loaded, I think we had better be getting back to the
ship, Captain's in a hurry to leave the coast anyhow."

But when the natives heard of this determination, they one and all
tried to persuade the whites to remain at least until day.  The
red-shirted chief pleaded almost with tears, in the very few words of
English at his command.

"You--me--brothers!"  He pointed from Duff to himself.  "You--stay.
All--stay.  Eat War-i-ka-ri much; eat--heap!"

But when he found that all persuasion was useless, he bade his people
fill the yawl with vegetables and such meat as was on hand.  He would
have butchered another ox, but as the boat would now hold no more, Duff
with difficulty made him stop.

As the whites were pushing off he came running down to the landing,
bearing on his shoulder a human leg severed from the body at the hip.

"Take!" he shouted, but Ralph made haste to shove the boat off.  "Take!"

Seeing that they would not return, he heaved the toothsome delicacy at
the lad, who, instead of catching it, knocked it into the river,
whereat the chief became highly excited, and evidently somewhat wroth.
The last they saw of him, he and others were trying to recover it by
the aid of a pole.

"Isn't it horrible?" said Ralph, feeling nauseated at the idea and the
sight.  "They seem friendly enough, yet--they eat one another.  Pah!"

Duff, at the tiller, laughed.  Ben shook his head as he took a fresh
quid.

"Many of these coast tribes are cannibals I've heard," commented the
mate.  "In times of famine they eat the old folks and the girl babies.
Queer world, isn't it?"

By the time the firelight had disappeared, and only the stars afforded
a relief to the darkness, the wall of forest on either hand grew vague
and indistinct.

Having the current with them, their progress was more rapid than their
ascent of the stream, and by the time daylight appeared they were well
on their way towards the mouth of the river.

Once, as they were rounding a bend, and were nearer the shore than
usual, a deep, harsh, though distant roar met their ears.  Ralph and
Ben wondered what it was, but the mate replied by one significant word:

"Lions."

"I would like to see one," said Ralph.  "But I thought lions were found
mostly in Central and Southern Africa.  At least so I've read."

"Right you are.  But now and then they frequent the Gold Coast.  I have
heard them in Natal, and down about the diamond regions.  Once you hear
a wild lion roar, you never forget the sound."

As the sun mounted above the forest, the odorous mists that infest
those regions were drawn upward, giving out as the air grew warm a
sickening and malarious influence.  Vast and gloomy cypress, bay, swamp
palm, ironwood, and other tropical woods reared their columnar trunks,
from out a dark and noisome undergrowth, to an immense height.  In
those leafy depths no sun ever shone, and the absence of bird life was
noticeably depressing.

"I hardly wonder the captain wants to get away as soon as possible,"
remarked Duff, as they at last neared the narrow point where the river
entered the little harbor.  "A week in this place and half of us would
be down with coast fever."

An exclamation from Ralph, who was in the bow, came next, as the yawl
passed the last leafy point, and the surface of the anchorage became
visible.

"What now?" demanded Duff.




CHAPTER XIX.

Left Behind.

No reply was necessary, for in another instant both the mate and the
sailor comprehended the cause of Ralph's surprise and alarm.

The Wanderer was nowhere to be seen.

The entire surface of the small, landlocked bay was as deserted and
seemingly untouched by man's presence, as if human eyes had never
beheld its solitude.  A glimpse of the inlet and the breakers far out
on the bar beyond was visible between two islets.

They could hear the monotonous thunder of the surf and discern a glassy
ocean farther out, for the morning was calm, promising also to be
intensely hot.

The surprise of each was so supreme that for an instant nothing was
said.  Finally the mate, with an expression of deep perplexity on his
countenance, said:

"I cannot understand it at all.  Let us row to the landing.  Perhaps we
may gain some clue to the mystery."

So they pulled across to the part of the harbor where the schooner had
been anchored when Duff, heading the boat for the shore, plunged them
into the leafy recesses that overhung the water.  Having once
penetrated this outer curtain, Ralph saw they were close to a rude
landing made of logs sunk endways into the oozy bottom, and floored
with large canes similar to bamboo.

A sort of corduroy road led into the swamp, and disappeared amid the
trees.  Upon a post near by was an old marlin spike with something
white fluttering beneath.  This attracted the mate's eye.

"Here we are," said he, detaching the bit of paper.  "Perhaps this will
give us a little light."

And he read as follows:

"3 bells sekund dog watch.  gOt to git out.  Uncle Sam on the Lookoute.
cap ses yu must shift fer yure selves."

"That looks as if a fo'c'stle fist had written it," remarked Duff
ruminatively.  "I have felt for some time that Gary wouldn't object to
being rid of a few of us."

"'E's a bloomin' fool," quoth Ben, evidently feeling that this exigency
had removed all restraint of speech as regarded the captain.  "Wot will
'e do short handed with a hundred or more black devils aboard in case
trouble comes?  Barrin' I were out o' here though, I wouldn't care if I
never touched a halyard of the Wanderer again."

"You see," said Duff, "we three were known to disapprove of the whole
business.  He needed me to get over here, for I know the coast.  But he
can get along without me going back."

"What does that mean about Uncle Sam," asked Ralph.

"That is to make us think some Yankee cruiser is in the neighborhood,
and that they left for safety's sake.  I half believe that is a blind.
But come.  We must be stirring, and see if they are really gone, and
also if we can cross the bar in a calm, loaded as we are.  I know we
can't, should a breeze spring up."

Presently they were aboard again, pulling for the inlet.  As they
passed between a number of mangrove islets Ralph, looking down, could
see an occasional shark or sawfish leisurely prodding about ten or
fifteen feet below the surface.

But as they neared the bar the water grew clouded, though a dark dorsal
appendage thrusting itself here and there above the wave indicated the
terrible result that would probably follow should the boat capsize.

When they rounded the last intervening point and the open ocean was
disclosed, the first object that met their eyes was the Wanderer with
all sails set, about two miles in the offing.  She lay motionless, for
the calm was complete.

"Well," remarked Duff, "we're all right if we pass the bar.  There
would be no trouble about that with a lighter load.  We can try it as
we are, for our supplies will be needed; but if necessary--over they
go."

They were already nearing the first line of breakers, when the mate
detected a second sail to the left and much nearer the shore.

This stranger was a full rigged ship hardly a mile away and to the
southward, while the Wanderer was almost due west from the inlet.

"She's a sailing corvette, or I'm much mistaken," said the mate,
"but--mind yourselves, men!  Pull with a will."

The first line of breakers was passed without trouble.  The second was
rougher, and the men strained at the oars to give the yawl as much
headway as possible.

The last wave came "quartering" and threw a hatful of water into
Ralph's face, whereat Mr. Duff laughed cheerily.

"One ducking!" he cried.  "But now comes the tug of war.  Jump her,
boys!  Jump her, I say!"

The third and last line was longer, larger, and in every way more
formidable, owing to the sudden deepening of the water.  Both Ben and
Ralph were rather exhausted from their previous exertions, and Duff
yelled himself hoarse in his repeated entreaties to:

"Give way!  G-g-give wa-a-a-y I tell you!  Don't you see--we're gone?
Keep her nose up!  K-e-e-p it u-u-u-p-p!  Sharks and sawfish, men! are
you going to let her broach?  Now then!  All together, a-n-d--over
she--good heavens!"

A barrel or two of brine hurled over the starboard quarter choked off
the mate's adjurations.  But it was the last of the angry combers and
the next minute the three were wiping the salt water from their faces
while the yawl was riding easily on the glassy swell just beyond the
bar.

"Now head her for the schooner, boys," said Duff, bailing with one hand
as he steered with the other.  "If we hadn't had the ebb with us, we'd
have had to lighten her.  Now--give me your oar, Ralph.  You steer.
We've no time to lose, for if a breeze starts before we reach the side,
I fear they're not so fond of our company but what they might give us
the slip yet."

"Couldn't we ship on that other vessel?" asked Ralph, by no means
reluctant to change his berth to a ship less liable to the law's
penalties.

"We probably could," replied Duff dryly.  "We probably might also have
to spend several months in jail somewhere as slavers, or for aiding and
abetting in the traffic.  I think we'd better overhaul the schooner and
wait for better times."

The sun was now high in the heavens, and the growing heat already
almost unbearable.  They stripped to their shirt and trousers while the
sweat rolled in streams from the faces of the oarsmen.

While nearing the Wanderer rapidly they noticed a faint, dark line
approaching up from the southeast along the line of the coast.

"A wind, by thunder!" exclaimed Duff, renewing his efforts at the oar.
"Look! the corvette already feels it.  Give way, Ben?  Gary is none too
good to leave us yet if the wind reaches him before we do."

Ralph, now rested, sprang forward.

"Take the tiller, Ben," said he.  "I'm good for a sharp pull."

But the old sailor, whose muscles were like whipcord, shook his head
and fairly made the yawl spring beneath his redoubled strokes.

For the next three or four minutes Duff kept his eye upon the advancing
line, behind which a sea of steely ripples danced in the sunlight.

The cruiser, slowly heeling to leeward, veered her bow round to her
course, and Duff could see the dash of water about her cutwater as she
forged ahead.  Still the Wanderer lay motionless, like a beautiful
picture, every sail that would draw set to catch the first whiff of the
breeze that was bringing the corvette slowly within range.

Less than three miles separated the vessels, while the yawl, scarcely
four hundred yards from the schooner, was lessening the distance
rapidly.  But the breeze traveled faster.

Ralph could see Gary in the rigging watching the cruiser through a
glass.  No attention seemed to be paid to the boat.

Three hundred yards--then two hundred--one hundred; and as the distance
lessened their spirits rose.  They were, however, half a cable length
away, when a sullen boom was heard, and a solid shot came skipping
along the surface of the sea to the left of the schooner.

"That is an order to 'stay where you are'," remarked Duff.  "Ah! here
comes our wind," he added, as a cool, refreshing whiff fanned their
brows.  "Any other time and I would welcome it; but--come down on her,
Ben!"

Ralph, fancying that he saw the Wanderer's sails beginning to fill,
sprang forward, seized an extra oar and pulled with all his might.  The
tired muscles were strained in a final effort, and the moist veins
bulged about their temples.

"Boat ahoy!" came from the schooner.  "Look alive or we'll leave you."

"Leave----" the rest of Duff's exclamation was lost as he threw his
whole effort into a last spurt.

The shadow of the lofty sails was towering over the yawl when the
Wanderer began to glide ahead.  Another gun from the cruiser, and the
ball drove between boat and schooner, missing the first by but a few
yards.

"Boat there!  Make ready for a rope!"

A sailor sprang upon the taffrail and the next instant a slim line
uncoiled itself over the water.  Duff, springing up, caught the end on
his oar blade, and by a dexterous twist brought it within reach.

As he rose from making it fast, the yawl was spinning through the water
in the schooner's wake, as the latter, heeling to the wind, responded
like a thing of life to the wishes of those on board.

Hand over hand the mate drew the heavily laden boat under the
Wanderer's lee, made fast the davits as they were lowered, and a moment
or two later the three tired boatmen found themselves safely on deck.

When the ample supply of meat and vegetables was hoisted over the
bulwarks, the few who had time to look were loud in their expressions
of approval.  Captain Gary hardly vouchsafed them more than a glance.
To Duff, however, he briefly said:

"We had warning in the night that the Adams" (a sailing vessel in the
old United States navy) "was making up the coast, and we had to pull
out.  We're short of water.  Your grub comes in handy, though."

"I suppose then we might have been left, had we been a little later, or
the wind had sprung up sooner."

The captain shrugged his shoulders, then glowered at Ralph, who was
relating his adventures to several men about the cook's galley.

"When John Bull or Uncle Sam are as close as that fellow yonder, a
slaver has to look out for himself.  Now, Mr. Duff, you are a gunner, I
understand.  I want you to make ready our stern chaser.  If they keep
on firing we must try to cripple their sailing powers if we can.  It's
lucky she didn't happen to be a steamer."

But Duff, already somewhat piqued by Gary's apparent indifference as to
whether the yawl was picked up or not, drew himself up stiffly.

"When I shipped with you, Captain Gary," he replied, "there was nothing
said about my serving as a gunner.  I must respectfully decline to fire
on an American ship.  I am too much of an American myself."

Without waiting for the burst of anger which he knew would follow this
mutinous(?) delivery, the second mate wheeled and made his way to the
galley, where he ordered Neb to serve him breakfast in the cabin.

Gary gave vent to a subdued oath or two, then bottled his wrath for a
more auspicious occasion.

Meanwhile the Wanderer, when once fully under way, began to evince her
remarkable sailing qualities, especially in light winds.  She steadily
drew away from the cruiser, whose people, having obtained the range,
were sending shot after shot, with a view of crippling the schooner's
sailing powers.

One round shot tore a great hole through the mainsail, as it went
shrieking by.  Gary himself, aided by Rucker, got ready one of the two
guns wherewith the Wanderer was equipped and soon returned their fire,
though no effect was manifest.

The cruiser must have been informed of the character of the slaver, or
she would not have attempted to cripple her so persistently.  Duff,
after eating, returned to the quarter-deck, where he watched with
folded arms the rather unskillful efforts to handle the long twelve
pounder pointed sternwards from the Wanderer's waist.  At each
discharge a chorus of cries from the hold reminded him of their living
cargo, deepening still more his disgust at the nature of the venture
into which he had been inveigled.

The breeze began to freshen and whip somewhat to the southwest.  Duff
went forward to where Gary and Rucker were trying to sight the loaded
gun.

"Shall I have the sheets trimmed, Captain Gary," he asked.

Gary surveyed the mate from head to foot with cool insolence.  Then he
stamped his foot.

"You shall either go before the mast as a common sailor, or you can
remain a prisoner in your stateroom during my pleasure.  If I gave you
your deserts, I'd have you clapped in irons."

"As a sailor you would probably put me in irons for again refusing to
fire, should you order me to; so I will go to the cabin.  Take notice,
however, Captain Gary, I protest against your treatment.  To fire on an
American man-of-war under these circumstances is piracy, and I submit
that no captain has a right to issue such orders to true American
seamen."

Gary's fury was such that he laid hold of one of the cutlasses in the
rack at the foot of the mainmast, but the screech of a shot and the
crash of a splintered topsail boom, diverted his attention.

Duff, laying aside his own weapon, descended to the cabin.

"Up with you!" shouted the captain.  "Lay out along the fo's'l gaff
there.  Lively now!"




CHAPTER XX.

Ralph Stumbles on a Discovery.

Three nimble sailors were soon stretched along the slanting gaff of the
great foresail, a perilous and quivering berth, with nothing for the
hands to grasp but the shivering leech and shivered boom of the
topsail.  The crippled boom was soon lashed with pieces of spun yarn,
and the damage thus temporarily repaired.

Ralph, after a comfortable meal in the galley for himself and Ben, was
attracted to the grating over the main hatch by the strange noises that
issued thence.  Shading his eyes from the light, he peered below, and
through the semi-darkness saw a sight that made him heartsick and
disgusted.  More than ever he wished that he had never gone on this
luckless cruise.

The main hold was a place, perhaps sixty feet long by less than
twenty-five wide.  Into this "black hole," where the upright space
between decks was less than seven feet, were crowded one hundred and
seventy naked creatures, like hogs in a stock car.

They could not lie down unless a portion stood up to make room, neither
could all remain seated except by drawing up their limbs in cramping
and painful postures.  The odors already arising from this pit of
torture were such that the lad had to turn his face away for fresh air.

"It's awful!" he gasped to himself.  "It's simply awful.  I never had
very much liking for niggers--as niggers, but such as this is enough to
bring God's punishment on every one of us that have helped to bring it
about.  Jeemineddy!  I wouldn't care much if that ship did overhaul us.
Want water, do you?"

This last remark was brought out by Ralph's noticing several of the
negroes make signs to him as of drinking from their hands.  Ralph
walked straight to Captain Gary and saluted.

"May I give those people below some water, sir?" he asked.  "They seem
to want some."

"No!" shouted Gary, not sorry to vent his spleen on so inviting an
object as Ralph.  "We'll all be wanting water if that fellow there
drives us from the coast without another chance to fill the butts.  Get
forward there and don't let me hear from you till you're spoken to.
D'ye understand?"

Ralph retreated, and Gary, after another unsuccessful trial at the
cruiser's masts, gave orders to cease firing.

The wind was now a stiff breeze, and the Adams was holding her own.
With the rising of the sea it was probable that the larger vessel would
gain on the smaller one.

The cruiser also stopped firing, as the increased rolling of the ship
rendered a long range shot too ineffective.

For an hour or more the relative positions of the two vessels remained
comparatively unchanged.  If there was any advantage it was on the side
of the cruiser, though the Wanderer behaved beautifully.

But the wind steadily rose, and by the time eight bells was struck, and
Neb announced dinner, the Adams was perceptibly gaining.

"Send that boy aft," ordered Gary, and when Ralph appeared the captain
said sneeringly: "You seem to think so much of those black brutes
below, I guess you can help deal out their rations.  Go to Long Tom."

That worthy was buckling a brace of revolvers about his person, and had
in his hand a sharp rawhide.  Two sailors bore a great basket of corn
bread and ship's hard bread.  To Ralph was given a smaller one,
containing meat minutely divided into about two ounce slices.

"'Ere we go," remarked the boatswain, heading for the lower gangway
door.

At this place an armed sentinel stood day and night.  As the four
entered, a howl arose not unlike that of caged wild beasts.  But it was
more for water than for food.

"Eat first; drink afterwards," said Bludson, striking lightly right and
left to restrain their eagerness.  "That's the law aboard here.  Mind,
Ralph; one bit of meat apiece--no more."

One sailor bore a lantern, for the only light afforded outside of that
was from the grated hatch above.  Amid the half obscurity Ralph saw a
jumble of swart, brutish faces and wildly gleaming eyes, and heard a
babel of guttural sounds suggestive of a savage Bedlam where violence
was restrained only by fear.

Up and down the rows of naked forms they passed, dealing to each one a
ration of bread and meat, scanty and coarse enough, yet sufficient to
sustain life.  Then half a pint of water was served out to each.

Here the struggle to keep order was fiercest.  The strong would attempt
to deprive the weak of their share, and Bludson's whip was kept
constantly going.

Once a brawny negro made a strong effort to seize the bucket,
regardless of the cowhide, when Long Tom felled him at a blow with his
pistol butt, then cocking the weapon, glanced sternly around at the
circle of angry faces by which they were surrounded.

The negroes would have torn them in pieces had they dared, for the want
of water was already rendering them desperate in that fetid hole.

Ralph returned to the deck pale, nauseated, and sick at heart.  The
captain noticed this and it angered him, as did nearly everything which
the boy now did.

"Hark ye!" he growled.  "D'ye think you'd like to spend all your time
down there?"

"I would rather be dead," said Ralph half angrily, for his whole being
rebelled against the atrocity of which he was being made, perforce, one
of the perpetrators.

"Would, eh?"  The captain eyed him with leering malevolence.  "You'll
mind your eye then while you're on this craft, and you'll obey orders,
without a word, or--down you go among those demons for punishment.  Go
to my room and bring up my small glass--the double one.  Stay--while
you're there make up the berth and tidy things up a bit.  Lively now!"

Ralph went below burning with a sense of futile rage.  It was useless
to rebel, however, for on a ship a boy is the most helpless of
creatures.

As he moodily arranged things in the captain's stateroom, wondering for
the hundreth time why Gary should appear to wish to persecute him after
having been so courteous at Savannah, Ralph's eye fell on an open
letter lying on the floor before the half open door of a small iron
safe.  Evidently Gary, in his haste or excitement over the approach of
the warship, had left the safe in this condition.  The letter had
probably fallen there unnoticed.

Ralph picked it up, intending to lay it on the table, when a certain
familiarity in the handwriting struck him as peculiar and he started to
read the contents.

"My dear Cousin:--" it began; but after getting thus far the boy threw
the sheet down upon the table.

"Why should I be reading the captain's letters?" thought he, and a
flush of shame crept momentarily to his forehead.  "And yet--it doesn't
seem to be the one I gave him."

He remembered that Shard had mentioned an intention to write Gary by
mail.

As Ralph hesitated, a desire strengthened within him to read further,
despite the monitions of conscience.  A vague idea that the strange and
contradictory behavior of Gary might be explained was perhaps at the
bottom of the lad's mental persistence.

He hesitated until his fingers burned, then made a sudden grasp at the
letter.




CHAPTER XXI.

At Close Quarters.

Without giving himself time to think, Ralph now read as follows:


My Dear Cousin:

If he does not get lost on his way you will be apt to see an awkward
country boy in Savannah in a day or two, who is quite anxious to go to
sea.  I have recommended him to apply to you, and you will do me a
great favor, not only to take him, but to see that he never comes back.
Mind you--no violence.  I know your devilish temper.  But you can
either wear him out with hard work, or leave him in Africa, or get rid
of him in some way which may gratify the hatred which I and mine have
felt for his whole generation for years, and yet avoid difficulty with
the law.  We have enough to contend with as it is, in our Cuban venture.

Frankly now, if you wish any more cash advances from me, you must see
to this lad, and contrive to make something out of this cargo of live
stock.  Shipping wild niggers is growing riskier every year, especially
as Cuba and Brazil (our only markets left) threaten to free their
slaves.

Look sharp, dodge all warships, and attend to that brat of a boy.  I
have soft soaped him by giving him a letter to you which you will
interpret by this.

Your Cousin,
  Theodore Shard.


Ralph's first hot impulse was to go up and make known to Gary that he
now saw through the eccentricities of the latter's behavior, and that
Shard's treachery was also known.  A second thought convinced him that
such a course in the captain's present mood, would most likely, only
precipitate some act of violence of which he would be the victim.

Ralph now saw why he had been sent up the river on a perilous errand,
and why he and his companions were so readily deserted on the first
inkling that a sloop of war was near.

Gary's unchanging severity and dislike were explained, and as the boy
contrasted his present treatment with the honeyed manner which had so
deceived him in Savannah, he felt that he was justified in using any
means to counteract such methods.

As he flung the letter down, a slight noise made him turn.  Duff was
standing at the door.

Ralph, feeling that here was his best friend aboard, resolved to
acquaint the mate with all that had occurred relating to Shard's and
Gary's conspiracy against himself.  This he did as briefly as possible,
clinching his remarks by holding out the letter.

"I won't read it, though it's right enough you should, seeing it
concerns your safety," replied Duff.  "I'm in disgrace, too, so it
might be a good plan for us to stick together--for self preservation, I
mean.  We don't want to hurt any one, unless they try to hurt us.
We're scarce in water, and that cruiser ain't going to let us back to
the coast again.  You can bank your life on that.

"Captain is in his worst mood, and he ain't likely to get better.
He'll begin on the crew next.  They say he is a perfect fiend for
punishment once he gets mad all through.  These poor niggers will keep
him half crazy as their want of water grows, and the hot calms strike
us in the doldrums.  It's my frank opinion, lad, that we'll be having a
little floating place of torment of our own here before many days have
passed."

The captain's voice hurled down the companionway, interrupted them
harshly.

"He wants his glass," said Ralph, seizing the instrument in question.
"I must go."

"Well," concluded Duff as he returned to his own stateroom, "lay low
and look out for squalls.  That's all we can do at present."

When Ralph returned to the deck the wind was stiffening to a gale, and
half a dozen men were putting a single reef into the mainsail, while
several more were laying out along the bowsprit doing the same office
for one of the jibs.

The outermost one, called the flyaway, was being furled, though the
sailor stretched out upon the stay beneath the bowsprit was drenched by
each downward plunge of the schooner's bow.  The Adams still carried a
heavy press of canvas, though black specks of men could be seen on the
yards shortening the loftier sails.  The larger vessel rode the rising
seas more easily, and had already come within close range.

Gary seized the glass and leveled it at the cruiser, then at the
southwestern horizon, where a dull gray film of vapor was settled upon
the sea.

He handed the glass to Rucker and swore impatiently.

"If we have half an hour more of this wind we're gone up," he growled.
"Our only chance is a fog."

A puff of smoke belched from the port bow of the warship.

"They understand what that fog might do for us as well as we do,"
remarked Rucker, as a shell exploded some distance to leeward.
"They'll get the range in a few minutes, and when one of those twelve
pound bombs explodes in our tops----"

"They see that solid shot won't do," interrupted Gary fiercely.  "It is
quick work they are after."

Down in the hold the labored pitching of the schooner was adding
seasickness to the sufferings of the poor wretches there.  Doleful
cries resounded, among which one at all conversant with their language
would have heard calls for water predominate.

At night, when darkness reigned, the misery of such a scene would be
augmented.

Several shells were fired by the cruiser, each one coming nearer to the
mark, until at last an explosion just forward of the foretopmast
shivered a double throat block, and down came the foresail, the leech
trailing in the sea as it fell.

Another piece of the shell tore off a sailor's arm, and still another
disabled one of the boats.

Orders from the captain came thick and fast; men flew hither and
thither to repair the damage; while the wounded man lay writhing and
neglected for some time.  The Adams all at once slowly yawed, being
within easy range, as the Wanderer lay helpless with her nose in the
wind's eye.

"Look out!" shouted Rucker.  "She's making ready to give us a
broadside."

"Lively there, men!" roared Gary, nearly frantic.  "Do you want to
spend a year or so in a Yankee jail?"

A redoubled roar from the cruiser followed, and a small tempest of iron
hurtled around them.

One shot passed through the after hold, terrifying anew the negroes,
who yelled fearfully.  A rent or two in the sails was all the damage
beside, that was inflicted.

Ralph, who was assisting to reeve a new block at the foretop, saw that
the fog was almost at hand.  But before it came a change of wind;
preceding which, as the southeaster died, there were a few moments of
calm.

The lull reached the Wanderer first, and the cruiser, swinging to her
course, forged so far ahead that, before the schooner could again hoist
her foresail, the Adams rounded to, less than half a mile away and
presented a frowning row of shotted guns to the slaver's stern.  It was
a fair raking position.

Rucker threw down his speaking trumpet in despair, though Gary's eyes
were fixed keenly upon the advancing fog.  A signal for the slaver to
lie to was followed by a peremptory shot athwart the schooner's bow.

At the same time a boat was lowered away, filled with armed men, and
started towards the Wanderer.

"Heave to, men!" ordered the captain.  "But be ready to hoist the
fo's'l when I give the word.  Down with your helm--down, man!"  This to
the man at the wheel.  "We mustn't give those fellows any cause to
suspect us--now."

While the boat approached, it was at times lost in the hollows of the
seas, but always rose again nearer than before.  Meanwhile the Wanderer
lay to, with her mainsail flattened and her topsails aback.

Apparently she was merely awaiting the arrival of the cruiser's boat to
surrender herself.  Many on board thought so now, and, in certain
quarters, bitter were the grumblings over their "hard luck."  All this
time Gary, standing at the compass, alternately watched the cruiser and
the approach of the fog, while the schooner, deprived of headway,
rolled in seeming helplessness in the trough of the sea.

"Lad," said Ben to Ralph as the two slid down the ratlines when their
task aloft was done, "I almost wish we were back among those bloody
niggers ashore.  'Twould be better than standin' trial for bein' caught
on a blackguard of a slaver--bad luck to her."

"We must make the best of it," began Ralph, when Gary's voice
interrupted him.

"Hoist away there, men!" cried the captain, brandishing his arms
furiously.  "Up with that fo's'l!  Up with it, I say!  Ease away on
those tops'ls.  Lively now!  Haul away on that jib.  Flatten 'em, boys!"

The men worked like demons, for on the instant they apprehended the
daring nature of Gary's maneuver.  Rucker, seizing the trumpet, echoed
the captain's orders in stentorian tones.

It was not until the schooner fell off broadside that these actions
were noticeable to those on the warship.  But she could not now fire
without endangering her own boat, which was scarcely fifty yards from
the slaver.

So nicely had Gary calculated, that the breeze bearing the fog struck
the Wanderer's sails just as she was trimmed to fall off.  The cruiser,
stricken by the brief calm which had previously palsied the schooner's
movements, lay helpless in a double sense, being unable to either move
or fire.

"Make ready to go about," said the captain to the first mate, who
bellowed the order through his trumpet.

They were nearly abreast of the cruiser's boat, which, seeing at once
what was up, fired an ineffectual volley of small arms as the Wanderer
gracefully swept by, hardly a pistol shot off.

"About ship!" said Gary quietly.

"Hard a lee!" sang out the mate, and as the schooner rushed up into the
wind, Gary, walking to the stern, kissed his hand satirically to the
officers in the boat.

"I've a notion to sink you," he muttered.  "One solid shot would do the
business; but perhaps 'twill be best for us to get away, doing as
little damage as possible.  It might be safer in case of subsequent
trouble with the authorities."

Close hauled upon her other tack, the schooner was heading diagonally
towards the fog which was just at hand, like a dense, advancing wall.

As they drew away from the boat the cruiser began to fire one gun after
another.  Each discharge sent apprehensive thrills through the slaver's
crew.  Finally a whole broadside of the warship's upper battery came
shrieking over the water.




CHAPTER XXII.

Trouble of Another Kind.

"That was a close call," exclaimed Rucker, as a shot cut away one of
the jib stays, carrying down the flying jib.

Even as he spoke the film of the fog enveloped them, and though the
sloop of war continued to fire, her shots did no further damage, for
the Wanderer almost immediately lost sight of her pursuer.

Gary then had the course altered to disconcert the aim of the corvette,
which soon after ceased firing.

The breeze that bore the fog with it, was a light one, and as the mist
was liable to rise at any time the captain made the most of his
opportunity by carrying all the sail he could spread.  He dared not
return to the coast, bad as he needed water; for the alarm once given,
other cruisers would be on the watch there.  So he determined to make
for the Cape Verdes, and risk the chance of being able to water in
those islands.  Should no prying war ships happen along he anticipated
little difficulty.

The day wore away slowly.  It was about an hour by sun in the afternoon
before the fog began to lift.  A sailor was at each mast head watching
for the Adams, as the course of the corvette was entirely unknown.

"Sail ho!" sang out one of these lookouts as the mist, rolling
eastward, began to show a clear horizon towards the north.

In a minute both captain and mate were aloft.  There was the Adams
about four miles away, and somewhat astern to the lee quarter.  Almost
at the same time the Wanderer was observed from the cruiser, as the
latter began to pile up her canvas with a rapidity that evinced a
sudden cause therefor.  As the mate returned to the deck Gary called:

"Ease away, Mr. Rucker.  We've got just the wind that suits us, and I
think we have the advantage this time."

With the light breeze that continued, and with the sheets free, the
Wanderer was at her best.  By the time the sun went down it could be
seen that the war ship was losing ground.

When night closed in she was fully five miles astern.  With a heavier
wind the advantage would have been on her side, but as it was, when
morning dawned the Adams was not in sight.

After that came several days of light, baffling winds, alternating with
calms.  The sun, as they drew nearer the equator, became more and more
unbearable.

In the close hold the heat and stench were frightful.  The constant
cries for water rendered the crew nervous and the captain irritable.
He now punished the men severely for the slightest infraction of duty.

"If we don't reach the Verdes," said Duff to Ralph one day, as the lad
was sweeping the cabin, "there will be an outbreak of some kind.  Come
to the gangway and listen."

The second mate, who still remained below--his place being taken by
Bludson after a fashion--now led Ralph to the grated door where stood
the loaded howitzer.  The sentry was not there; another sign of the
crew's demoralization.  He had slipped into one of the store rooms, now
left unlocked, to tap a water butt unseen, for all hands were on short
water rations.

When Duff and the boy halted, they could hear a sort of rasping sound
from underneath like the boring or cutting of wood.

"What is that?" asked Ralph.

"Mischief," said the mate sententiously.  "Those wretches in the hold
are up to some trickery.  These stupid sentries are too dull or
careless to investigate.  They are crazy for water in there, and it is
my opinion they have got hold of something and are trying to cut a way
out--God knows where!--perhaps through the bottom of the vessel."

"Suppose you tell the captain."

"He is that obstinate he'd simply curse me, and probably give no heed.
But some one else might speak with better effect."

"Do you think I had better?"

Ralph spoke doubtfully, realizing that he also was no favorite with
Gary.

"You might bring it about in some way.  I certainly owe Captain Gary no
favors, yet I should hate to stand by and see those fiends cut their
way out, and say nothing.  They would murder every soul on board."

Later on, Ralph found a chance to tell the captain what Duff had told
him.  Gary's scowl deepened.

"Duff told you this, did he?" demanded the skipper suspiciously.  "Out
with the truth."

Ralph acknowledged that the second mate was his informant.

"Stuff!  Haven't we a sentry there constantly?"

"But the sentry isn't always at his post, so Mr. Duff says.  He was
away today when we heard the noises."

"And you heard them, too!  The mate tattling to the cabin boy, and both
peaching on the poor sentry, who is, I dare say, more trusty than
either one of you two.  Go forward, and stay there until you are bidden
back.  Rank mutiny, by thunder!"

Gary stamped his foot, more with the air of one demented than that of a
sane and sober commander.  Indeed the situation was sufficiently grave
without this new complication.

Several of the negroes had already died, and more were down helpless
beneath the feet of their thirst-tortured but more able-bodied fellow
sufferers.  The howls and lamentations that continually ascended
through the grating were trying to the nerves, aside from
considerations of profit and loss.  The combined effect on Gary was to
render him more unreasonable and tyrannical than ever.

Oh, for more wind!  They were hardly up into the trades yet, and at
that season, even the trades were uncertain.

But it was certain that unless enough favorable wind did come, and come
soon, they would hardly reach the Cape Verdes in time.  Already crew,
negroes and all, were down to one pint of water to the man every
twenty-four hours.  In that hot and stifling weather their tortures
grew almost unbearable.

One night Rucker, happening to want a night glass, left the deck for a
moment to go below for it, and passing close to the sleepy sentry, he
heard the same sounds which had aroused Duff's suspicions.  After
Ralph's rebuff the second mate had made no further attempt to have the
thing investigated.

"What's that?" said he sharply to the sailor, who sat leaning against
the bulkhead, but the man made no answer.

Rucker shook him sharply, and at the same time scented the odor of
liquor about the fellow.

"Wake up.  What have you been drinking?  What noise is that?"

But receiving only unintelligible replies, and having to return
immediately to his watch on deck, he reported the circumstances to the
captain, who broke into a storm of invective.  Rucker discreetly
withdrew.

Shortly thereafter Duff heard from his stateroom an uproar in the
gangway.  Looking out, he saw the captain standing over the prostrate
form of the sentry, whom he had knocked down with the man's own gun.
One of the storeroom doors was open.

"I see now!" foamed Gary, nearly beside himself.  "You fellows on watch
have been tapping this rum barrel night and day, I reckon, and mischief
going on right under your feet.  But I'll even you up.  Where is the
bo's'n?"

Receiving no answer to this last shouted demand, Gary sprang up the
stairway, leaving the insensible sentry stretched upon the floor.

Duff, still watching from his stateroom through the open cabin door,
saw a gaunt, dusky face thrust itself from the storeroom and peer
wildly round.  Other faces joined it, and in an instant a dozen naked
black forms were crowding the gangway.

They saw Duff.  Several made for him, brandishing short chains from
their fetters, which they had managed somehow to loosen and sever.
Others beat the sentry's brains out, and overthrew the howitzer.

The noise thus made, and Duff's loud calls to alarm the ship, caused
Rucker and one or two seamen to run hastily down the companionway.
Being unarmed they were forced into the cabin or back up the gangway,
by a horde of frantic savages, who were being continually reinforced
from the hold by way of the two holes, which they had somehow cut
through the bulkhead into the storeroom, where among other things, was
the barrel of rum.

The drinking must have been going on secretly for a day or two.  In
fact others of the crew were now discovered to be tipsy, and that the
officers had not found it out before was doubtless owing to the growing
laxness of discipline, despite the captain's severity.

Gary, accompanied by Bludson and others, now appeared, armed with
pistols and cutlasses; but the door leading into the hold was already
broken down.  Scores of half crazy negroes swarmed into the gangway,
bearing back the whites by sheer weight of numbers, notwithstanding the
weapons of the crew.  Revolver and cutlass played an active part, but
the slaves seemed absolutely indifferent to life.

When one was shot down, half a dozen took his place.  Even the few
women fought like tigresses.  The truth was they were crazed for want
of water.

In the cabin, Rucker and one seaman had been literally torn limb from
limb.  The remaining man escaped into the captain's room.

Duff, who was without weapons, clambered through the stern window of
his room, and gained the deck by way of the vessel's stern post and a
rope thrown him by Ralph, who had been summoned to the wheel when the
alarm was given.  The lad was chafing at his inactivity.

"There's hardly any breeze," said Duff.  "Lash the wheel, my lad, and
bear a hand.  If those niggers gain the deck we're gone up sure."

It was but the task of a moment to obey, seize a cutlass from the rack
and follow the mate to the companion-way, where Gary and what was left
of the men with him were being forced up the steps.

The captain was covered with blood from a scalp wound, but he was equal
to several ordinary men.  Skillfully parrying the blows directed at his
life, he had laid more than one burly savage low.

But the number and fury of the yelling crowd were irresistible.
Seizing the weapons of their dead and wounded assailants, they fought
with the blind energy of desperation.

"Batten down the main hatch," called Gary, seeing Duff and Ralph.
"Bludson is gone, but we can hold them until you return."

The order was swiftly executed.  Then the second mate and Ralph,
assisted by one sailor, brought forward the heavy storm covering of the
after companion-way and placed it in readiness.  A charge down was then
made and the negroes driven back a little.

"Now, men," cried Gary, springing up to the deck, at the rear of his
men, "down with it!  Jump on it, and batten her--batten her!"

With both hatches thus secured, they were in undisputed possession of
the deck, though the whole interior of the ship, except the forecastle,
was at the mercy of the negroes.  The triumphant howls of the latter
were deafening.

Suddenly a shriek was heard.  The savages had entered the captain's
stateroom and fallen upon the sailor who had taken refuge there.

On deck Gary counted his help.  He found that besides Bludson and
Rucker five sailors were missing.  His available force, including
himself, Duff and Ralph, amounted only to ten.

Two of these were desperately wounded, one having his throat actually
torn by the teeth of the cannibals below.

The arms were mostly on deck, but the ammunition, provisions, and most
of their scanty supply of water was below.

They were in a terrible situation.  What deed of desperation the
negroes might do it was impossible to tell.  There were matches; they
might fire the ship.  There was the rum; they might still gain the
upper hand of all, when nerved and further crazed by liquor.

Two lanterns shed a melancholy light fore and aft.  The wind had died
away and the heavens were sprinkled with stars.

Gary placed two men fully armed, at each hatch, then called the rest to
the quarter-deck for a consultation.  He was calm, cool, yet heartless
and vindictive as ever.

Without caring for the men already sacrificed, he seemed only anxious
to save his vessel and as many of his mutinous victims as he might now
be able to carry into port.  For Duff and Ralph he, even now, scarcely
veiled his dislike as he sat upon the hatch, binding his wounded head
with a handkerchief.

But before much was said, a sailor ran back crying:

"This way!  This way!  The fiends are after us again."




CHAPTER XXIII.

Adrift.

Seizing their weapons, the wearied men ran forward to the forecastle,
where the negroes had nearly cut another hole through the bulkhead
separating the crew's quarters from the hold.

One of the main hatch guards was holding them at bay, and had managed
to seize the implement with which they had gained their liberty, from
the savage who happened to be using it last.  It was part of an old
hand saw, that had, by some neglect, been left unnoticed on the floor
of the hold.

Several shots drove back the blacks, then the hole, which was a small
one, was nailed up and another guard stationed.

Gary's next move was to order the two sound boats lowered and attached
by ropes to the side.  He was impressed by this last effort of the
blacks that the worst might happen, and that they had better be
prepared.  Once the horde of savages gained the decks, the vessel would
afford no refuge to their hated oppressors.

The night was somewhat advanced.  In the horizon a few darker spaces
denoted the presence of clouds, though all above was clear.

The Wanderer's sails hung limp, unless now and then a feeble expansion
caused by some desultory puff be excepted.  Gary divided the remainder
of the men into two watches, one of whom he caused to lie down on deck
for a little rest, with their arms at their sides.

Below, amid the darkness, a single light shone from the cabin.  Some
one of the blacks, evidently acquainted with the use of matches
(through traders or missionaries, doubtless), had found a way of
lighting the cabin lamp.  Pandemonium reigned there.  Inflamed by rum,
furious efforts were made from time to time to burst through the
hatches.

Along towards morning, however, a certain degree of quiet began to
prevail.  Perhaps the negroes were growing weary.

A light breeze had arisen that sent the schooner ahead.  Gary had
determined to make for the nearest port, provided they could hold out
to reach it.  He saw no chance to do aught to subdue and confine the
blacks with his reduced force.  If they saved the vessel and their own
lives, they would do more than some of them expected.

One of the boats was chafing against the weather side of the ship.
Gary directed Ralph to drop both boats astern and fasten one behind the
other.

The boy obeyed, climbing down into the first boat in order to attach
the second to its stern.  He made, as he thought, a half hitch of the
painter, then, drawing the second boat close to the first, he stepped
into it, and began bailing out the water that had filtered in through
the seams shrunken by exposure to the sun on the schooner's deck.

As he worked away, thoughts of his mountain home intruded strangely,
perhaps incongruously, upon his mind.  Looking eastward a narrow rim of
moon was protruding over the ocean's rim.

Something reminded him of the way it used to rise above "Old Peaky
Top," just back of the cabin on Hiawassee.  He straightened himself to
obtain a better view.  A sharp report rang out behind him from the
vessel, and he felt a numbness under his shoulder.

"Reckon they must be trying to get out again," he muttered, glancing at
the ship's stern.

He was then sensible of a dizziness and a roaring in his ears.  A black
savage face was glaring upon him from the window of the captain's
stateroom, from whence protruded the barrel of a rifle.  After that his
sight grew dim; something wet trickled down on one of his hands, and
outward things became a blank.  His last sensation was a comfortable
kind of sleepiness.

When Ralph came to himself he was lying in the bottom of the boat with
his head jammed uncomfortably under one of the thwarts.  As he
scrambled up, his first thought was of what the captain would say to
his falling asleep in that way.  But instead of rising, he stumbled and
fell.  Then he realized that it was morning and that he was
unaccountably weak.  Pulling himself up again with more care, he stared
around for an instant, then sank back against the thwart.

The Wanderer was nowhere to be seen.  After another moment he pulled
himself up on the seat, in order to assure himself that he was not
dreaming.  What his eyes had told him was a fact.

He was alone in that little boat, with not a sail or other sign of
man's presence anywhere within view.  The surprise held him mute and
breathless at first, then he began to wonder how he came to be left in
such a plight.

His left arm felt stiff and sore.  Looking down, he saw the blood had
dried on his left hand, while under that shoulder something smarted
with every movement.

It came to him then.  The report, the numbness, the fleeting glimpse of
that savage face, and the gun barrel, were now accounted for.

"While I was mooning away about grandfather and home, that fellow shot
me.  Lucky he didn't strike closer.  But how did I get loose?"

Examination showed him the painter trailing idly in the water
alongside.  He must have made that half hitch carelessly.  During his
swoon it had worked loose.

His friends on board had doubtless had their attention too much taken
up by the blacks, to give heed to him.  The whiffs of air had slowly
swept the schooner out of sight and he had lain senseless until
daylight.

"I am surely in a bad fix," he reflected.  "Wounded--in an open
boat--without an oar, or a bite to eat or drink."

He had read enough of the perils of the sea to comprehend the terrible
possibilities of his situation, and at first his blood chilled and his
courage sank.  Resolute as he was by nature, there was a deadly
difference between the loneliness of his present condition and the
solitude of his native mountains.

In the woods he was at home; he knew where to go to find people
there--but here!  In his weakened condition tears started to his eyes.
But he soon dashed them away, and, rising, set about dressing his wound.

He removed his jacket and shirt, and bathed the wound with ocean water,
as he knew that salt was good to allay possible inflammation.  The
bullet had grazed his side just under the shoulder, making a painful
though not a dangerous injury.

"Lucky it didn't lodge," he thought, as he tore up his handkerchief and
bound up the place by passing the bandage over his opposite shoulder.

A good deal of blood had flowed both down his arm and side.  This
accounted for his present weakness.

After resuming his clothes, he sat down to consider the situation.

There was a light breeze from the northeast, with a straggling fleece
of clouds, expanding like a fan towards the zenith.  Ralph knew that
the appearance indicated more wind, but he determined not to borrow
trouble from the future.

A slow, majestic heaving of the ocean, on which the yawl gently rose
and fell was counter crossed by the shorter ripples stirred up by the
light wind then blowing.  The dead swell evinced the neighborhood of
some previous gale.

"I might as well search the lockers," he said to himself.  "There might
be something eatable in them."

There was nothing to eat aboard; but in the locker at the stern he
discovered a small keg filled with water, overlooked probably when the
boat was unloaded, for it was the same craft in which the trip up the
African river had been made.

"That's a good find," he ejaculated.  "Crickey! what is this?"

He drew forth from under the bow a strip of canvas and an old rusty
hatchet.  The possession of these articles raised his spirits for a
time, so that he set to work to rig up a sort of jury mast and sail.
There were three thwarts.  From one of these he managed to split two
pieces some six feet long without impairing its strength as a brace to
stiffen the boat.  He lashed the three together with a few bits of spun
yarn from his pocket, making a mast nearly ten feet long.

Next he split from the other thwarts a piece or two for a boom, then he
turned his attention to the sail.

Part of the canvas he tore into strips, and by the help of these he
manufactured a sort of lug sail of sufficient size to keep the boat
steady in a seaway, and in running with a fair wind to make two or
three miles an hour.

To step and wedge the mast with the aid of the hatchet and more
splinters from the thwarts, did not take long.  The only thing that
bothered him was the main sheet, or--to explain--the rope which should
hold the sail taut and trim.

His eye happened to rest on the knot of the painter where it was
fastened to a ring bolt at the bow.  He drew the wet line aboard,
untied the knot and soon had his main sheet fastened to the boom.

There was a cleat near the tiller and Ralph, hauling in, brought the
yawl a little up in the wind and soon had the craft under headway.

"By jolly!" he exclaimed, "but this isn't so very bad, after all.  If I
only knew where to head now, I might strike the Cape Verdes.  I suppose
I might hit Africa if I went east long enough; that is, supposing I
didn't capsize or founder, or starve, or something.  Heigho!  How weak
I feel.  Believe I'll take breakfast."

So he took up the keg and drank heartily, for his wound had made him
slightly feverish.

"I must touch it lighter than this," he said as he put down the keg.
"Lord only knows when or where I will get it filled again."

As the sun came up, a flaming red ball, the wind slowly increased.

Ralph, though by no means experienced in boat sailing, had learned how
to steer.  The sail was too small and weakly fastened to render it
liable to endanger the safety of the craft and for a time the interest
aroused by the novelty of sailing by himself kept his spirits up.

But in an hour or so he felt weary.  The sea had slowly risen so that
an occasional dash of water flew over the bow whenever he headed in the
least to windward.

"What is the use of tiring myself out?" he thought at last.  "It don't
make any difference where I go, or whether I go at all."

So he unstepped his mast, stowed it in the boat's bottom, and lay down
on the sail.  The sun dazzled him and he drew his hat over his eyes.

Probably his wound and weakness made him drowsy, for he fell asleep.
When he again awoke the sun was nearly overhead.  The hot glare was
stifling.  His very clothing seemed to burn his flesh.  He staggered to
his feet and looked around the horizon wearily.

Suddenly his eyes brightened and his whole figure became animated and
eager.




CHAPTER XXIV.

Ralph's Sufferings.

Low down in the northwestern horizon was a faint speck of white.
Everywhere else the blue of the sky and ocean was unrelieved.  The
"mares' tails" of clouds had disappeared and the sea was a gently
heaving plain of glass.

"A sail!" exclaimed the boy.  "It must be a sail."

He hurriedly set up his mast again and hastened back to the tiller.
But there was no wind; the canvas hung limp, while the sun was broiling
the paint on the little forward deck.

"I don't suppose they can see me," thought he dejectedly.  "It must be
only their topsails that I see, and so small a boat as this would be
invisible.  Perhaps if they had a glass at the mast head, they might
find me.  Oh, if I only had a wind!"

Reflection, however, convinced him that a breeze would be as apt to
carry the strange vessel off as to bring it nearer, so he was fain to
sit still and idly watch the tiny dot of white, which meant so much,
yet might do so little.

The isolation of his position pressed upon him harder than ever.  He
felt, for a time, that if that elusive bit of white should disappear he
would certainly break down.  The heat and glare in the air added to his
misery, and he took another drink from the keg, despite his previous
abstemious resolve.

"I just can't help drinking," he said to himself in justification of
his act.  "I reckon it's the wound makes me burn so."

For a long while matters remained much the same, except that his hunger
increased and his general state of discomfort grew to a point that
rendered his exposure to the sun's rays unbearable.  He would have
taken his sail and made some sort of awning but for the faint hope that
it might be seen.

He crawled under the bow, where the deck sheltered the upper half of
his person, and found some relief.  From time to time he crept out and,
standing on the thwarts, watched the unchanging speck of white, with
longings which at times were almost akin to despair.

Towards the middle of the afternoon, after a longer stay beneath the
deck than usual, he heard a slight thump against the side of the boat.
Scrambling up, he saw that a light breeze had arisen, sending little
ripples over the sea.

The wind was fair towards the distant sail, and Ralph again stepped his
mast and trimmed his sheet, while his heart beat fast.  If he could
only get near enough to the stranger to be recognized!

But his progress was slow and many times the distant spot would
disappear momentarily, sending painful thrills through his veins.
Then, when it was visible once more, the sense of relief was almost as
hard to bear, so greatly were his nerves wrought up.

After a time it seemed to him that the sail was growing larger.  At
first he doubted, then became assured of that fact.

He rose and shouted in sheer exultation.  For a time the white spot
increased in size until he felt that he would certainly be seen a
moment or two later.  But that longed-for moment did not come.

At last he perceived that the stranger was sailing at right angles to
his own course, which would naturally expose to his view a larger
expanse of sail.  Would he be able to forge far enough ahead to be
recognized?

The period of suspense was almost an agony; nor was the after
conviction that the ship was slowly but surely leaving him, as she
passed on her course, much more painful by comparison.  But as long as
she was in sight Ralph sailed on.

He could not voluntarily give up even the last glimpse of what appeared
to be the only link connecting him with his fellow creatures.  But as
the dot of white was finally lost to view, he sank to the boat's bottom
in despair, letting the sail flap listlessly and the tiller swing
unguided.

"It is no use," he faltered, as his eyes momentarily filled under a
sinking feeling of utter loneliness.  "I might as well give up."

But pain is at times a great reviver.  As hope dwindled, the irritation
of his wound and the gnawing of his stomach forced their discomfort
upon his attention.  He drank again, and later on, again, with a
persistent disregard of future consequences which only the overwhelming
disconsolation of his situation could have inspired.

The wind stiffened and at last he was obliged to take down his sail,
out of sheer lack of energy to continue his battle with fate.  He lay
down under the bow for a long time.

The pitching of the yawl increased.  Finally a larger sea than usual
sent nearly a barrel of water over the deck, that streamed down upon
his legs.  Fear roused him to action once more.

He began bailing frantically with his hat, and soon had the boat dry
again.  As he remained aft, no more seas were shipped, though the wind
was increasing, and by certain signs he felt that rougher weather might
be imminent.  Clouds were rising, and though he did not like their
appearance, it was some relief when they shaded him from the now
declining heat of the sun.

As night approached, the wild waste of waters looked terribly stern and
forbidding.  Occasionally a distant breaking of some white capped wave
would send his heart into his mouth, only to sink again despairingly.

Just at sunset the great luminary peered gloriously forth.  Torturing
as was its power at midday, now it seemed to Ralph as if a friend were
bidding him farewell.  When the last of its golden surface had
vanished, he felt as if that friend had departed, never to return, at
least to him.

For hours he sat after that, while a gloom as of death settled over the
ocean, broken only by the plash of waves and the constant creaking of
the yawl as it rolled and pitched in the trough of the sea.

Once a shower of rain, accompanied by a slight flurry of wind, set him
to trembling, as he remembered the fury of the squalls in those
latitudes.  He felt that his frail shallop would never live through one.

Though in the tropics, he became chilly as the night advanced, while
the pain of hunger was but partially eased by the drafts of water of
which he still partook from time to time.  He finally lay down in the
stern and wrapped himself in the sail.

The pitching and rolling soon sent him to sleep, in a merciful relief
to the gnawing sense of misery that now never left his mind while awake.

A ship's yawl, being both broad and deep, is one of the safest of small
boats in a seaway.  Therefore Ralph passed the hours in temporary
security while unconscious.  Unless a gale should rise, there was
little danger of his craft's swamping, nor, except from hunger, was his
physical situation any worse than during the day.

The most appalling thing connected with such a position was the
feelings which it must necessarily arouse, and until day Ralph was
exempted from these.

When he rubbed his eyes at dawn he lay there dreading to rise.  The
loneliness of the sea renewed its terrors at once, and he feared to
look upon a scene of which he was the sole living element.

"I'm getting to be a regular baby," he said aloud.  "I wonder what
grandfather would say could he see me now.  I am at least away from
that old feud, if I never was before."

This allusion led him into a reverie upon the strangeness of the fate
that had led him half across the world in order to free himself from a
senseless quarrel, and to be pursued by it to an extent that had left
him free from its influence only when he was facing death in his
present forlorn condition.

He had been sent to Shard, whom he should have avoided as a relative of
the Vaughn faction.  Shard had sent him to Gary, while Gary, five
thousand miles away, was wreaking upon the boy all the hatred inspired
by the haters of his family far back in the Southern mountains.

At last he raised his head and peered out upon the watery waste.  As
his gaze swept from one side to the other an exclamation of amazement
dropped from his lips and he sprang to his feet.

Scarcely a quarter of a mile away was the Wanderer, with her sails all
spread and flapping idly from side to side as she rolled gently upon
the dead swell of the sea.  The wind had died away and the slaver lay
between the yawl and the eastern dawn, a dim yet recognizable bulk.
Her dark, graceful proportions were not to be mistaken.

"This beats the nation!" was Ralph's next ejaculation.  "This is what
one might call pure luck.  Now if I only had a pair of oars."

Not having any, he tried his sail, but found the attempt useless, and
he was compelled to sit there thrilling with impatience to be aboard
once more.  Finally, as he was about to rise and shout, he noticed
something white being waved from one of the stern windows.

While he was puzzling his brain over the meaning of this, a line of
black heads appeared above the bulwarks, and sundry black, naked forms
ran up the rigging.  At the same time a chorus of barbaric yells rang
out, that chilled the boy's blood, even at that distance.

"I wonder if the blacks have got possession of the ship at last," and
with the thought his heart sank as he realized the certain death to all
in case such a thing had taken place.  "If this be so, they have
undoubtedly killed every white aboard."

Ralph's situation now became doubly trying.  To venture to board the
schooner might prove his destruction.  To remain in the yawl was to
court a lingering and terrible death.

Already the pangs of hunger were almost unendurable.  He drank from the
keg, then measured the contents with a splinter.  It was half empty.
Twenty-four more hours of this and then----

"Come what will," he resolved, "I shall try to board the vessel.  One
may as well die one way as another."

After some reflection he took apart his mast and used the six foot
strips as oars, finding that he made a little progress, though the task
was fatiguing and the movement exasperatingly slow.

Meanwhile the noise on the Wanderer grew hideous.  The idle, untrimmed
manner in which the sails swung, was a fearful indication that the
untrained negroes were masters.  When within two hundred yards he took
a careful survey.  The whole deck and the lower rigging were alive with
blacks shouting, gesticulating, acting more like lunatics than sane
beings.

Something at the stern window again attracted his notice.  It was a
handkerchief being waved.  He answered the signal by waving his hat.
Then to Ralph's surprise and delight a white face was cautiously
protruded.

"I'll help that man off or die for it," was his next thought as he bent
once more to the task of rowing.

Had not the ocean been calm he would have made no headway.  As it was,
when he drew up some thirty yards from the schooner's stern, he was for
the moment completely exhausted.

Turning round, he recognized with joy the pale blood-stained face at
the window.

"In heaven's name!" cried the boy.  "What has happened?  Are any more
of you alive?"




CHAPTER XXV.

The Second Mate's Story.

The face at the window was that of Jacob Duff, the second mate.  He
shook his head in a melancholy way and beckoned with his hand.

"Come a little closer.  The blacks are drunk and have exhausted their
ammunition.  The magazine is in the lower hold, double locked and they
haven't found it yet."

Ralph slowly pulled under the stern where he would be protected from
missiles.  Over his head was a screaming crowd of savages who, however,
confined themselves to unintelligible threats.

The other boat was gone.  Duff, leaning out, motioned with his hand.

"There is no time for explanations now," said he.  "Let us get away
from here while those demons are too drunk to know how to hinder us.
Heavens, but what a time we've had!"

While speaking he handed out a pair of oars, a bag of ship's biscuit,
and a breaker of water.

Meantime the negroes evidently discovered that the boy was
communicating with some one on board.  The cries and uproar redoubled.
The noise of a crowd surging down the companionway and into the main
cabin could be heard.  Then came a tremendous crash against the door of
the stateroom.

"Hurry up!" exclaimed Duff coolly, handing out the things all in a heap
and scrambling to get through the small aperture himself.  "I braced
the door, but they are battering it down.  Quick, Ralph, pull me
through by the arms."

[Illustration: "Quick, Ralph, pull me through by the arms."]

The boy was none too swift.  Tugging with might and main, he dragged
the mate through and both fell heavily to the bottom of the yawl,
nearly capsizing the craft, just as the stateroom door gave way.

A stream of frantic blacks swarmed into the little apartment, one of
whom, thrusting his hideous face out at the window, was unceremoniously
pushed through by his comrades.  He fell across the gunwale of the boat
and was shoved overboard by Duff, while Ralph, seizing an oar, placed
an end against the schooner's stern-post and threw all his waning
strength upon it, sending the yawl out from under the shelter of the
ship.

When the negroes saw two whites instead of one they appeared beside
themselves with rage.  A few missiles were thrown; among other articles
a Winchester, which the boy strove in vain to reach as it rebounded
from the boat's bow into the sea.  Duff was struck with a marlin-spike,
but he still clung to the oar he was trying to use.  Another black
plunged through the window into the water, while several threw
themselves from the deck and began swimming towards the boat.

Ralph noticed that Duff could not stand.  He took both oars, and,
notwithstanding his weak condition, soon placed the boat beyond the
reach of pursuit.

The blacks, realizing this, turned and were swimming back to the
schooner, when one of them rose half his length from the water, sending
forth a piercing cry of agony.  Then he was suddenly jerked beneath the
waves, as if by some powerful though unseen agency.

"What did that?" exclaimed Ralph, horror stricken.

"Sharks," returned Duff sententiously, pointing to several dark pointed
fins that now appeared, all making for the schooner.  "The rascals are
never far away from a ship in these latitudes."

"This is horrible!" exclaimed the lad, pulling on one oar to turn the
boat round.

"What are you doing?" demanded Duff.

"I am going to try and save some of those niggers.  I know they are
bad; but we made them so.  I can't stand it, I tell you, to see them
eaten up in that way.  Look!"

There came another shriek, and a second trail of blood rose to the
surface of the sea as another victim was dragged beneath.

"I know," replied Duff.  "But--self preservation first.  Lock there,
will you!"

Regardless of their screaming comrades who were trying to reach the
ship, the blacks on board were striving to turn the big Long Tom
amidships so as to bring it to bear upon the yawl.

"That cannon is loaded--with slugs and scrap iron.  Captain had it done
in order to sweep the decks, if necessary.  But they gave us no chance
and the load is in it yet.  Give me an oar.  Pull now--for your life!
Lucky it is they don't know much about sighting a gun."

Suiting his action to his words the mate literally forced the lad to
obey.  Other cries sounded, and Ralph caught a glimpse of two or three
scrambling on board again by the aid of a rope that happened to hang
over the side.

His strength was nearly gone, and only an intense resolution kept him
to his task at the oar.  Duff, behind Ralph, also pulled away, though
the strain caused him to groan now and then.

"Are you hurt?" asked the boy as they drew rapidly away from the now
dreaded ship.

"Leg broke.  Shot below the knee.  Hist!  They are going to try it now."

A large negro was hastening from the cook's galley with a flaming
brand.  The instant of suspense that followed was awful.  A bright
flash followed, and as the accompanying roar met their ears a harsh
spattering and hissing beyond relieved their anxiety immensely.

Not a thing touched the boat or its occupants.

"Overshot--by thunder!" cried Duff with an exulting whoop, that ended
in a groan of pain.  "We are all right now; the beggars can never
reload.  They don't know how, and be hanged to 'em!"

After that, while resting, Ralph briefly related his own adventures,
though touching lightly upon his suffering for food and the pain of his
wound.

"You've had a time of it, sure," replied Duff.  "Yet it was lucky for
you and me both that you parted company with us as you did.  Ah! 'twas
a very trying day yesterday and a fearful time last night.  Eat a bite,
lad.  I can't till I've tried to do something for my leg."

So Ralph fell to on the bag of biscuit and the keg of water, while Duff
bathed and bound up his leg as best he could.  The bone had been
fractured just above the ankle by a bullet.

Fortunately it was an easy though painful matter to straighten the
limb, as nothing had been unjointed.  A spare shirt and some of the
canvas sufficed to keep the bone in place after a fashion.  As Duff
said grimly:

"It will do until we're picked up; and if we ain't picked up, it will
do anyhow."

Ralph, after eating, dressed his own wound, and the two made themselves
as comfortable as possible under the circumstances.  The mate's account
of what happened after Ralph's drifting away was in substance as
follows.

Things remained tolerably quiet for several hours after the defeat of
the attempt on the part of the blacks to gain the deck by way of the
forecastle.  It was concluded that the negroes were sleeping off the
effect of the rum they must have taken.  As most of the water was
below, they probably quenched their thirst without stint.

Meanwhile, on deck things looked more blue than ever.  The whites were
without provisions, nearly everything in that line being in the store
rooms below.  A large breaker of water was on tap in the waist, which,
with some ship's biscuits, formed their only diet that morning.

No sail was sighted all that day.  Ralph's absence was detected only
when it was found that one of the boats was gone.  Gary swore some at
the loss of the last, but seemed relieved rather than otherwise over
the fate of the boy.

"He's gone and a good riddance," said he.  "We're short of help, but we
can stand the loss of the cub better than that of the boat."

During the day the blacks below threw overboard the bodies of the
slain, having no fire wherewith to indulge their cannibalistic tastes.
One of the wounded seamen died and was consigned to the deep by his
desperate comrades.

The hours wore on until the strain of anxiety lest the blacks should
fire the ship, or renew their assaults, grew unendurable.  Some
proposed a desperate charge down the gangway with cutlasses and loaded
rifles.  Could they once force the blacks into the main hold, the
howitzer might again be trained on them.  One fatal discharge, said
these bolder ones, would cow the negroes into submission.

But Gary, who was no coward, would not allow any such rashness.  What
could seven men do against a hundred?  The negroes now had a few
weapons; they had all the ammunition but what was in the magazines of
the Winchesters.

"We must wait, keep cool, and watch for a sail," said the captain.  "In
rescue and in keeping these beggars below decks lies our hope."

"What will we do when our grub gives out?" asked some one.

"Die like men when the time comes, I hope," replied Gary, with grim
determination.

He was as game as he was heartless and cruel.  But later on one of the
men found a demijohn of liquor in the cook's pantry.  Neb, thoroughly
cowed by his uncivilized brethren below, had deserted his post and was
in hiding somewhere.  The liquor was secretly hidden away, and the men
began drinking.

By the time Gary found out what was up, every one but himself and Duff
was recklessly intoxicated.  He made a search for the stuff, but was
recalled by another effort of the blacks to force open one of the
hatches.

The attempt was foiled, but night had fallen before Gary found where
the liquor was hidden.  He promptly broke the demijohn, and was knocked
down thereupon by one of the drunken sailors.  This led to a general
melee on the quarter deck, where the row began.

The forecastle was entirely deserted by the men, who were maddened by
the destruction of their liquor.  Duff used his efforts to part them,
but growing uneasy over the unguarded state of the ship, he started to
go forward.

He had hardly reached the main deck when he saw a black form leaping
out of the forecastle.  The blacks, taking advantage of the fight
overhead, and the absence of a guard, had battered down the bulkhead
between the main hold and the sailors' sleeping quarters with the very
howitzer which had been mounted below for their subjection.

Duff raised the alarm, but it was too late.  Scores of negroes poured
upon the decks, now dimly lighted by ship's lanterns, and fell upon
their oppressors with a fury intensified by rum and a sense of
cruelties that had been inflicted upon them when bound and helpless.

They had armed themselves with knives, pieces of furniture converted
into clubs--anything that could be had.  Those who had Winchesters
opened a wild though almost useless fire on the whites, then clubbed
their guns.

One ball did indeed strike the second mate, and another put out the two
lanterns, leaving the after part of the ship in darkness.  But the
terrible conflict was over soon.

The last Duff saw of Gary he was backed against the main mast defending
himself.  One arm hung useless, as he faced a circle of savage,
merciless faces.  Then one of the negroes felled the captain from
behind, and a shower of blows was rained upon his prostrate figure.

Duff, who had done his part during the fighting, managed to make his
way to the quarter deck by striking down a negro or two who opposed
him.  It was then that he was shot.

Realizing that all was over, and determined to sell his life as dearly
as possible, he limped to the stern, and awaited his fate.  As if by an
inspiration, he thought of his stateroom which, as far as he knew,
might have remained locked after he had abandoned it upon the first
breaking forth of the blacks.

For the moment he was unobserved in the darkness that now reigned aft.
The negroes had just brought forth Neb's body, and were manifesting
their disapproval of his association with the whites by beating and
kicking the inanimate clay.

Duff, despite the pain of his fractured limb, lowered himself by a rope
to the still open window, and managed to pull himself through into his
stateroom, and drag his body to his berth.  Here the agony of his wound
overcame him, and he fell into a deep swoon.




CHAPTER XXVI.

Hard Times.

When the second mate revived there were sounds of high rejoicing
overhead.  He saw that the fastenings of his door had not been
disturbed.

After dressing his wound as best he could, he set about securing the
best possible means of prolonging and perhaps saving his life.  If the
drink-crazed blacks could be kept out of his stateroom, it might be
that he would not be molested until some passing vessel, noting the
unseaman-like appearance and maneuvers of the Wanderer would come to
his rescue.

The blacks evidently did not know of his whereabouts, but considered
that all of their whilom masters had been put to death.  But the chance
for ultimate safety was slight, he felt.

When the schooner might be fired or dismantled in a gale, through
ignorance, he knew not, but he realized that the negroes were liable to
commit almost any blunder.  Again, the passing ships might not stop.

He also must have something to eat and drink, his wound rendering him
especially thirsty.

Limping to the door he listened long and intently.  As far as he could
tell, the entire crowd of blacks were on deck, carousing over their
victory and enjoying the fresh air of which they so long had been
deprived.

He unlocked and peered through the door.  Then he quickly slipped into
the cabin and reconnoitered.  All seemed to be quiet.

Without wasting time he went into the store rooms, secured a bag of
biscuit and filled a breaker with water from one of the butts.
Carrying these into his room he returned and took a pair of spare oars
wherewith to brace his door.

The confusion and waste wrought by the blacks were extreme.  Bread,
meat, and vegetables lay upon the floor.  Boxes and barrels were broken
open and their contents recklessly thrown about.  The rum barrel had
been conveyed to the deck.

Overhead Duff could hear barbaric dancing, whooping and singing.  A
noise at the head of the companion-way caused him to retreat hastily to
his own room, where he softly locked the door and used both oars as
braces.  For the present he was probably safe, as his presence had not
yet been discovered.

All that day the negroes gave themselves over to eating and drinking.
The sails swung idly in the passing breezes, and as the weather was not
boisterous the schooner fared very well.

Duff slept, thought, and nursed his wound.  At times he would look from
his little window for a sail, and when night came he curled down in his
bunk so snugly, that it seemed at times as if things were going on as
usual before the mutiny.  When he looked out in the morning at daylight
the first object he saw was the yawl.

At first he thought it might be the second boat which had been loosened
somehow during the fierce battle on deck.  But when Ralph rose and
looked around, the mate recognized the lad and waved his handkerchief.

He was not a little astonished at the boy's re-appearance, having heard
the shot which wounded Ralph, and having given both lad and yawl up for
lost.

"Well now," remarked Ralph, on the conclusion of the story, "what are
we to do?"

"When the sun gets well up, we will take an observation and make a
reckoning.  Then we'll lay our course for the nearest land.  Perhaps we
may be picked up--perhaps we won't be.  Whatever happens we will make
the grub and water go as far as possible, keep a stiff lip, and trust
to Providence."

While speaking Duff drew forth from the bundle of bedding he had thrown
out, a leather bag.  From this he produced a compass and a sextant.

"Now, lad," said he, "let us enlarge this here sail a bit, and get
ready to do some traveling when the breeze comes."

For an hour or two both man and boy worked until they had the yawl in
as good trim as possible.  Then the mate took an observation by the
sun, cast a reckoning, and informed Ralph that as far as his knowledge
of geography would serve, they were some two hundred miles from the
Cape Verdes.

"We have a fair wind, Ralph, so square away west by nor'west, and leave
this bloody slaver to her fate.  I'm sorry for those niggers, for bad
as they treated us, we got 'em in the fix they're in.  If we speak a
vessel we can go back."

"Mebbe they won't want to," suggested Ralph.

"Salvage," returned Duff briefly.  "There's money in it, you see.  Men
will do about anything for money enough."

For the next two days they kept their course and took turn about in
sailing.  As the last glimpse of the slaver faded into nothingness,
both felt relieved.  They nursed their wounds and endured their
sufferings and privations as best they could.

The third day sundry signs betokening a storm lent an anxious
expression to Duff's face, that soon transferred itself to Ralph's.

The wind stiffened gradually into half a gale and night closed in,
around an ominous and threatening horizon.  Though worn and wearied,
the mate never gave up the tiller all during that black and perilous
siege of darkness.

Ralph bailed and held the main sheet.  When the squalls came he
slackened up or drew in around the cleat as became necessary.

The scene was intensely depressing, hopeless, terrible.  Hardly a word
was spoken save in reference to the management of the boat.

Morning found them greatly exhausted and barely able to keep their
small craft from broaching to.  Had this happened they would have
foundered undoubtedly.

The clouds seemed to press the ocean, confining the view to less than
half a mile in any direction.  The sea was a tumbling mass of gray,
seething billows, that tossed the yawl at pleasure hither and thither,
the rag of sail barely sufficing to keep her head to windward.

Ralph had endured the terrors of the night without a murmur.  But he
had been aboard the yawl now about five days on a diet of bread and
water.  Nature was giving way under the strain.

As he gazed around on the angry scene, where no sign of relenting on
the part of the storm was evident, he turned to Duff and fixed on him a
hopeless look.

"I don't think I can stand it much longer, sir," he said.

The mate's plight was almost as bad; indeed his wound was worse than
Ralph's.  But he was tougher; he had been shipwrecked twice previously.

"Lad," he replied, somewhat sternly, "never give up as long as you can
bat an eye.  That's my doctrine."

And he looked it; so did Ralph a moment later, nor did the boy complain
again.

All that weary day they fought a losing battle against wind and wave,
and when night once more closed in without any sign of clearing
weather, the hearts of both were at the lowest ebb of hope.  Had the
gale increased they must inevitably have been swamped.

Along about two bells in the first night watch the mate, who had never
uttered one word of complaint, groaned aloud.

"Give--me--water," he faltered.  "I--I----"  And he sank forward
against Ralph, and from there to the boat's bottom, where he lay
apparently insensible from exhaustion and pain.

The boy seized the tiller, or the yawl, broaching, would have shipped a
fatal sea.  There was nothing to do but to hold to his post; so after
throwing a blanket over Duff he turned his attention to the boat,
keeping the shred of sail taut, and the bow as much to windward as
possible.

Later on he nodded, but found on awaking that the wind was decreasing.
This cheered him into renewed activity for a time, then he fell asleep
again, and so continued, with brief interludes of wakefulness, until he
felt himself sinking from the seat he had held so long.  Once he
fancied he caught a gleam of stars; and it seemed that a stillness was
pervading the air as the whistle of the wind died into melancholy
murmurings.  After that he remembered nothing more until a voice
penetrated his brain like a trump of doom.

He started up, but fell back weakly.  The mate was steering and half
lying on the bottom of the boat, while shading his eyes with one hand
as he stared over the gunwale.

"Rouse up a bit, lad!" cried Duff, his tones quivering with excitement
and weakness.  "It's a sail--a sail!"

Ralph struggled to his knees and beheld a large ship bearing down upon
them scarcely half a mile away.  The sun was up, and the sky bright and
fair, with a ragged patch of cloud here and there.

"Hurray!" he cried weakly, then his head swam, and he fell back
motionless.

Duff held grimly to his post, even after consciousness had departed.
The rescuing party found him with head drooped upon his arm, while his
nerveless fingers still rested on the tiller.




CHAPTER XXVII.

Uncle Gideon.

The day was well spent when Ralph again came to his senses.  He raised
his head and looked about in a half stupefied wondering way.

The lad was in a small, but well lighted stateroom, plainly yet
comfortably furnished.  A grave looking, middle aged man was feeling
his pulse, while a sailor, neatly dressed in a blue jacket and white
duck trousers, stood behind with a towel over his arm and a bowl of
broth in his hand.

The other was in a navy blue uniform.  The gold lace on his cap and the
shoulder straps betokened one in authority.  Outside, the sun was
shining brightly, while a sound of measured tramping and an occasional
order in commanding tones, indicated something of military precision in
the surroundings.

"Where am I?" asked Ralph, noticing that his hands were rather white
and wasted.

"You are on the United States sloop of war, the Adams, homeward bound,"
replied the officer.  "You were picked up six days ago, and have been
ill ever since.  I am the ship's surgeon."

"Is--is----"

"Yes, Mr. Duff is well," said Dr. Barker, anticipating the boy's
inquiry; "that is except his leg, which is progressing finely.  You
must not talk much--yet.  We ran upon the Wanderer after picking you
up.  Duff related his own adventures and yours, and gave us his
reckoning, taken just after you and he left her.  We found her after a
two days' search, partially dismasted, and the blacks thoroughly cowed
by the gale.  We sent her to St. Paul De Loando, where she will be
appraised and sold.

"It is likely that your share and Mr. Duff's of the prize money will be
considerable, as but for you two we would not have made the capture.
As you were deceived when shipping on her as to the object of her trip,
you can not be held responsible for the crime committed by her captain
and owner in violating the law against slave trading.  The negroes of
course will be set free."

The door here opened and Duff entered on crutches, followed by a tall,
sandy whiskered officer, who went up to Ralph at once.

"Well, nephew," said he in a cordial, hearty tone, "how are you?  Well
enough to stand a stiff surprise?"

Ralph wondered weakly, but his perplexity ended in a smile.  It seemed
as if every one was very cordial and that his lines were falling in
pleasant places at last.

He greeted Duff eagerly and looked at the two naval men inquiringly,
remembering the surgeon's warning as to talking.

"This is Chief Quartermaster Gideon Granger, Ralph," said Duff.  "Now
do you know who he is?"

"Gideon Granger was my father's half brother," replied the lad at once.
"He left home before I was born.  Grandfather thought he went to Texas,
but as he never heard from him, we all supposed he was dead.  So--you
are--Uncle Gid."

"Yes, my lad," said Granger.  "You see your grandfather and I didn't
get on together somehow, so one day I tripped anchor and made sail, as
I thought, for the West; but the sight of salt water was too much for
me.  I drifted into a sailor's life, got into the navy, was promoted
during the war, and--here I am.

"Meeting up with you, however, is about the strangest streak of luck I
have happened with yet.  But I am none the less glad to fall in with
one of my own kin.  You're as welcome to me, lad, as I reckon we were
to you and Duff, the morning we sighted you off the Cape Verdes.  When
he told me who you were I was all broke up.  You were pretty well done
for."

"I guess I must have given you some trouble since then," returned
Ralph, reaching for his uncle's hand.  "We did have rather a tough time
in that old boat."

"You did that.  As soon as you were hoisted aboard, Dr. Barker
pronounced you down with coast fever.  That trip up the river Duff
tells me about, probably planted the seeds, and exposure did the
rest--eh, Doc."

The surgeon nodded, then the chief quartermaster added: "But we will be
at Norfolk in a week, then I'll apply for shore leave and you and I
will go down and see the old man."

"He won't want to see me," remarked Ralph, who then briefly related the
circumstances under which he had been driven from home, his encounter
with Shard, and the latter's mode of placing him at Gary's mercy.

The old warrant officer laughed over the silly feud, while sympathizing
with the boy over its sad results.

"You shall take me home," he concluded.  "Father will forgive us both
and we'll liven the old gent up a bit.  Perhaps we can get him down
where he can taste a whiff of salt air, especially if I make a
man-'o-war's man out of his grandson."

The doctor now interposed, and said that Ralph had talked, and been
talked to, enough that day.  So the boy was left to another refreshing
sleep, after enjoying his bowl of chicken broth.

Two days later he was out on deck, where the neatness, precision, and
martial splendor of everything he saw, quite captivated his young
imagination.  When they entered the harbor at Fortress Monroe and
salutes were fired, yards manned, and flags dipped by the Adams and the
friendly foreign war ships anchored there, Ralph felt more than ever
that his vocation was that of a sailor.

True to his word, Uncle Gideon soon started with his nephew for the old
mountain home that he had not seen for more than thirty years.  When
Ralph stood aside, and the stern old man gazed upon his first born, the
meeting and recognition were touching in the extreme.

Ralph was forgiven for outliving the feud, and the final result was
that son and grandson carried the lonely old man with them back to
Norfolk, where he was made comfortable in the "Old People's Home," his
own means, supplemented by Gideon's savings, paying all expenses.

One day the quartermaster came into their boarding-house, and on
entering Ralph's room slapped the lad heartily on the back.

"I've fixed it, nephew," said he jovially.  "My ship sails in three
days, and I was afraid I might not pull you through in time.  But our
captain gave us a lift.  You know he stands in with some of the big
bugs in the navy department at Washington.

"What!" exclaimed Ralph enthusiastically, his eyes glowing, "am I
really to get a berth on the training ship as a naval apprentice?"

"Better than that.  When I made known that your share of the Wanderer
prize money, and what I could spare would pay your way, captain wrote
to his friend at Washington, and the upshot of it all is you're to go
to Annapolis.  Think of that!  One year to prepare for your
examination--four years as a cadet--then an ensign.  Ah, lad!  If I'd
had your chance at your age I might have been at least a lieutenant.
During the war there was more than one such rose to be commodore.  But
bear in mind: I can renew my youth in watching you.  So bear a hand,
lad, and do your best.  You may live to walk your own quarter-deck yet."

"If I do," replied Ralph, seizing his uncle's hard and weather beaten
hand, "it will all be owing to you."

The old veteran grinned, then seemed to remember something.

"Put on your hat, lad," said he.  "We will lay a course for the old man
over at the Home.  You must ask him if fighting for Uncle Sam on sea
isn't better than bushwhacking your neighbors in the mountains."