JEFFERSON AS A TACTICIAN


The word "tactician" is usually applied to military movements, but
it has a broader meaning than this; it embodies the idea  of a
peculiar skill or faculty--a nice perception or discernment which
is characterized by adroit planning or management, artfully directed
in politics or diplomacy in government.

    "Of all creatures the sense of tact is most exquisite in
    man"--Ross: Microcosmia.

                "To see in such a clime,
        Where science is new, men so exact
        In tactic art"--Davenant Madagascar.

True statesmanship is the masterful art. Poetry, music, painting,
sculpture and architecture please, thrill and inspire, but the great
statesman and diplomatist and leader in thought and action convinces,
controls and compels the admiration of all classes and creeds. Logical
thought, power of appeal and tactfulness never fail to command attention
and respect. It has always been thus, and it will unquestionably so
remain. Many really able and brilliant men, however, lack balance and
the faculty of calculation. They are too often swayed by emotions, and
their intellectual powers, which otherwise might exert a controlling
influence, are thus weakened, and often result in failure. True
greatness in a man is gauged by what he accomplished in life, and the
impress he left upon his fellow-men. It does not consist of one act, or
even of many, but rather their effect upon the times in which he lived,
and how long they endure after the actor is gone from the throng of the
living.

At the bar, in the pulpit, in the medical profession, and especially
in political life, _tact_ is the _sine qua non_ to the highest degree
of individual success. However gifted one may be, he cannot win
conspicuous laurels in any calling or avocation, if he be deficient in
tactfulness. The man who best understands human nature, knows how to
approach people, and possesses the art of leading them, is the one who
will invariably have the largest following and will possess the
greatest amount of influence over his fellows. The fact cannot be
disputed that men of great brilliancy of intellect, without tact, have
been distanced by others far less talented, who possessed the knack of
getting near to the masses with the object in view to lead and control
them. A military commander who knows how to muster and marshal his men
so as to make them most effective when a battle is pending, will be
unquestionably successful in manoeuvres and successful also in
battle; and it is equally true in statecraft, and in the learned
professions as well. The skillful tactician is master of every
situation and is the victor in every important contest. But more than
in any other calling is this true in politics. The successful leader in
legislative bodies,--he whose name is recorded on the legislative
journal as the author of the most important measures which are enacted
into laws--is, without exception, that member who is tactful,
thoughtful, industrious and sincere. It makes no difference how great
his natural endowments may be, if he be wanting in these elements his
success will be restricted to a narrow sphere; and the greatest of
these is tactfulness.

The world's great tacticians are few. In America I can mention but
three who are deserving of first rank,--Thomas Jefferson, Henry Clay
and James G. Blaine. Neither represented the same generation, and
neither was the exact counterpart of the others, but all of them were
renowned in their ability to control their fellow-men. Each possessed
that peculiar magnetic power to draw men around them and to win their
confidence and support. Each had but to say the word, and his wishes
were carried out. Each needed only to give the command to follow, and,
like drilled soldiers, the multitudes fell into line and were obedient
to every order. They were evidently cast in a peculiar mould, and that
particular mould is limited seemingly to a single man in every
generation. Why it is thus we know not, and yet we know that it is so.
As the precentor in a choir leads the masses with his baton, and under
correct leadership they rarely miss a note, so does the great tactician
issue his commands, and his wishes are supreme. I here write Jefferson,
Clay and Blaine as America's intrepid leaders and commanders in civil
life; these three, and the greatest of these was Jefferson, as he
seemed to have learned in early life, more than any of his compeers,
that a little management will often avoid resistance, which a vast
force will strive in vain to overcome; and that it is wisdom to grant
graciously what he could not refuse safely, and thus conciliate those
whom he was otherwise unable to control.

In referring to a man who possesses a high grade of capacity in a
particular calling, we usually say he is _able_--_an able man_. The
term able, therefore, signifies more than _capable_, more than
well-informed, whether applied to an artist, a general, a man of
learning, or a judge. A man may have read all that has been written on
war, and may have seen it, without being _able_ to conduct a war. He
may be capable of commanding, but to acquire the name of an _able_
general he must command more than once with success. A judge may know
all the laws, without being _able_ to apply the principles of law
properly. A learned man may not be able either to speak, or to write,
or to teach in a commanding manner. An able man, then, is he who makes
a valuable use of what he knows. A capable man can do a thing; an able
one does it. The term _able_ cannot, therefore, be properly applied to
genius. It is not correct, according to my way of thinking, to say an
"able poet," an "able painter," an "able musician," an "able orator,"
an "able sculptor," because it is talent or genius, or both, that gives
one rank in these callings in life, or in these particular undertakings.
The word "able," as I understand it, is applicable to those arts only
which involve the exercise of the mind as a controlling factor. One may
be a great orator, according to the usual acceptation of the term
"great," and yet be only a declaimer and a rhetorician. That is to say,
he may be able to captivate audiences by his superior _action_, as
Demosthenes defines oratory to be, and at the same time his elocution
and rhetoric may be unexceptionable, yet he maybe in fact totally
lacking in every element which goes to make up real greatness.

It may be correctly claimed that one may win distinction and renown by
energy and tact, and yet be deficient in both wit and learning. But
usually men are measured by the success they make in life, just as a
carpenter is measured by his "chips"; and accepting this measure, it is
exceedingly rare to find one who reaches above the rank of a ward
politician, unless he possesses those real elements of greatness which
I choose to class as honesty, sobriety, manliness, sympathy, energy,
education, knowledge and fairness. I agree that a great tactician may
not _per se_ be a great man, but I do say that one who possesses this
element, usually embodies those other elements which are accepted
ordinarily as the true ingredients of greatness.

Jefferson did not rank in oratory with the Adamses, the Randolphs,
James Otis and Patrick Henry, who were contemporaneous with him. He
was, therefore, not by nature great in the sphere of oratory, and in
his public utterances he does not always show the habit of radical
thought which gave the great Democratic party, which lived and ruled
our country throughout the larger part of the nineteenth century, that
tremendous moral force peculiar to that marvelous organization which he
founded and fostered throughout his long, useful and eventful life. Yet
his speeches, if they may be classed as such, were clear, logical,
forceful, convincing. In politics, in literature, in everything that
concerned the world's forward movement in his day, his intellectual
sympathies were universal, or as nearly so as it was possible for any
man's to be. Men less learned and with lesser power of reason and
thoughtfulness than he, have moved audiences to frenzy and have carried
them at will; but Jefferson, without this peculiar gift, certainly
possessed a sufficiency of this power, which the broad culture of the
scholar and the steadfast tension of the thinker can give to any man.
His addresses and writings are pregnant with profound aphorisms, and
through his great genius transient questions were often transformed
into eternal truths. His arguments were condensed with such admirable
force of clearness that his utterances always found lodgment in the
minds of both auditors and readers. Sensitive in his physical
organization, easily moved to tenderness, and incapable of malice, he
had that ready responsiveness to his own emotions as well as to those
of others, which always characterizes genius.

While it may be said that oratory was not an art with Jefferson, yet
his ideas on all governmental questions were always so clear and strong
and well matured that he never failed to express them forcefully and
effectively. His wonderful intellect, upon all important occasions,
never failed to take hold on principle, justice, liberty and moral
development, without which, as a part of its essence, the greatest mind
can never express itself adequately. His State papers and his addresses
and writings reveal the highest order of intellect, and are marked with
a degree of originality peculiarly Jeffersonian. The doctrines he
proclaimed and the principles he promulgated were so logical and sound
that they are cherished yet, and it is believed by millions of our
countrymen that they are as imperishable as the stars. Jefferson's
philosophical ideas of democratic government are as much alive to-day
as they were when he was at the zenith of his glory in life, and this
cannot be said of any other illustrious American who was
contemporaneous with him. It may be truthfully claimed that the lamp of
liberty, which he, perhaps more than any other one American of his
times helped to light, will never go out; and it may also be stated,
with an equal degree of truthfulness, that the brilliant star of his
own personal and political greatness will never set.

Some American writers have, from their standpoints of review,
animadverted upon certain alleged weaknesses of Jefferson as a great
national character. Although I do not indorse his position as favoring
"States' Rights" and a Federal Government of restricted powers, as over
against the broader doctrine promulgated by Washington, Adams, Jay and
Hamilton, of a centralized government or Union which, when national
questions are involved, should be, at all times, the supreme power of
the country, yet I concede to him wonderful foresight in advocating a
Constitution that would grant to the States the greatest possible
latitude. Other critics have also barked along the trail of this
distinguished man of destiny, charging him with being a demagogue, a
jingoist, an infidel and the like, but their barking has made him all
the greater, and has added new laurels to his marvelous career. Faults
he may have had, but who has not? Weaknesses he may have had, but who
is universally wise and strong? Burke, in his incomparable speech in
the English Parliament on the East India bill, spoke for many great men
in history when he thus alluded to the younger Fox: "He has faults; but
they are faults, that though they may, in a small degree, tarnish the
lustre, and sometimes impede the march of his abilities, have nothing
in them to extinguish the fire of great virtues. In those faults there
is no mixture of deceit, of hypocrisy, of pride, of ferocity, of
complexional despotism, or want of feeling for the distress of
mankind."

Like Charles James Fox, to whom Edmund Burke referred, Thomas Jefferson
was the foremost Commoner of his day, and he allowed no opportunity to
pass unimproved, to lift the common people to higher conceptions of
life and duty. Such men are rare, and I am glad to be able
conscientiously to place the name of Thomas Jefferson, in many
important respects, and particularly as the champion of the rights of
the common people, pre-eminently above all the other distinguished
Americans of his generation; and I wish it understood that I make this
statement upon a fair comprehensive knowledge of the acts and works of
the leading men of that period of our country's history.

Jefferson in early life accepted the idea or theory that the first and
most general truth in history is that men ought to be free. He
evidently felt that if happiness is the end of the human race, then
freedom is the condition, and that this freedom should not be a kind of
a half escape from thralldom and tyranny, but it should be ample and
absolute. This theory is most admirably expressed in the opening of the
Declaration of Independence, of which he was the sole author, and which
was adopted almost literally as he wrote it: "We hold these truths to
be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they are endowed
by their Creator with certain inalienable rights; that among these are
life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness; that to secure these rights
governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from
the consent of the governed; that whenever any form of government
becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to
alter or abolish it, and to institute a new government, laying its
foundations, and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall
seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness." Democratic
principles cannot be more clearly expressed than in the language above
quoted, nor can any creed be more clearly defined. It is but just to
state, therefore, that no individual American represents more
distinctively the constructive power of the principles of popular
government than Thomas Jefferson, who was then as now the greatest of
all Virginians save one--Washington. In all of his public acts he was
upheld by his confidence in the people, and he was so tactful at all
times that he never allowed himself to wander at any great distance
from the masses of his fellows. His faith in the reserve power of the
people was imposing, and by this trustfulness he stamped himself as the
matchless leader of his times, and among the greatest leaders of all
times. Excepting, perhaps, Washington and Lincoln, the name of
Jefferson is the most conspicuous of all Americans, and will endure
longest in the annals of the history of the Great Republic, because it
must be conceded that his theories of government have had more
influence upon the public life of America than those of any other
American citizen, living or dead.

There was a sympathy between his heart and the great popular heart,
which time and conditions have never shaken. Expressions from his
writings have become axioms, creeds and rallying cries to great
multitudes of his countrymen. Three quarters of a century have elapsed
since his death, and yet his ideas, doctrines and teachings are still
quoted and accepted without any apparent diminution of their influence.
Cicero had in mind an exact prototype of Jefferson when he said,
"_Homines ad deos nulla re propius accedunt quam salutem hominibus
dando._"[1]

      [1] There is no way by which man can approach nearer to the gods
      than by contributing to the welfare of their fellow creatures.

Authentic history shows a persistent tendency of the Anglo-Saxon race
in the unswerving direction of personal liberty. The inhabitants of the
American Colonies revealed a tenacity and self-assertiveness in this
direction to a greater extent than had ever been shown in England. The
Jeffersonian idea has ever been that there shall be no king; that the
sovereign ruler should be placed on the same level and be judged by the
same principles as the humblest citizen; that the lords of the manors
are entitled to no more privileges than the poorest peasant; that these
rights are inalienable, and that any government which disregards them
must of necessity be tyrannical.

In his introduction to De Tocqueville's able "Democracy in America,"
Mr. John T. Morgan thus describes the formative period of the American
Republic, a period in which the name of Thomas Jefferson must, if
justice be meted out to him, appear in every chapter, and in every
important achievement that was then made:

"In the eleven years that separated the Declaration of the Independence
of the United States from the completion of that act in the ordination
of our written Constitution, the great minds of America were bent upon
the study of the principles of government that were essential to the
preservation of the liberties which had been won at great cost and with
heroic labors and sacrifices. Their studies were conducted in view of
the imperfections that experience had developed in the government of
the Confederation, and they were, therefore, practical and thorough.
When the Constitution was thus perfected and established, a new form of
government was created, but it was neither speculative nor experimental
as to the principles on which it was based. If they were true
principles, as they were, the government founded upon them was destined
to a life and an influence that would continue while the liberties it
was intended to preserve should be valued by the human family. Those
liberties had been wrung from reluctant monarchs in many contests, in
many countries, and were grouped into creeds and established in
ordinances sealed with blood, in many great struggles of the people.
They were not new to the people. They were consecrated theories, but no
government had been previously established for the great purpose of
their preservation and enforcement. That which was experimental in our
plan of government was the question whether democratic rule could be so
organized and conducted that it would not degenerate into license and
result in the tyranny of absolutism, without saving to the people the
power so often found necessary of representing or destroying their
enemy, when he was found in the person of a single despot."

In this excerpt the true democratic principles upon which the American
Republic was founded, and which principles were largely conceived and
put in shape by Thomas Jefferson, are clearly and concisely set forth.
De Tocqueville, born and reared amid monarchial surroundings, though
brilliant and learned as he was, could not measure the depths to which
Jefferson had dug into the labyrinths of free thought and free
institutions, and the consequence was that all of his conjectures as to
the life and perpetuity of a government based upon the will and wishes
of its subjects could not endure, went for naught, and subjected him to
a just criticism not only by the advocates of such a government, but by
the government itself. Daniel Webster in the Senate of the United
States, while defending the doctrines of universal liberty, for which
the State of Massachusetts had always stood, in his great speech in
reply to Senator Hayne, of South Carolina, exclaimed in stentorian
voice, "I shall enter on no encomium upon Massachusetts; she needs
none. There she is. Behold her and judge for yourself. There is her
history; the inhabitants know it by heart." So we can say to De
Tocqueville, who had said of the Government of the United States, that
it is all sail and no ballast, and that it possessed no power to resist
internal strife, and, therefore, could not endure: there she is; she
needs no encomium by us; there she stands, and she has stood firmly in
the face of all sorts of opposition for more than a hundred years, and
we believe she will endure forever!

In close relationship to that reign of democratic government which
Jefferson so earnestly sought to establish, lies, in open view, the
necessity for the education of the people, and to its accomplishment he
dedicated, in early life, his talents and his energies. He saw then,
and we, at this later period of our national growth and development,
realize it all the more, that the strength and perpetuity of all free
governments rest mainly upon the education of their subjects. Without
it such governments fall easy victims to ignorant military captains and
civil demagogues of low repute. Free government is better than monarchy
in proportion to the intelligence of the governed. Where every citizen
has by systematic training been rooted and grounded in the fruitful
soil of knowledge, the principles and practices of self-restraint, and
the generous ways of freedom, his loyalty to country cannot easily be
shaken, nor can he easily be drawn into hostile schemes against the
government that protects him. Jefferson saw clearly the necessity of a
general system of education, and was among the very first to move in
the direction of its establishment. He was so earnest an advocate of
the necessity for and the advantages of education, that he never
relaxed his efforts, although vigorously opposed by many of his able
associates, until he established the University of Virginia to be
finally supported by the State, as an open forum for the education of
the young men of the Commonwealth; and his biographers inform us that
he regarded this the most important achievement of his great career. In
fact, he esteemed this victory so highly that he directed the words to
be placed upon his tombstone at Monticello--"Founder of the University
of Virginia." No act of his revealed more fully than this the tactician
and the statesman, and no single act of his, although his entire career
was strewn with great deeds, did so much to usher in a golden era of
humanity and an universal monarchy of man, which, under God, is coming
by and by.

Jefferson began public life early. Shortly after his graduation from
William and Mary's College, the oldest educational institution in
Virginia, he took up the study of law, and within a very few years he
had gathered about him a profitable clientage. In this, the foremost of
the learned professions, his genius as a tactician was early displayed.
On account of his comparative youthfulness and the limited time that he
had been at the bar, he could not, in the nature of things, have been
an erudite lawyer, and yet the registry of the courts before which he
practised showed that in the fourth year, after he became a barrister,
he was employed in four hundred and thirty important cases. No one but
a tactful man, however great his learning, in so short a period of
time, could make a record of that exalted grade. He was, therefore, at
the beginning of his career as a public man, frank, earnest, cordial,
sympathetic in his manner, full of confidence in men, and sanguine in
his views of life, which gave him a grip upon those about him, as a
leader equipped by nature for achievements of the highest and most
important possibilities.

As a delegate to the Second Continental Congress Mr. Jefferson had a
leading share in its deliberations, although that body embraced many of
the most distinguished men of that period. The most important act of
that assembly was the adoption of the Declaration of Independence,
which, as I have already stated, he himself drafted. It is said,
however, that he was most valuable in committee work, because of the
aptness of his sensible and methodical mind, and the ingenuity he
possessed in putting his ideas upon paper, and doing it in such a way
as to create but little, if any, antagonisms. In all of the official
stations in which he was placed by his fellow citizens, by means of his
talents for constructive statesmanship, and his persuasive and
conciliatory spirit, he invariably displayed a remarkable talent for
tact in parliamentary leadership.

Military chieftains often win immortal renown as the result of a single
important battle, and often flash like rush-light stars across the sky
of history. But this is not true of men like Jefferson and others of
his class. They _grow_ into great characters, and they build
monuments to their memories which the tooth of time cannot destroy.
There is nothing ephemeral or evanescent in the makeup of their
records. They build not for a day nor a year, but for the centuries.
Indeed, it may be said that they build for eternity, and thus many of
them have builded wiser than they knew. The following is a summary of
Jefferson's achievements:

 1. Jefferson, although eight years at the bar, became a lawyer of
renown, and an acknowledged leader in the profession.

 2. For many years he was a member of the House of Burgesses of
Virginia, and possessed therein an influence almost supreme.

 3. He was a member of different conventions, selected by the people of
Virginia, to consider the state of the colony, to provide against
taxation without representation, and to secure greater liberties for
the people, and was a leader in them all.

 4. He was chairman of the three committees appointed in 1774 by the
Virginia Convention, (1) to provide for the better education of the
people; (2), for the arming of the militia of the colony; and (3), to
draw up a statement of the causes which had impelled the colonies to
take up arms against the mother country.

 5. He was a member of the Continental Congress which adopted the
Declaration of American Independence, and was the writer of that
immortal document, which of itself entitles him to enduring fame. For
more than a century and a quarter it has been read every year in all
parts of the Republic to assembled multitudes on the anniversary of its
ratification, and it has been used as a model by all peoples since its
adoption, who have sought to secure for themselves freedom and
self-government.

 6. He was Governor of Virginia during the latter part of the
Revolution, and at the end of his term of office, the House of
Burgesses publicly thanked him for the able and patriotic services
rendered by him during his administration of that exalted station.

 7. He, while a member of the American Congress after the adoption of
our present Constitution, was the author of the system of coinage
which, with some amendments, is still in vogue in the United States.

 8. He was, in the early years of the Republic, twice commissioned by
Congress as Minister Plenipotentiary to negotiate treaties of commerce
with European States, and in this, as in all other public undertakings,
he exhibited the highest character of tact and diplomacy.

 9. He was five years Minister to France, was exceedingly popular, and
secured several important modifications of the French tariff in the
interests of American commerce.

10. As the first Secretary of State under Washington, he handled, with
consummate skill, the perplexing international questions which grew out
of the war declared by France in 1793, against Holland and Great
Britain.

11. In 1796 he became Vice-President, and was elevated to the
Presidency in 1800, and was reelected in 1804. In this great office he
regarded himself purely as a trustee of the public, and the simplicity
of his customs and his manly demeanor in office brought to him the
confidence of the people of the country at large.

12. The crowning glory of his administration was the purchase of the
territory of Louisiana from France. This single act made his
administration historic, and the people are even now only beginning to
fully appreciate it as they should.

13. In the manner in which he controlled politics during his two terms
as President, which resulted almost in the total absorption or
annihilation of the Federalist party, he exhibited the qualities of a
tactician rarely, if ever, equaled.

14. After forty years of public life, the illustrious Commoner retired
to private life upon his farm at Monticello, and gave his remaining
years to the establishment and building up of the University of
Virginia, which became a noted centre of learning before his death, and
has been, for over three quarters of a century, the leading university
of the South.

Thomas Jefferson was a great man, a great diplomatist, a great
tactician and an illustrious citizen and patriot. His name and his
deeds will be cherished and admired as long as the English language is
read or spoken, and as long as human lips lisp the name of liberty.

[Illustration: Handwritten signature of G. W. Atkinson]

[Illustration: The First Prayer in Congress]




CONTENTS.


                                                                 PAGE

JEFFERSON AS A TACTICIAN. By Hon. George W. Atkinson,
    ex-Governor of West Virginia                                    i

LETTERS WRITTEN WHILE IN EUROPE, 1784-1790                      1-460

  To General Washington, Nov. 14, 1786                              1
  To Monsieur Chas, Dec. 7, 1786                                    5
  To Monsieur Duler, Dec. 8, 1786                                   6
  To Messrs. Wilt, Delmestre and Co., Dec. 11, 1786                 7
  To James Madison, Dec. 16, 1786                                   8
  To Charles Thompson, Dec. 17, 1786                               11
  To Colonel James Monroe, Dec. 18, 1786                           15
  To John Adams, Dec. 20, 1786                                     18
  To Francis Hopkinson, Dec. 23, 1786                              20
  To Benjamin Franklin, Dec. 23, 1786                              23
  To Ezra Stiles, Dec. 24, 1786                                    25
  To C. W. F. Dumas, Dec. 25, 1786                                 26
  To William Carmichael, Dec. 26, 1786                             29
  To Benjamin Vaughan, Dec. 29, 1786                               32
  To John Jay, Dec. 31, 1786                                       35
  To Samuel Osgood, Jan. 5, 1787                                   38
  To M. de Calonnes (Controlleur Générale), Jan. 7, 1787           40
  To John Jay, Jan. 9, 1787                                        41
  To John Adams, Jan. 11, 1787                                     47
  To Colonel David S. Franks, Jan. 11, 1787                        49
  To Monsieur L. W. Otto, Jan. 14, 1787                            50
  To Monsieur le Duc D'Harcourt, Governeur du Dauphin,
    Jan. 14, 1787                                                  52
  To Hector St. John de Crevecoeur, Jan. 15, 1787                  53
  To Colonel Edward Carrington, Jan. 16, 1787                      55
  To M. Du Rival, Jan. 17, 1787                                    59
  To Messrs. S. and J. H. Delap, Jan. 17, 1787                     60
  To Monsieur Soulés, Jan. 19, 1787                                61
  To Monsieur Hilliard d'Auberteuil, Jan. 27, 1787                 62
  To Chevalier de Segond, Jan. 27, 1787                            62
  To James Madison, Jan. 30, 1787                                  63
  To John Jay, Feb. 1, 1787                                        73
  To Monsieur Soulés, Feb. 2, 1787                                 78
  To John Adams, Feb. 6, 1787                                      79
  To Mrs. William Bingham, Feb. 7, 1787                            81
  To Governor Edmund Randolph, Feb. 7, 1787                        84
  To John Jay, Feb. 8, 1787                                        85
  To C. W. F. Dumas, Feb. 9, 1787                                  86
  To Messrs. Borgnis Desbordes Frères, Feb. 12, 1787               88
  To John Adams, Feb. 14, 1787                                     89
  To John Jay, Feb. 14, 1787                                       89
  To M. le Prevôt des Marchands et Echevins de Paris,
    Feb. 18, 1787                                                  90
  To William Carmichael, Feb. 18, 1787                             91
  To Thomas Barclay, Feb. 18, 1787                                 93
  To John Adams, Feb. 20, 1787                                     95
  To John Adams, Feb. 23, 1787                                     96
  To John Jay, Feb. 23, 1787                                       98
  To Richard Peters, Feb. 26, 1787                                100
  To the Marquis de La Fayette, Feb. 28, 1787                     101
  To Madame la Comtesse de Tesse, March 20, 1787                  102
  To the Marquis de La Fayette, April 11, 1787                    106
  To William Short, April 12, 1787                                110
  To John Jay, May 4, 1787                                        111
  To Pierre Guide, May 6, 1787                                    123
  To William Carmichael, June 14, 1787                            125
  To C. W. F. Dumas, June 14, 1787                                128
  To John Bannister, Junior, June 19, 1787                        129
  To James Madison, June 20, 1787                                 131
  To John Jay, June 21, 1787                                      138
  To Madame de Corny, June 30, 1787                               145
  To John Adams, July 1, 1787                                     146
  To David Hartley, July 2, 1787                                  150
  To Benjamin Vaughan, July 2, 1787                               152
  To Dr. William Gordon, July 2, 1787                             154
  To T. B. Hollis, Esq., July 2, 1787                             155
  To John Bondfield, July 2, 1787                                 156
  To James Manny, July 2, 1787                                    157
  To Monsieur l'Abbé Morellet, July 2, 1787                       158
  To T. M. Randolph, Junior, July 6, 1787                         165
  To Edward Rutledge, Esq., July 14, 1787                         169
  To John Adams, July 17, 1787                                    173
  To Joseph Fenwick, July 21, 1787                                174
  To Stephen Cathalan, Junior, July 21, 1787                      175
  To the Delegates of Rhode Island, July 22, 1787                 178
  To the Count de Montmorin, July 23, 1787                        180
  To Fulwar Skipwith, July 28, 1787                               187
  To J. W. Eppes, July 28, 1787                                   189
  To Alexander Donald, July 28, 1787                              191
  To William Drayton, July 30, 1787                               193
  To Francis Hopkinson, Esq., Aug. 1, 1787                        205
  To R. Izard, Esq., Aug. 1, 1787                                 209
  To James Madison, Aug. 2, 1787                                  212
  To Thomas Barclay, Aug. 3, 1787                                 216
  To Thomas Barclay, Aug. 3, 1787                                 218
  To Edward Randolph, Aug. 3, 1787                                218
  To the Governor of Virginia (Edmund Randolph), Aug. 3, 1787     220
  To William Hay, Aug. 4, 1787                                    223
  To Dr. David Ramsay, Aug. 4, 1787                               225
  To Edward Carrington, Aug. 4, 1787                              227
  To Dr. James Currie, Aug. 4, 1787                               229
  To Benjamin Hawkins, Aug. 4, 1787                               231
  To Colonel James Monroe, Aug. 5, 1787                           233
  To the Honorable Commissioners of the Treasury, Aug. 5, 1787    235
  To John Jay, Aug. 6, 1787                                       239
  To Governor Edward Rutledge, Aug. 6, 1787                       250
  To Hector St. John de Crevecoeur, Aug. 6, 1787                  252
  To Colonel Richard Claiborne, Aug. 8, 1787                      253
  To John Churchman, Aug. 8, 1787                                 254
  To Monsieur de L'Hommande, Aug. 9, 1787                         255
  To Peter Carr, Aug. 10, 1787                                    256
  To Dr. George Gilmer, Aug. 11, 1787                             263
  To Colonel T. M. Randolph, Aug. 11, 1787                        266
  To the Reverend James Madison, Aug. 13, 1787                    269
  To the Honorable J. Blair, Aug. 13, 1787                        272
  To Joseph Jones, Aug. 14, 1787                                  273
  To General George Washington, Aug. 14, 1787                     274
  To Colonel David Humphreys, Aug. 14, 1787                       278
  To John Jay, Aug. 15, 1787                                      280
  To James Madison, Aug. 15, 1787                                 281
  To the Count del Vermi, Aug. 15, 1787                           282
  To John Adams, Aug. 30, 1787                                    285
  To Monsieur le Comte de Montmorin, Sept. 8, 1787                289
  To Andrew Limozin, Sept. 9, 1787                                291
  To T. Blake, Sept. 9, 1787                                      293
  To John Bondfield, Sept. 9, 1787                                293
  To C. W. F. Dumas, Sept. 10, 1787                               294
  To Don Francisco Chiappi, Sept. 15, 1787                        295
  To George Wythe, Sept. 16, 1787                                 296
  To David Rittenhouse, Sept. 18, 1787                            301
  To the Honorable Commissioners of the Treasury,
    Sept. 18, 1787                                                303
  To John Jay, Sept. 19, 1787                                     304
  To Charles Thompson, Sept. 20, 1787                             311
  To John Jay, Sept. 22, 1787                                     314
  To John Jay, Sept. 22, 1787                                     315
  To Burrill Carnes, Sept. 22, 1787                               318
  To Andrew Limozin, Sept. 22, 1787                               319
  To John Jay, Sept. 24, 1787                                     320
  To John Adams, Sept. 28, 1787                                   321
  To Colonel William S. Smith, Sept. 28, 1787                     323
  To Monsieur le Comte de Buffon, Oct. 3, 1787                    325
  To C. W. F. Dumas, Oct. 4, 1787                                 327
  To General John Sullivan, Oct. 5, 1787                          328
  To John Jay, Oct. 8, 1787                                       330
  To James Madison, Oct. 8, 17S7                                  335
  To John Jay, Oct. 8, 1787                                       336
  To Monsieur le Comte de Moustier, Oct. 9, 1787                  339
  To Madame de Brehan, Oct. 9, 1787                               340
  To Andrew Limozin, Oct. 9, 1787                                 340
  To C. W. F. Dumas, Oct. 14, 1787                                341
  To Madame de Corny, Oct. 18, 1787                               342
  To the Count de Montmorin, Oct. 23, 1787                        344
  To Monsieur l'Abbé de Morellet, Oct. 24, 1787                   347
  To John Jay, Oct. 27, 1787                                      348
  To John Jay, Nov. 3, 1787                                       349
  To John Jay, Nov. 3, 1787                                       359
  To the Count de Montmorin, Nov. 6, 1787                         363
  To John Jay, Nov. 7, 1787                                       367
  To John Adams, Nov. 13, 1787                                    368
  To Colonel William S. Smith, Nov. 13, 1787                      371
  To James Maury, Nov. 13, 1787                                   374
  To C. W. F. Dumas, Dec. 9, 1787                                 376
  To William Carmichael, Dec. 11, 1787                            378
  To John Adams, Dec. 12, 1787                                    383
  To James Madison, Dec. 20, 1787                                 385
  To Edward Carrington, Dec. 21, 1787                             393
  To John Jay, Dec. 21, 1787                                      397
  To Andrew Limozin, Dec. 22, 1787                                400
  To the Board of Treasury, Dec. 30, 1787                         402
  To John Jay, Dec. 31, 1787                                      404
  To Monsieur Lambert (Controller-General), Jan. 3, 1788          411
  To the Chevalier de Quesnay de Beaurepaire, Jan. 6, 1788        412
  To William Drayton, Jan. 13, 1788                               413
  To le Comte de Bernstorff, Minister of Foreign Affairs,
    Copenhagen, Jan. 21, 1788                                     414
  To William Rutledge, Feb. 2, 1788                               417
  To John Adams, Feb. 6, 1788                                     419
  To the Commissioners of the Treasury, Feb. 7, 1788              421
  To Doctor Price, Feb. 7, 1788                                   424
  To Alexander Donald, Feb. 7, 1788                               425
  To Brissot de Warville, Feb. 12, 1788                           428
  To C. W. F. Dumas, Feb. 12, 1788                                429
  To Monsieur de Bertrous, Feb. 21, 1788                          431
  To Monsieur Trouchin, Feb. 26, 1788                             432
  To John Adams, March 2, 1788                                    434
  To John Jay, March 13, 1788                                     435
  To John Jay, March 16, 1788                                     436
  To C. W. F. Dumas, March 29, 1788                               441
  To the Commissioners of the Treasury, March 29, 1788            443
  To William Short, March 29, 1788                                445
  To General George Washington, May 2, 1788                       447
  To James Madison, May 3, 1788                                   455


[Illustration: David Humphreys
 Photogravure from the Original Painting by Herring]




ILLUSTRATIONS.


JEFFERSON AT SIXTY-TWO                                 _Frontispiece_
  Photogravure from the Original Crayon Drawing by St. Memin

                                                          FACING PAGE

THE FIRST PRAYER IN CONGRESS                                       xx
  Photogravure from the Original Painting by T. H. Matteson

DAVID HUMPHREYS                                                  xxvi
  Photogravure from the Original Painting by Herring

JOHN JAY                                                          366
  Photogravure from the Original Painting by Stuart and Trumbull




CORRESPONDENCE.

LETTERS WRITTEN WHILE IN EUROPE.

1784-1789.




JEFFERSON'S WORKS.

LETTERS WRITTEN WHILE IN EUROPE.

1784-1789.




TO GENERAL WASHINGTON.

PARIS, November 14, 1786.


SIR,--The house of Le Coulteux, which for some centuries has been the
wealthiest of this place, has it in contemplation to establish a great
company for the fur trade. They propose that partners interested one
half in the establishment, should be American citizens, born and
residing in the United States. Yet if I understood them rightly, they
expect that that half of the company which resides here, should make
the greatest part, or perhaps the whole of the advances, while those
on our side of the water should superintend the details. They had,
at first, thought of Baltimore as the centre of their American
transactions. I have pointed out to them the advantages of Alexandria
for this purpose. They have concluded to take information as to
Baltimore, Philadelphia, and New York, for a principal deposit, and
having no correspondent at Alexandria, have asked me to procure a state
of the advantages of that place, as also to get a recommendation of the
best merchant there, to be adopted as partner and head of the business
there. Skill, punctuality and integrity are the requisites in such a
character. They will decide on their whole information, as to the place
for their principal factory. Being unwilling that Alexandria should lose
its pretensions, I have undertaken to procure them information as to
that place. If they undertake this trade at all, it will be on so great
a scale as to decide the current of the Indian trade to the place they
adopt. I have no acquaintance at Alexandria or in its neighborhood; but,
believing you would feel an interest in the matter, from the same
motives which I do, I venture to ask the favor of you to recommend to me
a proper merchant for their purpose, and to engage some well-informed
person to send me a representation of the advantages of Alexandria, as
the principal deposit of the fur trade.

The author of the political part of the "Encyclopédie Methodique"
desired me to examine his article, "Etats Unis." I did so. I found it a
tissue of errors; for, in truth, they know nothing about us here.
Particularly, however, the article "Cincinnati" was a mere philippic
against that institution; in which it appeared that there was an utter
ignorance of facts and motives. I gave him notes on it. He reformed it,
as he supposed, and sent it again to me to revise. In this reformed
state, Colonel Humphreys saw it. I found it necessary to write that
article for him. Before I gave it to him, I showed it to the Marquis de
La Fayette, who made a correction or two. I then sent it to the author.
He used the materials, mixing a great deal of his own with them. In a
work, which is sure of going down to the latest posterity, I thought it
material to set facts to rights as much as possible. The author was
well disposed; but could not entirely get the better of his original
bias. I send you the article as ultimately published. If you find any
material errors in it, and will be so good as to inform me of them, I
shall probably have opportunities of setting this author to rights.
What has heretofore passed between us on this institution, makes it my
duty to mention to you, that I have never heard a person in Europe,
learned or unlearned, express his thoughts on this institution, who did
not consider it as dishonorable and destructive to our governments; and
that every writing which has come out since my arrival here, in which
it is mentioned, considers it, even as now reformed, as the germ whose
development is one day to destroy the fabric we have reared. I did not
apprehend this, while I had American ideas only. But I confess that
what I have seen in Europe has brought me over to that opinion; and
that though the day may be at some distance, beyond the reach of our
lives perhaps, yet it will certainly come, when a single fibre left of
this institution will produce an hereditary aristocracy, which will
change the form of our governments from the best to the worst in the
world. To know the mass of evil which flows from this fatal source, a
person must be in France; he must see the finest soil, the finest
climate, the most compact State, the most benevolent character of
people, and every earthly advantage combined, insufficient to prevent
this scourge from rendering existence a curse to twenty-four out of
twenty-five parts of the inhabitants of this country. With us, the
branches of this institution cover all the States. The southern ones,
at this time, are aristocratical in their dispositions; and, that that
spirit should grow and extend itself, is within the natural order of
things. I do not flatter myself with the immortality of our
governments; but I shall think little also of their longevity, unless
this germ of destruction be taken out. When the society themselves
shall weigh the possibility of evil, against the impossibility of any
good to proceed from this institution, I cannot help hoping they will
eradicate it. I know they wish the permanence of our governments, as
much as any individuals composing them.

An interruption here, and the departure of the gentleman by whom I send
this, oblige me to conclude it, with assurances of the sincere respect
and esteem with which I have the honor to be, dear Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR CHAS.

PARIS, December 7, 1786.


SIR,--I should with great pleasure have perused your manuscript of the
history of the American Revolution, but that it comes to me in the
moment of my setting out on a journey into the south of France, where I
am to pass the winter. In the few moments of leisure which my
preparations for that journey admitted, I have read some detached
parts, and find that it would have been very interesting to me. In one
of these (page 60), I have taken the liberty of noting a circumstance
which is not true, and to which I believe M. d'Aubertueil first gave a
place in history. In page 75, I observe it says that Congress removed
to Hartford, but this is a misinformation. They never sat there. In
general, I would observe to you, that where there is no other authority
for a fact than the history of d'Aubertueil, it will not be safe to
hazard it. These authors have been led into an infinitude of errors,
probably by trusting to the English papers, or to the European ones,
copied from them. It is impossible to resort to a more impure source. I
am much pleased to find, that you concur in the justice of the
principles which produced our revolution, and have only to wish that I
could have been able to go through the whole work. I have the honor to
be, with much respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO M. DULER.

PARIS, December 8, 1786.


SIR,--The circumstance escaped me of my having had the honor of being
made known to you by Mr. Walker at Charlottesville. However, I should
not have been the less ready, had it been in my power, to have aided
you in procuring employment in some bureau here. But a stranger as I
am, unconnected and unacquainted, my solicitations on your behalf would
be as ineffectual as improper. I should have been happy to have been
able to render you this service, as I am sincerely concerned at the
circumstance which has placed you in need of it.

As to the paper money in your hands, the States have not yet been able
to take final arrangements for its redemption. But, as soon as they
shall get their finances into some order, they will surely pay for it
what it was worth in silver at the time you received it, with interest.
The interest on loan-office certificates is, I think, paid annually in
all the States; and, in some of them, they have begun to make payments
of the principal. These matters are managed for foreigners by the
consul of their nation in America, where they have not a private friend
to attend for them. I have the honor to be, Sir, with much respect,
your most obedient humble servant.




TO MESSRS. WILT, DELMESTRE AND CO.

PARIS, December 11, 1786.


GENTLEMEN,--Your favor of the 6th instant is duly come to hand, as had
done that also of the 8th of November. I was much obliged to you for
your observations and information on the late regulations. I have
received and am still receiving from other quarters, other hints for
its improvement. I cannot propose these to the minister as they arrive,
because, besides the perpetual fatigue to him, the business would not
be so well done in the end. As soon as all the defects of the new
arrangement shall be discovered by a little experience, as well as by
their being submitted to the gentlemen concerned in the commerce, I
shall be able, by bringing all the amendments necessary into a single
proposition, to submit them at once to the consideration of the
minister. It will probably be yet some months before this can be done.
In the meantime, we must be contented to submit a little longer to
those remnants of burthen which still rest on our commerce. In this
view, I will still thank you for any new hints of amendment which may
occur to you in experience, assuring you they shall be put to good use,
when the occasion shall serve. I have the honor to be, with much
respect, Gentlemen, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JAMES MADISON.

PARIS, December 16, 1786.


DEAR SIR,--After a very long silence, I am at length able to write to
you. An unlucky dislocation of my right wrist, has disabled me from
using that hand, three months. I now begin to use it a little, but with
great pain; so that this letter must be taken up at such intervals as
the state of my hand will permit, and will probably be the work of some
days. Though the joint seems to be well set, the swelling does not
abate, nor the use of it return. I am now, therefore, on the point of
setting out to the south of France, to try the use of some mineral
waters there, by immersion. This journey will be of two or three
months.

I enclose you herein a copy of the letter from the Minister of Finance
to me, making several advantageous regulations for our commerce. The
obtaining this has occupied us a twelve month. I say _us,_ because I
find the Marquis de La Fayette so useful an auxiliary, that
acknowledgments for his co-operation are always due. There remains
still something to do for the articles of rice, turpentine, and ship
duties. What can be done for tobacco, when the late regulation expires,
is very uncertain. The commerce between the United States and this
country being put on a good footing, we may afterwards proceed to try
if anything can be done, to favor our intercourse with her colonies.
Admission into them for our fish and flour, is very desirable; but,
unfortunately, both those articles would raise a competition against
their own.

I find by the public papers, that your commercial convention failed in
point of representation. If it should produce a full meeting in May,
and a broader reformation, it will still be well. To make us one nation
as to foreign concerns, and keep us distinct in domestic ones, gives
the outline of the proper division of powers between the general and
particular governments. But, to enable the federal head to exercise the
powers given it to best advantage, it should be organized as the
particular ones are, into legislative, executive, and judiciary. The
first and last are already separated. The second should be. When last
with Congress, I often proposed to members to do this, by making of the
committee of the States, an executive committee during the recess of
Congress, and, during its sessions, to appoint a committee to receive
and despatch all executive business, so that Congress itself should
meddle only with what should be legislative. But I question if any
Congress (much less all successively) can have self-denial enough to go
through with this distribution. The distribution, then, should be
imposed on them. I find Congress have reversed their division of the
western States, and proposed to make them fewer and larger. This is
reversing the natural order of things. A tractable people may be
governed in large bodies; but, in proportion as they depart from this
character, the extent of their government must be less. We see into
what small divisions the Indians are obliged to reduce their societies.
This measure, with the disposition to shut up the Mississippi, gives me
serious apprehensions of the severance of the eastern and western parts
of our confederacy. It might have been made the interest of the western
States to remain united with us, by managing their interests honestly,
and for their own good. But, the moment we sacrifice their interests to
our own, they will see it better to govern themselves. The moment they
resolve to do this, the point is settled. A forced connection is
neither our interest, nor within our power.

The Virginia act for religious freedom has been received with infinite
approbation in Europe, and propagated with enthusiasm. I do not mean by
the governments, but by the individuals who compose them. It has been
translated into French and Italian, has been sent to most of the courts
of Europe, and has been the best evidence of the falsehood of those
reports which stated us to be in anarchy. It is inserted in the new
"Encyclopédie," and is appearing in most of the publications respecting
America. In fact, it is comfortable to see the standard of reason at
length erected, after so many ages, during which the human mind has
been held in vassalage by kings, priests, and nobles; and it is
honorable for us, to have produced the first legislature who had the
courage to declare, that the reason of man may be trusted with the
formation of his own opinions.



I thank you for your communications in Natural History. The several
instances of trees, &c., found far below the surface of the earth, as
in the case of Mr. Hay's well, seem to set the reason of man at
defiance.

I am, dear Sir, with sincere esteem, your friend and servant.




TO CHARLES THOMPSON.

PARIS, December 17, 1786.


DEAR SIR,--A dislocation of my right wrist has for three months past,
disabled me from writing except with my left hand, which was too slow
and awkward to be employed often. I begin to have so much use of my
wrist, as to be able to write, but it is slowly, and in pain. I take
the first moment I can, however, to acknowledge the receipt of your
letters of April the 6th, July the 8th and 30th. In one of these, you
say, you have not been able to learn, whether, in the new mills in
London, steam is the immediate mover of the machinery, or raises water
to move it? It is the immediate mover. The power of this agent, though
long known, is but now beginning to be applied to the various purposes
of which it is susceptible. You observe that Whitehurst supposes it to
have been the agent, which bursting the earth, threw it up into
mountains and valleys. You ask me what I think of his book? I find in
it many interesting facts brought together, and many ingenious
commentaries on them. But there are great chasms in his facts, and
consequently in his reasoning. These he fills up by suppositions, which
may be as reasonably denied as granted. A sceptical reader therefore,
like myself, is left in the lurch. I acknowledge, however, he makes
more use of fact, than any other writer on a theory of the earth. But I
give one answer to all these theorists. That is as follows. They all
suppose the earth a created existence. They must suppose a creator
then; and that he possessed power and wisdom to a great degree. As he
intended the earth for the habitation of animals and vegetables, is it
reasonable to suppose, he made two jobs of his creation, that he first
made a chaotic lump and set it into rotatory motion, and then waited
the millions of ages necessary to form itself? That when it had done
this, he stepped in a second time, to create the animals and plants
which were to inhabit it? As the hand of a creator is to be called in,
it may as well be called in at one stage of the process as another. We
may as well suppose he created the earth at once, nearly in the state
in which we see it, fit for the preservation of the beings he placed on
it. But it is said, we have a proof that he did not create it in its
present solid form, but in a state of fluidity; because its present
shape of an oblate spheroid is precisely that which a fluid mass
revolving on its axis would assume.

I suppose that the same equilibrium between gravity and centrifugal
force, which would determine a fluid mass into the form of an oblate
spheroid, would determine the wise creator of that mass, if he made it
in a solid state, to give it the same spheroidical form. A revolving
fluid will continue to change its shape, till it attains that in which
its principles of contrary motion are balanced. For if you suppose them
not balanced, it will change its form. Now, the same balanced form is
necessary for the preservation of a revolving solid. The creator,
therefore, of a revolving solid, would make it an oblate spheroid, that
figure alone admitting a perfect equilibrium. He would make it in that
form, for another reason; that is, to prevent a shifting of the axis of
rotation. Had he created the earth perfectly spherical, its axis might
have been perpetually shifting, by the influence of the other bodies of
the system; and by placing the inhabitants of the earth successively
under its poles, it might have been depopulated; whereas, being
spheroidical, it has but one axis on which it can revolve in
equilibrio. Suppose the axis of the earth to shift forty-five degrees;
then cut it into one hundred and eighty slices, making every section in
the plane of a circle of latitude, perpendicular to the axis: every one
of these slices, except the equatorial one, would be unbalanced, as
there would be more matter on one side of its axis than on the other.
There could be but one diameter drawn through such a slice, which would
divide it into two equal parts. On every other possible diameter, the
parts would hang unequal. This would produce an irregularity in the
diurnal rotation. We may, therefore, conclude it impossible for the
poles of the earth to shift, if it was made spheroidically; and that it
would be made spheroidical, though solid, to obtain this end. I use
this reasoning only on the supposition that the earth has had a
beginning. I am sure I shall read your conjectures on this subject with
great pleasure, though I bespeak, beforehand, a right to indulge my
natural incredulity and scepticism. The pain in which I write awakens
me here from my reverie, and obliges me to conclude with compliments to
Mrs. Thompson, and assurances to yourself of the esteem and affection
with which I am sincerely, dear Sir, your friend and servant.

P. S. Since writing the preceding, I have had a conversation on the
subject of the steam mills, with the famous Boulton, to whom those of
London belong, and who is here at this time. He compares the effect of
steam with that of horses, in the following manner: Six horses, aided
with the most advantageous combination of the mechanical powers
hitherto tried, will grind six bushels of flour in an hour; at the end
of which time they are all in a foam, and must rest. They can work
thus, six hours in the twenty-four, grinding thirty-six bushels of
flour, which is six to each horse, for the twenty-four hours. His steam
mill in London consumes one hundred and twenty bushels of coal in
twenty-four hours, turns ten pair of stones, which grind eight bushels
of flour an hour each, which is nineteen hundred and twenty bushels in
the twenty-four hours. This makes a peck and a half of coal perform
exactly as much as a horse, in one day, can perform.




TO COLONEL MONROE.

PARIS, December 18, 1786.


DEAR SIR,--Your letters of August the 19th and October the 12th, have
come duly to hand. My last to you was of the 11th of August. Soon after
that date I got my right wrist dislocated, which has, till now,
deprived me of the use of that hand; and even now, I can use it but
slowly, and with pain. The revisal of the Congressional intelligence
contained in your letters, makes me regret the loss of it on your
departure. I feel, too, the want of a person there, to whose discretion
I can trust confidential communications, and on whose friendship I can
rely against the unjust designs of malevolence. I have no reason to
suppose I have enemies in Congress; yet it is too possible to be
without that fear. Some symptoms make me suspect, that my proceedings
to redress the abusive administration of tobacco by the Farmers General
have indisposed towards me a powerful person in Philadelphia, who was
profiting from that abuse. An expression in the enclosed letter of M.
de Calonnes, would seem to imply, that I had asked the abolition of Mr.
Morris's contract. I never did. On the contrary, I always observed to
them, that it would be unjust to annul that contract. I was led to
this, by principles both of justice and interest. Of interest, because
that contract would keep up the price of tobacco here, to thirty-four,
thirty-six, and thirty-eight livres, from which it will fall when it
shall no longer have that support. However, I have done what was right,
and I will not so far wound my privilege of doing that, without regard
to any man's interest, as to enter into any explanations of this
paragraph with him. Yet I esteem him highly, and suppose that hitherto
he had esteemed me. You will see by Calonne's letter, that we are doing
what we can, to get the trade of the United States put on a good
footing. I am now about setting out on a journey to the south of
France, one object of which is to try the mineral waters there, for the
restoration of my hand; but another is, to visit all the seaports where
we have trade, and to hunt up all the inconveniences under which it
labors, in order to get them rectified. I shall visit, and carefully
examine too, the canal of Languedoc. On my return, which will be early
in the spring, I shall send you several livraisons of the
"Encyclopédie," and the plan of your house. I wish to heaven, you may
continue in the disposition to fix it in Albemarle. Short will
establish himself there, and perhaps Madison may be tempted to do so.
This will be society enough, and it will be the great sweetener of our
lives. Without society, and a society to our taste, men are never
contented. The one here supposed, we can regulate to our minds, and we
may extend our regulations to the sumptuary department, so as to set a
good example to a country which needs it, and to preserve our own
happiness clear of embarrassment. You wish not to engage in the
drudgery of the bar. You have two asylums from that. Either to accept a
seat in the Council, or in the judiciary department. The latter,
however, would require a little previous drudgery at the bar, to
qualify you to discharge your duty with satisfaction to yourself.
Neither of these would be inconsistent with a continued residence in
Albemarle. It is but twelve hours' drive in a sulky from
Charlottesville to Richmond, keeping a fresh horse always at the
halfway, which would be a small annual expense. I am in hopes that Mrs.
M. will have in her domestic cares, occupation and pleasure, sufficient
to fill her time, and insure her against the _tedium vitæ_; that she
will find, that the distractions of a town, and the waste of life under
these, can bear no comparison with the tranquil happiness of domestic
life. If her own experience has not yet taught her this truth, she has
in its favor the testimony of one who has gone through the various
scenes of business, of bustle, of office, of rambling, and of quiet
retirement, and who can assure her, that the latter is the only point
upon which the mind can settle at rest. Though not clear of
inquietudes, because no earthly situation is so, they are fewer in
number, and mixed with more objects of contentment than in any other
mode of life. But I must not philosophise too much with her, lest I
give her too serious apprehensions of a friendship I shall impose on
her. I am with very great esteem, dear Sir, your sincere friend and
servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY MR. ADAMS.

PARIS, December 20, 1786.


DEAR SIR,--Colonel Franks will have the honor of delivering you the
treaty with the Emperor of Morocco, and all its appendages. You will
perceive, by Mr. Barclay's letter, that it is not necessary that any
body should go back to Morocco to exchange ratifications. He says,
however, that it will be necessary that Fennish receive some testimony
that we approve the treaty; and as, by the acts of Congress, our
signature is necessary to give validity to it, I have had duplicates of
ratifications prepared, which I have signed, and now send you. If you
approve and sign them, send one back to me to be forwarded to Fennish,
through Mr. Carmichael. Perhaps a joint letter should be written to
Fennish; if you think so, be so good as to write and sign one and send
it with the ratification, and I will sign and forward it. The other
ratification is to go to Congress. Colonel Franks wishes to proceed
with the papers to that body. He should do it, I think, immediately, as
Mr. Jay, in a letter to me of October 26th, says that Congress have
heard through the French Chargé des Affaires, that the treaty was
signed, and they wonder they have not heard it from us.

I enclose you a copy of a letter from Mr. Lambe, by which you will
perceive he does not propose to quit Alicant. I will forward the
resolution of Congress to Mr. Carmichael, which was enclosed in yours
of November 30th, to see if that will move him. As the turn of this
resolution admits a construction that Congress may think our original
appointment of him censurable, I have, as in justice I ought, in a
letter to Mr. Jay, taken on myself the blame of having proposed him to
you, if any blame were due. I have enclosed him a copy of my letter to
you of September 24, 1785. Mr. Barclay has proposed to go to Alicant to
settle Lambe's accounts, and asked to be strengthened with our
authority. If Lambe will obey the resolve of Congress, it will be
better to let him go and settle his account there. But if he will not
go back, perhaps it might not be amiss for Mr. Barclay to have
instructions from us to require a settlement, those instructions to be
used in that case only. If you think so, be so good as to write a joint
letter and send it to me. But this, if done at all, should be done
immediately. How much money has Lambe drawn? I have suggested to Mr.
Jay the expediency of putting the Barbary business into Carmichael's
hands, or sending somebody from America, in consideration of our
separate residence and our distance from the scene of negotiation.

I had seen, without alarm, accounts of the disturbances in the East.
But Mr. Jay's letter on the subject had really affected me. However,
yours sets me to rights. I can never fear that things will go far wrong
where common sense has fair play. I but just begin to use my pen a
little with my right hand, but with pain. Recommending myself,
therefore, to the friendship of Mrs. Adams, I must conclude here with
assurances of the sincere esteem of, dear Sir, your friend and servant.

P. S. Should a Mr. Maury, of Virginia, but now a merchant of Liverpool,
present himself to you, I recommend him to your notice, as my old
school-fellow, and a man of the most solid integrity.




TO MR. HOPKINSON.

PARIS, December 23, 1786.


DEAR SIR,--My last letter to you was dated August 14th. Yours of May
27th and June 28th, were not then received, but have been since. I take
the liberty of putting under your cover another letter to Mrs. Champis,
as also an inquiry after a Dr. Griffiths. A letter to M. le Vieillard,
from the person he had consulted about the essence L'Orient, will
convey to you the result of my researches into that article. Your
spring-block for assisting a vessel in sailing cannot be tried here,
because the Seine, being not more than about forty toises wide, and
running swiftly, there is no such thing on it as a vessel with sails. I
thank you for the volume of the Philadelphia transactions, which came
safely to hand, and is, in my opinion, a very valuable volume, and
contains many precious papers. The paccan-nut is, as you conjecture,
the Illinois nut. The former is the vulgar name south of the Potomac,
as also with the Indians and Spaniards, and enters also into the
Botanical name which is Juglano Paccan. I have many volumes of the
"Encyclopédie" for yourself and Dr. Franklin; but, as a winter passage
is bad for books, and before the spring the packets will begin to sail
from Havre to New York, I shall detain them till then. You must not
presume too strongly that your comb-footed bird is known to M. de
Buffon. He did not know our panther. I gave him the stripped skin of
one I bought in Philadelphia, and it presents him a new species, which
will appear in his next volumes. I have convinced him that our deer is
not a Chevreuil, and would you believe that many letters to different
acquaintances in Virginia, where this animal is so common, have never
enabled me to present him with a large pair of their horns, a blue and
red skin stuffed, to show him their colors, at different seasons. He
has never seen the horns of what we call the elk. This would decide
whether it be an elk or a deer. I am very much pleased with your
project on the Harmonica, and the prospect of your succeeding in the
application of keys to it. It will be the greatest present which has
been made to the musical world this century, not excepting the
Piano-forte. If its tone approaches that given by the finger as nearly
only as the harpsichord does that of the harp, it will be very
valuable. I have lately examined a foot-bass newly invented here, by
the celebrated Krumfoltz. It is precisely a piano-forte, about ten feet
long, eighteen inches broad, and nine inches deep. It is of one octave
only, from fa to fa. The part where the keys are, projects at the side
in order to lengthen the levers of the keys. It is placed on the floor,
and the harpsichord or other piano-forte is set over it, the foot
acting in concert on that, while the fingers play on this. There are
three unison chords to every note, of strong brass wire, and the lowest
have wire wrapped on them as the lowest in the piano-forte. The chords
give a fine, clear, deep tone, almost like the pipe of an organ. Have
they connected you with our mint? My friend Monroe promised me he would
take care for you in that, or perhaps the establishment of that at New
York may have been incompatible with your residence in Philadelphia. A
person here has invented a method of coining the French écu of six
livres, so as to strike both faces and the edge at one stroke, and
makes a coin as beautiful as a medal. No country has ever yet produced
such a coin. They are made cheaper, too. As yet, he has only made a few
to show the perfection of his manner. I am endeavoring to procure one
to send to Congress as a model for their coinage. They will consider
whether, on establishing a new mint, it will be worth while to buy his
machines, if he will furnish them. A dislocation of my right wrist,
which happened to me about a month after the date of my last letter to
you, has disabled me from writing three months. I do it now in pain,
and only in cases of necessity, or of strong inclination, having as yet
no other use of my hand. I put under your cover a letter from my
daughter to her friend. She joins me in respects to your good mother,
to Mrs. Hopkinson and yourself, to whom I proffer assurances of the
esteem with which I am, dear Sir, your sincere friend and servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY DR. FRANKLIN.

PARIS, December 23, 1786.


DEAR SIR,--I have received your favor of October 8, but the volume of
transactions mentioned to come with it, did not; but I had received one
from Mr. Hopkinson. You also mention the diplomas it covered for other
persons, and some order of the society relative to myself, which I
supposed were omitted by accident, and will come by some other
conveyance. So far as relates to myself, whatever the order was, I beg
leave to express to you my sense of their favor, and wish to merit it.
I have several _livraisons_ of the "Encyclopédie" for yourself and Mr.
Hopkinson, which shall be sent in the spring, when they will be less
liable to injury. Some books also which I received from Baron Blome
must await that conveyance. I receive some discouraging accounts of the
temper of the people in our new government, yet were I to judge only
from the accounts given in the public papers, I should not fear their
passing over without injury. I wish you may have given your opinion of
them to some of your friends here, as your experience and knowledge of
men would give us more confidence in your opinion. Russia and the Porte
have patched up an accommodation through the mediation of this court.
The coolness between Spain and Naples will remain, and will occasion
the former to cease intermeddling with the affairs of the latter. The
Dutch affairs are still to be settled. The new King of Prussia is more
earnest in supporting the cause of the slaveholder than his uncle was,
and in general an affectation begins to show itself of differing from
his uncle. There is some fear of his throwing himself into the Austrian
scale in the European division of power. Our treaty with Morocco is
favorably concluded through the influence of Spain. That with Algiers
affords no expectation. We have been rendered anxious here about your
health, by hearing you have had a severe attack of your gout.
Remarkable deaths are the Duchess of Chabot, of the House of
Rochefoucault, Beaujon, and Peyronet, the architect who built the
bridge of Neuilly, and was to have begun one the next spring from the
Place Louis XV. to the Palais Bourbon. A dislocated wrist not yet
re-established, obliges me to conclude here with assurances of the
perfect esteem and respect with which I have the honor to be, your
Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.

P. S. Will you permit my respects to your grandson, Mr. Franklin, to
find their place here?




TO MR. STILES.

PARIS, December 24, 1786.


SIR,--I feel myself very much honored by the degree which has been
conferred on me by the Senatus Academicus of Yale College, and I beg
leave, through you, Sir, to express to them how sensible I am of this
honor, and that it is to their and your indulgence, and not to any
merit of my own, that I am indebted for it.

The commotions that have taken place in America, as far as they are yet
known to me, offer nothing threatening. They are a proof that the
people have liberty enough, and I could not wish them less than they
have. If the happiness of the mass of the people can be secured at the
expense of a little tempest now and then, or even of a little blood, it
will be a precious purchase. "Malo libertatem periculosam quam quietem
servitutem." Let common sense and common honesty have fair play, and
they will soon set things to rights.

The bickerings between Russia and the Porte are quieted for the moment.
The coolness between the Kings of Spain and Naples will remain, but
will have no other consequence than that of the former withdrawing from
interference with the affairs of the latter. The present King of
Prussia pushes the interest of the Stadtholder more zealously than his
uncle did. There have been fears that he might throw himself into the
Austrian scale, which would greatly derange the European balance. This
country is firm in support of the patriotic party in the United
Netherlands.

We have made an advantageous treaty with Morocco, but with Algiers
nothing is done. From what I learn from the temper of my countrymen and
their tenaciousness of money, it will be more easy to raise ships and
men to fight these pirates into reason than money to bribe them. I wish
that something could be done in some form or another to open the
Mediterranean to us. You will have seen that France is endeavoring to
relieve and encourage our commerce with her.

The arts and sciences offering nothing new at this moment worth
communicating to you, I shall only add assurances of the respect and
esteem with which I have the honor to be, dear Sir, your most obedient,
and most humble servant.




TO M. DUMAS.

PARIS, December 25, 1786.


SIR,--A dislocation of my right wrist has for upwards of three months
prevented my writing to you. I begin to use it a little for the pen;
but it is with great pain. To this cause alone I hope you will ascribe
that I have acknowledged at one time the receipt of so many of your
letters. Their dates are September 12, 26, October 6, 17, 19, 23,
November 3, 17, December 1, and there is one without date. They were
communicated to the Marquis de LaFayette according to your desire, and
those to Mr. Jay have been forwarded from time to time as private
conveyances occurred, except some of the last for which no such
conveyance has occurred till now. A gentleman is setting out for
London, and from thence for New York.

We receive news from America of collections of the people in three or
four instances in the Eastern States, demanding delays in the
proceedings of the courts of justice. Those States, as you know,
depended before the war chiefly on their whale oil and fish. The former
was consumed in London, but, being now loaded with heavy duties, cannot
go there. Much of their fish went up the Mediterranean, now shut to us
by the piratical States. Their debts, therefore, press them, while the
means of payment have lessened. The mobs, however, separated without a
single injury having been offered to the person or property of any one,
nor did they continue twenty-four hours in any one place. This country
has opened a market for their whale oil, and we have made a good treaty
of peace with Morocco. But with Algiers we can do nothing. An American
paper has published a letter, as from me to the Count de Vergennes, on
the subject of our productions of tobacco and rice. It is surreptitious
and falsified; and both the true and untrue parts very improper for the
public eye. How a newswriter of America got at it, is astonishing, and
with what views it had been altered. I will be much obliged to you if
you will endeavor to prevent its publication in the Leyden Gazette.

The following question I take the liberty of proposing to you
confidentially. This country wants money in its treasury. Some
individuals have proposed to buy our debt of twenty-four millions at a
considerable discount. I have informed Congress of it, and suggested to
them the expediency of borrowing this sum in Holland, if possible, as
well to prevent loss to this country as to draw all their money
transactions to one point. But could they borrow the money in Holland?
I would be obliged to you for your opinion on this question, as it
would decide me in pressing this matter further on Congress, or letting
it drop. It will readily occur to you that the answer should come
through the hands of your ambassador here alone. The pain in which I
write obliges me, after many thanks for the interesting details of
transactions in your country, to assure you of the esteem and respect
with which I have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO MR. CARMICHAEL.

PARIS, December 26, 1786.


DEAR SIR,--A note from me of the 22d of September, apprised you it
would be some time before I should be able to answer your letters. I
did not then expect it would have been so long.

I enclose herein a resolution of Congress, recalling Mr. Lambe, which I
will beg the favor of you to have delivered him. I have written to Mr.
Adams on the subject of directing him to settle with Mr. Barclay, and
attend his answer. In the meantime, I am not without hopes Mr. Barclay
has done the business. I send also a note desiring Mr. Lambe to deliver
you his cypher, and a copy of a letter from the Minister of Finance
here, to me, announcing several regulations in favor of our commerce.

My "Notes on Virginia," having been hastily written, need abundance of
corrections. Two or three of these are so material, that I am
reprinting a few leaves to substitute for the old. As soon as these
shall be ready, I will beg your acceptance of a copy. I shall be proud
to be permitted to send a copy, also, to the Count de Campomanes, as a
tribute to his science and his virtues. You will find in them that the
Natural Bridge has found an admirer in me also. I should be happy to
make with you the tour of the curiosities you will find therein
mentioned. That kind of pleasure surpasses much, in my estimation,
whatever I find on this side the Atlantic. I sometimes think of
building a little hermitage at the Natural Bridge (for it is my
property) and of passing there a part of the year at least.

I have received American papers to the 1st of November. Some tumultuous
meetings of the people have taken place in the eastern States; _i. e._
one in Massachusetts, one in Connecticut, and one in New Hampshire.
Their principal demand was, a respite in the judiciary proceedings. No
injury was done, however, in a single instance, to the person or
property of any one, nor did the tumult continue twenty-four hours in
any one instance. In Massachusetts, this was owing to the discretion
which the malcontents still preserved; in Connecticut and New
Hampshire, the body of the people rose in support of government, and
obliged the malcontents to go to their homes. In the last-mentioned
State, they seized about forty, who were in jail for trial. It is
believed this incident will strengthen our government. Those people are
not entirely without excuse. Before the war, these States depended on
their whale oil and fish. The former was consumed in England, and much
of the latter in the Mediterranean. The heavy duties on American whale
oil, now required in England, exclude it from that market; and the
Algerines exclude them from bringing their fish into the Mediterranean.
France is opening her ports for their oil, but in the meanwhile, their
ancient debts are pressing them, and they have nothing to pay with. The
Massachusetts Assembly, too, in their zeal for paying their public
debt, had laid a tax too heavy to be paid in the circumstances of their
State. The Indians seem disposed, too, to make war on us. These
complicated causes, determined Congress to increase their forces to two
thousand men. The latter was the sole object avowed, yet the former
entered for something into the measure. However, I am satisfied the
good sense of the people is the strongest army our government can ever
have, and that it will not fail them. The commercial convention at
Annapolis, was not full enough to do business. They found, too, their
appointments too narrow, being confined to the article of commerce.
They have proposed a meeting in Philadelphia in May, and that it may be
authorized to propose amendments of whatever is defective in the
federal constitution.

When I was in England, I formed a portable copying press, on the
principles of the large one they make here, for copying letters. I had
a model made there, and it has answered perfectly. A workman here has
made several from that model. The itinerant temper of your court will,
I think, render one of these useful to you. You must, therefore, do me
the favor to accept of one. I have it now in readiness, and shall send
it by the way of Bayonne, to the care of Mr. Alexander there, unless
Don Miguel de Lardizabal can carry it with him.

My hand admonishes me it is time to stop, and that I must defer writing
to Mr. Barclay till to-morrow.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the highest esteem and
respect, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. VAUGHAN.

PARIS, December 29, 1786.


SIR,--When I had the honor of seeing you in London, you were so kind as
to permit me to trouble you sometimes with my letters, and particularly
on the subject of mathematical or philosophical instruments. Such a
correspondence will be too agreeable to me, and at the same time, too
useful, not to avail myself of your permission. It has been an opinion
pretty generally received among philosophers, that the atmosphere of
America is more humid than that of Europe. Monsieur de Buffon makes
this hypothesis one of the two pillars whereon he builds his system of
the degeneracy of animals in America. Having had occasion to controvert
this opinion of his, as to the degeneracy of animals there, I expressed
a doubt of the fact assumed, that our climates are more moist. I did
not know of any experiments which might authorize a denial of it.
Speaking afterwards on the subject with Dr. Franklin, he mentioned to
me the observations he had made on a case of magnets, made for him by
Mr. Nairne in London. Of these you will see a detail, in the second
volume of the American Philosophical Transactions, in a letter from Dr.
Franklin to Mr. Nairne, wherein he recommends to him to take up the
principle therein explained, and endeavor to make an hygrometer, which,
taking slowly the temperature of the atmosphere, shall give its mean
degree of moisture, and enable us thus to make with more certainty, a
comparison between the humidities of different climates. May I presume
to trouble you with an inquiry of Mr. Nairne, whether he has executed
the Doctor's idea, and if he has, to get him to make for me a couple of
the instruments he may have contrived? They should be made of the same
piece, and under like circumstances, that sending one to America, I may
rely on its indications there, compared with those of the one I shall
retain here. Being in want of a set of magnets also, I would be glad if
he would at the same time send me a set, the case of which should be
made as Dr. Franklin describes his to have been, so that I may repeat
his experiment. Colonel Smith will do me the favor to receive these
things from Mr. Nairne, and to pay him for them.

I think Mr. Rittenhouse never published an invention of his in this
way, which was a very good one. It was of an hygrometer which, like the
common ones, was to give the actual moisture of the air. He has two
slips of mahogany about five inches long, three-fourths of an inch
broad, and one-tenth of an inch thick, the one having the grain running
lengthwise, and the other crosswise. These are glued together by their
faces, so as to form a piece five inches long, three-fourths of an inch
broad, and one-third of an inch thick, which is stuck by its lower end
into a little plinth of wood, presenting their edge to the view. The
fibres of the wood you know are dilated, but not lengthened by
moisture. The slip, therefore, whose grain is lengthwise, becomes a
standard, retaining always the same precise length. That which has its
grain crosswise, dilates with moisture, and contracts for the want of
it. If the right hand piece be the cross grained one, when the air is
very moist, it lengthens, and forces its companion to form a kind of
interior annulus of a circle on the left. When the air is dry, it
contracts, draws its companion to the right, and becomes itself the
interior annulus. In order to show this dilatation and contraction, an
index is fixed on the upper end of two of the slips; a plate of metal
or wood is fastened to the front of the plinth, so as to cover the two
slips from the eye. A slit, being nearly the portion of a circle, is
cut in this plate, so that the shank of the index may play freely
through its whole range. On the edge of the slit is a graduation. The
objection to this instrument is, that it is not fit for comparative
observations, because no two pieces of wood being of the same texture
exactly, no two will yield exactly alike to the same agent. However, it
is less objectionable on this account, than most of the substances
used. Mr. Rittenhouse had a thought of trying ivory; but I do not know
whether he executed it. All these substances not only vary from one
another at the same time, but from themselves at different times. All
of them, however, have some peculiar advantages, and I think this, on
the whole, appeared preferable to any other I had ever seen. Not
knowing whether you had heard of this instrument, and supposing it
would amuse you, I have taken the liberty of detailing it to you.

I beg you to be assured of the sentiments of perfect esteem and respect
with which I have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, December 31, 1786.


SIR,--I had the honor of addressing you on the 12th of the last month;
since which, your favor of October the 12th has been received,
enclosing a copy of the resolution of Congress for recalling Mr. Lambe.
My letter by Mr. Randall informed you that we had put an end to his
powers, and required him to repair to Congress. I lately received a
letter from him, dated Alicant, October the 10th, of which I have the
honor to enclose you a copy; by which, you will perceive that the
circumstance of ill health, either true or false, is urged for his not
obeying our call. I shall immediately forward the order of Congress. I
am not without fear, that some misapplication of the public money may
enter into the causes of his declining to return. The moment that I saw
a symptom of this in his conduct, as it was a circumstance which did
not admit the delay of consulting Mr. Adams, I wrote to Mr. Carmichael,
to stop any moneys which he might have in the hands of his banker. I am
still unable to judge whether he is guilty of this or not, as by the
arrangements with Mr. Adams, who alone had done business with the
bankers of the United States, in Holland, Mr. Lambe's drafts were to be
made on him, and I know not what their amount has been. His drafts
could not have been negotiated, if made on us both, at places so
distant. Perhaps it may be thought, that the appointment of Mr. Lambe
was censurable in the moment in which it was made. It is a piece of
justice, therefore, which I owe to Mr. Adams, to declare that the
proposition went first from me to him. I take the liberty of enclosing
you a copy of my letter to Mr. Adams, of September the 24th, 1785, in
which that proposition was made. It expresses the motives operating on
my mind in that moment, as well as the cautions I thought it necessary
to take. To these must be added, the difficulty of finding an American
in Europe fit for the business, and willing to undertake it. I knew
afterwards, that Dr. Bancroft (who is named in the letter) could not,
on account of his own affairs, have accepted even a primary
appointment. I think it evident, that no appointment could have
succeeded without a much greater sum of money.

I am happy to find that Mr. Barclay's mission has been attended with
complete success. For this we are indebted, unquestionably, to the
influence and good offices of the court of Madrid. Colonel Franks, the
bearer of this, will have the honor to put into your hands the original
of the treaty, with other papers accompanying it. It will appear by
these, that Mr. Barclay has conducted himself with a degree of
intelligence and of good faith, which reflects the highest honor on
him.

A copy of a letter from Captain O'Bryan to Mr. Carmichael, is also
herewith enclosed. The information it contains will throw farther light
on the affairs of Algiers. His observations on the difficulties which
arise from the distance of Mr. Adams and myself from that place, and
from one another, and the delays occasioned by this circumstance, are
certainly just. If Congress should propose to revive the negotiations,
they will judge whether it will not be more expedient to send a person
to Algiers, who can be trusted with full powers; and also whether a
mission to Constantinople may not be previously necessary. Before I
quit this subject, I must correct an error in the letter of Captain
O'Bryan. Mr. Lambe was not limited, as he says, to one hundred, but to
two hundred dollars apiece for our prisoners. This was the price which
has been just paid for a large number of French prisoners, and this was
our guide.

I have the honor to be, with the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO SAMUEL OSGOOD.

PARIS, January 5, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am desired to forward to you the enclosed queries, and to
ask the favor of you to give such an answer to them, as may not give
you too much trouble. Those which stand foremost on the paper, can be
addressed only to your complaisance; but the last may possibly be
interesting to your department, and to the United States. I mean those
which suggest the possibility of borrowing money in Europe, the
principal of which shall be ultimately payable in land, and in the
meantime a good interest. You know best whether the suggestion can be
turned to any profit, and whether it will be worth while to introduce
any proposition to Congress thereon. Among the possible shapes into
which a matter of this kind may be formed, the following is one: Let us
suppose the public lands to be worth a dollar, hard money, the acre. If
we should ask of a moneyed man a loan of one hundred dollars, payable
with one hundred acres of land at the end of ten years, and in the
meantime carrying an interest of five per cent., this would be more
disadvantageous to the lender than a common loan, payable ultimately in
cash. But if we should say, we will deliver you the one hundred acres
of land immediately, which is in fact an immediate payment of the
principal, and will nevertheless pay your interest of five per cent.,
for ten years, this offers a superior advantage, and might tempt money
holders. But what should we in fact receive, in this way, for our
lands? Thirty-seven dollars and one-fourth, being left in Europe, on an
interest of five per cent., would pay annually the interest of the one
hundred dollars for ten years. There would remain then only sixty-two
dollars and three-quarters, for the one hundred acres of land, that is
to say, about two-thirds of its price. Congress can best determine,
whether any circumstance in our situation, should induce us to get rid
of any of our debts in that way. I beg you to understand, that I have
named rates of interest, term of payment, and price of land, merely to
state the case, and without the least knowledge that a loan could be
obtained on these terms. It remains to inform you from whom this
suggestion comes. The person from whom I receive it, is a Monsieur
Claviere, connected with the moneyed men of Amsterdam. He is, on behalf
of a company there, actually treating with the Comptroller General
here, for the purchase of our debt to this country, at a considerable
discount. Whether he has an idea of offering a loan to us, on terms
such as I have above spoken of, I know not; nor do I know that he is
authorized to make the suggestion he has made. If the thing should be
deemed worthy the attention of Congress, they can only consider it as a
possibility, and take measures to avail themselves of it, if the
possibility turns out in their favor, and not to be disappointed if it
does not. Claviere's proposition not being formal enough for me to make
an official communication of it, you will make what use of it you see
best. I am, with very sincere esteem and attachment, dear Sir, your
most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO M. DE CALONNE.

PARIS, January 7, 1787.


SIR,--I had the honor, on the 2d of November last, to acknowledge the
receipt of your Excellency's letter of October the 22d, wherein you are
so good as to communicate to me the arrangements which the King had
been pleased to make for the encouragement of the commerce of the
United States of America with his subjects. I immediately made known
the same to the agents of the United States in the several seaports of
this kingdom, that they might give information thereof to the persons
concerned in that commerce. Unacquainted with the forms in which his
Majesty usually declares his will in cases of this kind, and the manner
in which it is communicated to the officers of the customs at the
seaports, I am unable to answer those agents who inform me that the
officers of the customs and farms do not as yet consider themselves
bound to conform to the new regulations. I take the liberty, therefore,
of soliciting your Excellency's interposition for the issuing such
orders as may be necessary for carrying into effect the gracious
intentions of the King, and of repeating the assurances of those
sentiments of perfect respect and esteem, with which I have the honor
to be your Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, January 9, 1787.


SIR,--My last of December the 31st, acknowledged the receipt of yours
of October the 12th, as the present does those of October the 3d, 9th,
and 27th, together with the resolution of Congress of October the 16th,
on the claim of Shweighauser. I will proceed in this business on the
return of Mr. Barclay, who, being fully acquainted with all the
circumstances, will be enabled to give me that information, want of
which might lead me to do wrong on the one side or the other.

Information of the signature of the treaty with Morocco has been long
on its passage to you. I will beg leave to recur to dates, that you may
see that no part of it has been derived from me. The first notice I had
of it, was in a letter from Mr. Barclay, dated Daralbeyda, August the
11th. I received this on the 13th of September. No secure conveyance
offered till the 26th of the same month, being thirteen days after my
receipt of it. In my letter of that date, which went by the way of
London, I had the honor to enclose you a copy of Mr. Barclay's letter.
The conveyance of the treaty itself is suffering a delay here at
present, which all my anxiety cannot prevent. Colonel Franks' baggage,
which came by water from Cadiz to Rouen, has been long and hourly
expected. The moment it arrives, he will set out to London, to have
duplicates of the treaty signed by Mr. Adams, and from thence he will
proceed to New York.

The Chevalier del Pinto, who treated with us on behalf of Portugal,
being resident at London, I have presumed that causes of the delay of
that treaty had been made known to Mr. Adams, and by him communicated
to you. I will write to him by Colonel Franks, in order that you may be
answered on that subject.

The publication of the enclosed extract from my letter of May the 27th,
1786, will, I fear, have very mischievous effects. It will tend to draw
on the Count de Vergennes the formidable phalanx of the Farms; to
prevent his committing himself to me in any conversation which he does
not mean for the public papers; to inspire the same diffidence into all
other ministers, with whom I might have to transact business; to defeat
the little hope, if any hope existed, of getting rid of the Farm on the
article of tobacco; and to damp that freedom of communication which the
resolution of Congress of May the 3d, 1784, was intended to
re-establish.

Observing by the proceedings of Congress, that they are about to
establish a coinage, I think it my duty to inform them, that a Swiss,
of the name of Drost, established here, has invented a method of
striking the two faces and the edge of a coin, at one stroke. By this,
and other simplifications of the process of coinage, he is enabled to
coin from twenty-five thousand to thirty thousand pieces a day, with
the assistance of only two persons, the pieces of metal being first
prepared. I send you by Colonel Franks three coins of gold, silver and
copper, which you will perceive to be perfect medals; and I can assure
you, from having seen him coin many, that every piece is as perfect as
these. There has certainly never yet been seen any coin, in any
country, comparable to this. The best workmen in this way, acknowledge
that his is like a new art. Coin should always be made in the highest
perfection possible, because it is a great guard against the danger of
false coinage. This man would be willing to furnish his implements to
Congress, and if they please, he will go over and instruct a person to
carry on the work: nor do I believe he would ask anything unreasonable.
It would be very desirable, that in the institution of a new coinage,
we could set out on so perfect a plan as this, and the more so, as
while the work is so exquisitely done, it is done cheaper.

I will certainly do the best I can for the reformation of the consular
convention, being persuaded that our States would be very unwilling to
conform their laws either to the convention, or to the scheme. But it
is too difficult and too delicate, to form sanguine hopes. However,
that there may be room to reduce the convention, as much as
circumstances will admit, will it not be expedient for Congress to give
me powers, in which there shall be no reference to the scheme? The
powers sent me, oblige me to produce that scheme, and certainly, the
moment it is produced, they will not abate a tittle from it. If they
recollect the scheme, and insist on it, we can but conclude it; but if
they have forgotten it (which may be), and are willing to reconsider
the whole subject, perhaps we may get rid of something the more of it.
As the delay is not injurious to us, because the convention, whenever
and however made, is to put us in a worse state than we are in now, I
shall venture to defer saying a word on the subject, till I can hear
from you in answer to this. The full powers may be sufficiently
guarded, by private instructions to me, not to go beyond the former
scheme. This delay may be well enough ascribed (whenever I shall have
received new powers) to a journey I had before apprised the minister
that I should be obliged to take, to some mineral waters in the south
of France, to see if, by their aid, I may recover the use of my right
hand, of which a dislocation, about four months ago, threatens to
deprive me in a great measure. The surgeons have long insisted on this
measure. I shall return by Bordeaux, Nantes and L'Orient, to get the
necessary information for finishing our commercial regulations here.
Permit me, however, to ask as immediately as possible, an answer,
either affirmative or negative, as Congress shall think best, and to
ascribe the delay on which I venture, to my desire to do what is for
the best.

I send you a copy of the late marine regulations of this country. There
are things in it, which may become interesting to us. Particularly,
what relates to the establishment of a marine militia, and their
classification.

You will have seen in the public papers, that the King has called an
assembly of the Notables of this country. This has not been done for
one hundred and sixty years past. Of course, it calls up all the
attention of the people. The objects of this assembly are not named:
several are conjectured. The tolerating the Protestant religion;
removing all the internal Custom-houses to the frontier; equalizing the
gabelles on salt through the kingdom; the sale of the King's domains,
to raise money; or, finally, the effecting this necessary end by some
other means, are talked of. But in truth, nothing is known about it.
This government practises secrecy so systematically, that it never
publishes its purposes or its proceedings, sooner or more extensively
than necessary. I send you a pamphlet, which, giving an account of the
last Assemblée des Notables, may give an idea of what the present will
be.

A great desire prevails here of encouraging manufactures. The famous
Boulton and Watts, who are at the head of the plated manufactures of
Birmingham, the steam mills of London, copying presses and other
mechanical works, have been here. It is said also, that Wedgewood has
been here, who is famous for his steel manufactories, and an earthen
ware in the antique style; but as to this last person, I am not
certain. It cannot, I believe, be doubted, but that they came at the
request of government, and that they will be induced to establish
similar manufactures here.

The transferring hither those manufactures, which contribute so much to
draw our commerce to England, will have a great tendency to strengthen
our connections with this country, and loosen them with that.

The enfranchising the port of Honfleur at the mouth of the Seine, for
multiplying the connections with us, is at present an object. It meets
with opposition in the ministry; but I am in hopes it will prevail. If
natural causes operate, uninfluenced by accidental circumstances,
Bordeaux and Honfleur, or Havre, must ultimately take the greatest part
of our commerce. The former by the Garonne and canal of Languedoc,
opens the southern provinces to us; the latter, the northern ones and
Paris. Honfleur will be peculiarly advantageous for our rice and whale
oil, of which the principal consumption is at Paris. Being free, they
can be re-exported when the market here shall happen to be overstocked.

The labors of the ensuing summer will close the eastern half of the
harbor of Cherbourg, which will contain and protect forty sail of the
line. It has from fifty to thirty-five feet of water next to the cones,
shallowing gradually to the shore. Between this and Dunkirk, the
navigation of the channel will be rendered much safer in the event of a
war with England, and invasions on that country become more
practicable.

The gazettes of France and Leyden, to the present date, accompany this.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect respect,
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, January 11, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Mr. Jay, in his last letter to me, observes they hear
nothing further of the treaty with Portugal. I have taken the liberty
of telling him that I will write to you on the subject, and that he may
expect to hear from you on it, by the present conveyance. The Chevalier
del Pinto being at London, I presume he has, or can inform you why it
is delayed on their part. I will thank you also for the information he
shall give you.

There is here an order of priests called the Mathurins, the object of
whose institution is, the begging of alms for the redemption of
captives. About eighteen months ago, they redeemed three hundred, which
cost them about fifteen hundred livres apiece. They have agents
residing in the Barbary States, who are constantly employed in
searching and contracting for the captives of their nation, and they
redeem at a lower price than any other people can. It occurred to me,
that their agency might be engaged for our prisoners at Algiers. I have
had interviews with them, and the last night, a long one with the
General of the order. They offer their services with all the benignity
and cordiality possible. The General told me, he could not expect to
redeem our prisoners as cheap as their own, but that he would use all
the means in his power to do it on the best terms possible, which will
be the better, as there shall be the less suspicion that he acts for
our public. I told him I would write to you on the subject, and speak
to him again. What do you think of employing them, limiting them to a
certain price, as three hundred dollars for instance, or any other sum
you think proper? He will write immediately to his instruments there,
and in two or three months we can know the event. He will deliver them
at Marseilles, Cadiz, or where we please, at our expense. The money
remaining of the fund destined to the Barbary business, may, I suppose,
be drawn on for this object. Write me your opinion, if you please, on
this subject, finally, fully and immediately, that, if you approve the
proposition, I may enter into arrangements with the General, before my
departure to the waters of Aix, which will be about the beginning of
February.

I have the honor to be, with very sincere esteem and respect, dear Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO COLONEL FRANKS.

January 11, 1787.


My anxiety, my dear Sir, on the detention of the Morocco treaty is
inexpressible. However cogent and necessary the motives which detain
you, I should be deemed inexcusable were I to let such a safe
opportunity as that by Colonel Blackden pass without sending the papers
on to London. Mr. Jay complained that a treaty signed in June was not
ratified in October. What will they say when they shall observe that
the same treaty does not reach them till March, nine months? In the
meantime, our whole commerce is paying a heavy tax for insurance till
its publication. Can you fix a day as early as Monday or Tuesday for
your departure, whether your baggage arrives or not, or would you
rather decline the going with the papers? In the former case, if your
baggage does not arrive before your departure, any orders you may think
proper to leave respecting it, shall be punctually executed. I can send
it to Mr. Simonson at Havre, so that it may go to America in the
February packet. I shall see you at the Marquis's to-day, and we will
speak about this matter.




TO MONSIEUR OTTO.

PARIS, January 14, 1787.


SIR,--I have been honored with your letter of October 15, and thank you
for the intelligence it contained. I am able to make you but an unequal
return for it, your friends here being so much more in condition to
communicate to you interesting intelligence. With respect to the
affairs of Holland, they do not promise arrangement. The interest which
the King of Prussia takes in the affairs of the Stadtholder, seem to
threaten an interruption of his cordiality with the country. The
misunderstanding between the Kings of Spain and Naples, and a projected
visit of the latter to Vienna, with the known influence of his Queen
over him, are matter for some jealousy.

As to domestic news, the Assembly of Notables occupies all
conversation. What will be the subjects of their deliberation is not
yet declared. The establishment of provincial assemblies, tolerating
the Protestant religion, removing the internal barriers to the
frontiers, equalizing the Gabelles, sale of the King's domains, and, in
short, every other possible reformation, are conjectured by different
persons. I send you a pamphlet on the last Assembly of Notables, from
which ideas are formed as to what this will be. Possibly you may
receive the same from some of your friends. I send you, also, what it
is less likely you should get from them, because it is next to
impossible to get it at all--that is, a late memoir by Linquet, which
has produced his perpetual exile from this country. To these I add a
report written by M. Bailly, on the subject of the Hotel-Dieu of Paris,
which has met a very general approbation. These are things for the day
only. I recollect no work of any dignity which has been lately
published. We shall very soon receive another volume on Mineralogy from
M. de Buffon; and a third volume of the "Cultivator Américain" is in
the press. So is a History of the American War, by a Monsieur Soulés,
the two first volumes of which, coming down to the capture of Burgoyne,
I have seen, and think better than any I have seen. Mazzei will print
soon two or three volumes 8vo. of "Recherches Historiques and
Politiques sur les Etats Unis d'Amérique," which are sensible. We are
flattered with the hopes that the packet boats will hereafter sail
monthly from Havre, the first being to sail on the 10th of the next
month. This is very desirable indeed, as it will furnish more frequent
opportunities of correspondence between the two countries. If I can be
made useful to you in any line whatever here, it will make me very
happy. Being with sincere esteem and respect, Sir, your most obedient,
and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR LE DUC D'HARCOURT, GOVERNEUR DU DAUPHIN.

PARIS, January 14, 1787.


SIR,--In the conversation with which you were pleased to honor me, a
few days ago, on the enfranchisement of the port of Honfleur, I took
the liberty of observing, that I was not instructed by my constituents
to make any proposition on that subject. That it would be agreeable to
them, however, I must suppose, because it will offer the following
advantages:

1. It is a convenient entrepôt for furnishing us with the manufactures
of the northern parts of France, and particularly of Paris, and for
receiving and distributing the productions of our country in exchange.

2. Cowes, on the opposite side of the channel, has heretofore been the
deposit for a considerable part of our productions, landed in Great
Britain in the first instance, but intended for re-exportation. From
thence, our rice, particularly, has been distributed to France and
other parts of Europe. I am not certain whether our tobaccos were
deposited there, or carried to London to be sorted for the different
markets. To draw this business from Cowes, no place is so favorably
situated as Honfleur.

3. It would be a convenient deposit for our whale oil, of which, after
the supply of Paris, there will be a surplus for re-exportation.

4. Should our fur trade be recovered out of the hands of the English,
it will naturally come to Honfleur, as the port of Paris.

5. Salt is an important article in all our return cargoes; because,
being carried as ballast, its freight costs nothing. But, on account of
some regulations, with which I am not well acquainted, it cannot, at
present, be shipped to advantage from any port on the Seine.

6. Our vessels being built sharp, for swift sailing, suffer extremely
in most of the western ports of France, in which they are left on dry
ground at every ebb of the tide. But at Honfleur, I am told, they can
ride in bold water, on a good bottom and near the shore at all times.

These facts may, perhaps, throw some light on the question in which,
for the good of both countries, you are pleased to interest yourself. I
take the liberty, therefore, of barely mentioning them, and with the
more pleasure, as it furnishes me an occasion of assuring you of those
sentiments of respect and esteem with which I have the honor to be,
your most obedient, humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR DE CREVE-COEUR.

PARIS, January 15, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I see by the Journal of this morning, that they are robbing
us of another of our inventions to give it to the English. The writer,
indeed, only admits them to have revived what he thinks was known to
the Greeks, that is, the making the circumference of a wheel of one
single piece. The farmers in New Jersey were the first who practised
it, and they practised it commonly. Dr. Franklin, in one of his trips
to London, mentioned this practice to the man now in London, who has
the patent for making those wheels. The idea struck him. The Doctor
promised to go to his shop, and assist him in trying to make the wheel
of one piece. The Jersey farmers do it by cutting a young sapling, and
bending it, while green and juicy, into a circle; and leaving it so
until it becomes perfectly seasoned. But in London there are no
saplings. The difficulty was, then, to give to old wood the pliancy of
young. The Doctor and the workman labored together some weeks, and
succeeded; and the man obtained a patent for it, which has made his
fortune. I was in his shop in London, he told me the whole story
himself, and acknowledged, not only the origin of the idea, but how
much the assistance of Dr. Franklin had contributed to perform the
operation on dry wood. He spoke of him with love and gratitude. I think
I have had a similar account from Dr. Franklin, but cannot be quite
certain. I know, that being in Philadelphia when the first set of
patent wheels arrived from London, and were spoken of by the gentleman
(an Englishman) who brought them, as a wonderful discovery, the idea of
its being a new discovery was laughed at by the Philadelphians, who, in
their Sunday parties across the Delaware, had seen every farmer's cart
mounted on such wheels. The writer in the paper, supposes the English
workman got his idea from Homer. But it is more likely the Jersey
farmer got his idea from thence, because ours are the only farmers who
can read Homer; because, too, the Jersey practice is precisely that
stated by Homer: the English practice very different. Homer's words are
(comparing a young hero killed by Ajax to a poplar felled by a workman)
literally thus: "He fell on the ground, like a poplar, which has grown
smooth, in the west part of a great meadow; with its branches shooting
from its summit. But the chariot maker, with the sharp axe, has felled
it, that he may bend a wheel for a beautiful chariot. It lies drying on
the banks of the river." Observe the circumstances which coincide with
the Jersey practice. 1. It is a tree growing in a moist place, full of
juices and easily bent. 2. It is cut while green. 3. It is bent into
the circumference of a wheel. 4. It is left to dry in that form. You,
who write French well and readily, should write a line for the Journal,
to reclaim the honor of our farmers. Adieu. Yours affectionately.




TO COLONEL EDWARD CARRINGTON.

PARIS, January 16, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Uncertain whether you might be at New York at the moment of
Colonel Franks' arrival. I have enclosed my private letters for
Virginia under cover to our delegation in general, which otherwise I
would have taken the liberty to enclose particularly to you, as best
acquainted with the situation of the persons to whom they are
addressed. Should this find you at New York, I will still ask your
attention to them.

In my letter to Mr. Jay, I have mentioned the meeting of the Notables,
appointed for the 29th instant. It is now put off to the 7th or 8th of
next month. This event, which will hardly excite any attention in
America, is deemed here the most important one which has taken place in
their civil line during the present century. Some promise their country
great things from it, some nothing. Our friend de La Fayette was placed
on the list originally. Afterwards his name disappeared, but finally
was reinstated. This shows that his character here is not considered as
an indifferent one, and that it excites agitation. His education in our
school has drawn on him a very jealous eye from a court whose
principles are the most absolute despotism. But I hope he has nearly
passed his crisis. The King, who is a good man, is favorably disposed
towards him, and he is supported by powerful family connections and by
the public good will. He is the youngest man of the Notables except one
whose office placed him on the list.

The Count de Vergennes has within these ten days had a very severe
attack of what is deemed an unfixed gout. He has been well enough,
however, to do business to-day. But anxieties for him are not yet
quieted. He is a great and good minister, and an accident to him might
endanger the peace of Europe.

The tumults in America I expected would have produced in Europe an
unfavorable opinion of our political state. But it has not. On the
contrary, the small effect of these tumults seems to have given more
confidence in the firmness of our governments. The interposition of the
people themselves on the side of government has had a great effect on
the opinion here. I am persuaded myself that the good sense of the
people will always be found to be the best army. They may be led astray
for a moment, but will soon correct themselves. The people are the only
censors of their governors; and even their errors will tend to keep
these to the true principles of their institution. To punish these
errors too severely would be to suppress the only safeguard of the
public liberty. The way to prevent these irregular interpositions of
the people, is to give them full information of their affairs through
the channel of the public papers, and to contrive that those papers
should penetrate the whole mass of the people. The basis of our
governments being the opinion of the people, the very first object
should be to keep that right; and were it left to me to decide whether
we should have a government without newspapers, or newspapers without a
government, I should not hesitate a moment to prefer the latter. But I
should mean that every man should receive those papers, and be capable
of reading them. I am convinced that those societies (as the Indians)
which live without government, enjoy in their general mass an
infinitely greater degree of happiness than those who live under the
European governments. Among the former, public opinion is in the place
of law, and restrains morals as powerfully as laws ever did anywhere.
Among the latter, under pretence of governing, they have divided their
nations into two classes, wolves and sheep. I do not exaggerate. This
is a true picture of Europe. Cherish, therefore, the spirit of our
people, and keep alive their attention. Do not be too severe upon their
errors, but reclaim them by enlightening them. If once they become
inattentive to the public affairs, you and I, and Congress and
Assemblies, Judges and Governors, shall all become wolves. It seems to
be the law of our general nature, in spite of individual exceptions;
and experience declares that man is the only animal which devours his
own kind; for I can apply no milder term to the governments of Europe,
and to the general prey of the rich on the poor. The want of news has
led me into disquisition instead of narration, forgetting you have
every day enough of that. I shall be happy to hear from you sometimes,
only observing that whatever passes through the post is read, and that
when you write what should be read by myself only, you must be so good
as to confide your letter to some passenger, or officer of the packet.
I will ask your permission to write to you sometimes, and to assure you
of the esteem and respect with which I have honor to be, dear Sir, your
most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO M. DU RIVAL.

PARIS, January 17, 1787.


SIR,--You were pleased, in behalf of a friend, to ask information of me
on the subject of the money of the United States of America, and I had
the honor of informing you, by letter of November 7, that no
regulations of their coin had then been made by Congress, as far as I
knew. They had, however, entered into resolutions on that subject,
which have since come to hand. A translation of these will be found in
the Leyden Gazette of some few weeks ago. But it will be necessary to
make the following corrections in the Gazette:

The Gazette dates the resolutions October 10; but they were of August
8. It gives only 365.64 grains of pure silver to the dollar; it should
be 375.64. It states the pound of silver, with its alloy, to be worth
9.99 dollars only, whereas it is fixed at 13.777 dollars; and the pound
of gold, with its alloy, being worth 209.77 dollars, gives the
proportion of silver to gold as 1 to 15.225. These corrections being
made, the resolutions as stated in the Leyden Gazette may be confided
in.

I have the honor to be, with much respect, Sir, your most obedient, and
most humble servant.




TO MESSRS. S. AND J. H. DELAP.

PARIS, January 17, 1787.


GENTLEMEN,--I am honored this day by the receipt of your letter of the
6th instant. Having nothing to do with the matters of account of the
United States in Europe, it is out of my power to say anything to you
as to the payment of the balance due to you. Yet I think it would be
proper for you to write to the "Commissioners of the Treasury," at New
York, on this subject. They are the persons who are to pay it; and as
their Board has been created since the debt was contracted, they may
possibly need information on the subject.

As to your loan office certificates, you would do well to commit them
to some correspondent in America. They will be settled by the table of
depreciation at their true worth in gold or silver at the time the
paper dollars were lent. On that true value the interest has been paid,
and continues to be paid to the creditors annually in America. That the
principal will also be paid, is as sure as any future fact can be. The
epoch is not fixed. It is expected that the State of New York will
shortly accede to the impost which has been proposed. When that shall
be done, that impost will suffice to pay the interest, and sink the
principal in a very few years. I have the honor to be, with much
respect, Gentlemen, your most obedient humble servant.




TO M. SOULÉS.

PARIS, January 19, 1787.


SIR,--I have the honor of enclosing to you the sheets on the subject of
Wyoming. I have had a long conversation with M. Creve-coeur on them. He
knows well that canton. He was in the neighborhood of the place when it
was destroyed, saw great numbers of the fugitives, aided them with his
wagons, and had the story from all their mouths. He committed notes to
writing at the moment, which are now in Normandy, at his father's. He
has written for them, and they will be here in five or six days, when
he premises to put them into my hands. He says there will be a great
deal to alter in your narration, and that it must assume a different
face, more favorable both to the British and Indians. His veracity may
be relied on, and I told him I was sure your object was truth; and, to
render your work estimable by that character, that I thought you would
wait, and readily make any changes upon evidence which should be
satisfactory to you. The moment I receive his notes I will communicate
them to you, and have the honor to be, with much respect, Sir, your
most obedient humble servant.




TO M. HILLIARD D'AUBERTEUIL.

PARIS, January 27, 1787.


SIR,--I duly received the letter you did me the honor to write, and the
verses therein enclosed on the subject of M. de La Fayette. I have
taken measures to present the public with this acceptable present; but
the newspapers here are slow in complying with the applications
addressed to them. It is not for a stranger to decide on the merits of
poetry in a language foreign to him. Were I to presume to do it in this
instance, I should certainly assign to this composition a high degree
of approbation.

I wish it were in my power to furnish you with any materials for the
history on which you are engaged, but I brought no papers of that kind
with me from America. In a letter you did me the honor of writing me
sometime ago, you seemed to suppose, you might go to America in quest
of materials. Should you execute this idea, I should with great
pleasure give any assistance in my power to obtain access for you to
the several deposits of materials which are in that country. I have the
honor to be, with great respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO CHEVALIER DE SEGOND.

PARIS, January 27, 1787.


SIR,--I have duly received the letter with which you have been pleased
to honor me, complaining of the non-payment of interest on the sum due
to you from the United States. I feel with great sensibility the weight
of these complaints; but it is neither in my province, nor in my power,
to remedy them. I am noways authorized to interfere with the money
matters of the United States in Europe. These rest altogether between
the Commissioners of the Treasury of the United States at New York and
their bankers in Europe. Being informed, however, from Mr. Grand, that
the funds appropriated to the payment of the foreign officers were
exhausted, I took the liberty of representing strongly to the
Commissioners the motives which should urge them to furnish new
supplies. They assured me, in answer, that they would do it at the
first moment it should be in their power. I am perfectly persuaded they
will; however, I shall immediately forward to them the letter you have
been pleased to address to me; and will observe to you, that it is to
them alone, or to Congress, to whom you can make any future
applications with effect.

I have the honor to be, with much respect, Sir, your most obedient, and
most humble servant.




TO JAMES MADISON.[2]

PARIS, January 30, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--My last to you was of the 16th of December; since which, I
have received yours of November the 25th, and December the 4th, which
afforded me, as your letters always do, a treat on matters public,
individual and economical. I am impatient to learn your sentiments on
the late troubles in the Eastern States. So far as I have yet seen,
they do not appear to threaten serious consequences. Those States have
suffered by the stoppage of the channels of their commerce, which have
not yet found other issues. This must render money scarce, and make the
people uneasy. This uneasiness has produced acts absolutely
unjustifiable; but I hope they will provoke no severities from their
governments. A consciousness of those in power that their
administration of the public affairs has been honest, may perhaps,
produce too great a degree of indignation; and those characters,
wherein fear predominates over hope, may apprehend too much from these
instances of irregularity. They may conclude too hastily, that nature
has formed man insusceptible of any other government than that of
force, a conclusion not founded in truth nor experience. Societies
exist under three forms, sufficiently distinguishable. 1. Without
government, as among our Indians. 2. Under governments, wherein the
will of every one has a just influence; as is the case in England, in a
slight degree, and in our States, in a great one. 3. Under governments
of force; as is the case in all other monarchies, and in most of the
other republics. To have an idea of the curse of existence under these
last, they must be seen. It is a government of wolves over sheep. It is
a problem, not clear in my mind, that the first condition is not the
best. But I believe it to be inconsistent with any great degree of
population. The second state has a great deal of good in it. The mass
of mankind under that, enjoys a precious degree of liberty and
happiness. It has its evils, too; the principal of which is the
turbulence to which it is subject. But weigh this against the
oppressions of monarchy, and it becomes nothing. _Malo periculosam
libertatem quam quietam servitutem._ Even this evil is productive of
good. It prevents the degeneracy of government, and nourishes a general
attention to the public affairs. I hold it, that a little rebellion,
now and then, is a good thing, and as necessary in the political world
as storms in the physical. Unsuccessful rebellions, indeed, generally
establish the encroachments on the rights of the people, which have
produced them. An observation of this truth should render honest
republican governors so mild in their punishment of rebellions, as not
to discourage them too much. It is a medicine necessary for the sound
health of government.

      [2] The latter part of this letter is in cypher; but appended to
      the copy preserved, are explanatory notes, which have enabled us
      to publish it entire, except a few words, to which they afford no
      key. These are either marked thus * * *, or the words which the
      context seemed to require, inserted in italics.

If these transactions give me no uneasiness, I feel very differently at
another piece of intelligence, to wit, the possibility that the
navigation of the Mississippi may be abandoned to Spain. I never had
any interest westward of the Alleghany; and I never will have any. But
I have had great opportunities of knowing the character of the people
who inhabit that country; and I will venture to say, that the act which
abandons the navigation of the Mississippi is an act of separation
between the eastern and western country. It is a relinquishment of five
parts out of eight, of the territory of the United States; an
abandonment of the fairest subject for the payment of our public debts,
and the chaining those debts on our own necks, _in perpetuum_. I have
the utmost confidence in the honest intentions of those who concur in
this measure; but I lament their want of acquaintance with the
character and physical advantages of the people, who, right or wrong,
will suppose their interest sacrificed on this occasion, to the
contrary interests of that part of the confederacy in possession of
present power. If they declare themselves a separate people, we are
incapable of a single effort to retain them. Our citizens can never be
induced, either as militia or as soldiers, to go there to cut the
throats of their own brothers and sons, or rather, to be themselves the
subjects, instead of the perpetrators of the parricide. Nor would that
country quit the cost of being retained against the will of its
inhabitants, could it be done. But it cannot be done. They are able
already to rescue the navigation of the Mississippi out of the hands of
Spain, and to add New Orleans to their own territory. They will be
joined by the inhabitants of Louisiana. This will bring on a war
between them and Spain; and that will produce the question with us,
whether it will not be worth our while to become parties with them in
the war, in order to re-unite them with us, and thus correct our error?
And were I to permit my forebodings to go one step further, I should
predict that the inhabitants of the United States would force their
rulers to take the affirmative of that question. I wish I may be
mistaken in all these opinions.

We have, for some time, expected that the Chevalier de La Luzerne would
obtain a promotion in the diplomatic line, by being appointed to some
of the courts where this country keeps an ambassador. But none of the
vacancies taking place, which had been counted on, I think the present
disposition is, to require his return to his station in America. He
told me himself, lately, that he should return in the spring. I have
never pressed this matter on the court, though I knew it to be
desirable and desired on our part; because, if the compulsion on him to
return had been the work of Congress, he would have returned in such
ill temper with them, as to disappoint them in the good they expected
from it. He would forever have laid at their door his failure of
promotion. I did not press it for another reason, which is, that I have
great reason to believe that the character of the Count de Moutier, who
would go, were the Chevalier to be otherwise provided for, would give
the most perfect satisfaction in America.

As you have now returned into Congress, it will become of importance
that you should form a just estimate of certain public characters: on
which, therefore, I will give you such notes, as my knowledge of them
has furnished me with. You will compare them with the materials you are
otherwise possessed of, and decide on a view of the whole.

You know the opinion I formerly entertained of my friend, Mr. Adams.
 * * * and the Governor were the first who shook that opinion. I
afterwards saw proofs which convicted him of a degree of vanity, and of
a blindness to it, of which no germ appeared in Congress. A seven
months' intimacy with him here, and as many weeks in London, have given
me opportunities of studying him closely. He is vain, irritable, and a
bad calculator of the force and probable effect of the motives which
govern men. This is all the ill which can possibly be said of him. He
is as disinterested as the being who made him: he is profound in his
views; and accurate in his judgment, except where knowledge of the
world is necessary to form a judgment. He is so amiable, that I
pronounce you will love him, if ever you become acquainted with him. He
would be, as he was, a great man in Congress.

Mr. Carmichael is, I think, very little known in America. I never saw
him, and while I was in Congress I formed rather a disadvantageous idea
of him. His letters, received then, showed him vain, and more attentive
to ceremony and etiquette, than we suppose men of sense should be. I
have now a constant correspondence with him, and find him a little
hypochondriac and discontented. He possesses a very good understanding,
though not of the first order. I have had great opportunities of
searching into his character, and have availed myself of them. Many
persons of different nations, coming from Madrid to Paris, all speak of
him as in high esteem, and I think it certain that he has more of the
Count de Florida Blanca's friendship, than any diplomatic character at
that court. As long as this minister is in office, Carmichael can do
more than any other person who could be sent there.

You will see Franks, and doubtless he will be asking some appointment.
I wish there may be any one for which he is fit. He is light,
indiscreet, active, honest, affectionate. Though Bingham is not in
diplomatic office, yet as he wishes to be so, I will mention such
circumstances of him, as you might otherwise be deceived in. He will
make you believe he was on the most intimate footing with the first
characters in Europe, and versed in the secrets of every cabinet. Not a
word of this is true. He had a rage for being presented to great men,
and had no * * * in the methods by which he could effect it. * * * * *

The Marquis de La Fayette is a most valuable auxiliary to me. His zeal
is unbounded, and his weight with those in power, great. His education
having been merely military, commerce was an unknown field to him. But
his good sense enabling him to comprehend perfectly whatever is
explained to him, his agency has been very efficacious. He has a great
deal of sound genius, is well remarked by the King, and rising in
popularity. He has nothing against him, but the suspicion of republican
principles. I think he will one day be of the ministry. His foible is,
a canine appetite for popularity and fame; but he will get above this.
_The Count de Vergennes_ is _ill_. The possibility of his _recovery_,
renders it dangerous for us to express a doubt of it; but he is in
danger. He is a great minister in European affairs, but has very
imperfect ideas of our _institutions_, and no confidence in them. His
devotion to the principles of pure despotism, renders him
unaffectionate to our governments. But his fear of England makes him
value us as a make weight. He is cool, reserved in political
conversations, but free and familiar on other subjects, and a very
attentive, agreeable person to do business with. It is impossible to
have a clearer, better organized head; but age has chilled his heart.

Nothing should be spared, on our part, to attach this country to us. It
is the only one on which we can rely for support, under every event.
Its inhabitants love us more, I think, than they do any other nation on
earth. This is very much the effect of the good dispositions with which
the French officers returned. In a former letter, I mentioned to you
the dislocation of my wrist. I can make not the least use of it, except
for the single article of writing, though it is going on five months
since the accident happened. I have great anxieties, lest I should
never recover any considerable use of it. I shall, by the advice of my
surgeons, set out in a fortnight for the waters of Aix, in Provence. I
chose these out of several they proposed to me, because if they fail to
be effectual, my journey will not be useless altogether. It will give
me an opportunity of examining the canal of Languedoc, and of acquiring
knowledge of that species of navigation, which may be useful hereafter;
but more immediately, it will enable me to make the tour of the ports
concerned in commerce with us, to examine, on the spot, the defects of
the late regulations respecting our commerce, to learn the further
improvements which may be made in it, and on my return, to get this
business finished. I shall be absent between two and three months,
unless anything happens to recall me here sooner, which may always be
effected in ten days, in whatever part of my route I may be.

In speaking of characters, I omitted those of Reyneval and Hennin, the
two eyes of Count de Vergennes. The former is the most important
character, because possessing the most of the confidence of the Count.
He is rather cunning than wise, his views of things being neither great
nor liberal. He governs himself by principles which he has learned by
rote, and is fit only for the details of execution. His heart is
susceptible of little passions, but not of good ones. He is
brother-in-law to M. Gerard, from whom he received disadvantageous
impressions of us, which cannot be effaced. He has much duplicity.
Hennin is a philosopher, sincere, friendly, liberal, learned, beloved
by everybody; the other by nobody. I think it a great misfortune that
the United States are in the department of the former. As particulars
of this kind may be useful to you, in your present situation, I may
hereafter continue the chapter. I know it will be safely lodged in your
discretion.

Feb. 5. Since writing thus far, Franks has returned from England. I
learn that Mr. Adams desires to be recalled, and that Smith should be
appointed Chargé des Affaires there. It is not for me to decide whether
any diplomatic character should be kept at a court, which keeps none
with us. You can judge of Smith's abilities by his letters. They are
not of the first order, but they are good. For his honesty, he is like
our friend Monroe; turn his soul wrong side outwards, and there is not
a speck on it. He has one foible, an excessive inflammability of
temper, but he feels it when it comes on, and has resolution enough to
suppress it, and to remain silent till it passes over.

I send you, by Colonel Franks, your pocket telescope, walking stick and
chemical box. The two former could not be combined together. The latter
could not be had in the form you referred to. Having a great desire to
have a portable copying machine, and being satisfied, from some
experiments, that the principle of the large machine might be applied
in a small one, I planned one when in England, and had it made. It
answers perfectly. I have since set a workman to making them here, and
they are in such demand that he has his hands full. Being assured that
you will be pleased to have one, when you shall have tried its
convenience, I send you one by Colonel Franks. The machine costs
ninety-six livres, the appendages twenty-four livres, and I send you
paper and ink for twelve livres; in all, one hundred and thirty-two
livres. There is a printed paper of directions; but you must expect to
make many essays before you succeed perfectly. A soft brush, like a
shaving brush, is more convenient than the sponge. You can get as much
ink and paper as you please from London. The paper costs a guinea a
ream. I am, dear Sir, with sincere esteem and affection, your most
obedient humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, February 1, 1787.


SIR,--My last letters were of the 31st of December, and 9th of January;
since which last date, I have been honored with yours of December the
13th and 14th. I shall pay immediate attention to your instructions
relative to the South Carolina frigate. I had the honor of informing
you of an improvement in the art of coining, made here by one Drost,
and of sending you, by Colonel Franks, a specimen of his execution in
gold and silver. I expected to have sent also a coin of copper. The
enclosed note from Drost will explain the reason why this was not sent.
It will let you see also, that he may be employed; as I suppose he is
not so certain as he was of being engaged here. Mr. Grand, who knows
him, gives me reason to believe he may be engaged reasonably. Congress
will decide whether it be worth their attention.

In some of my former letters, I suggested an opportunity of obliging
this court, by borrowing as much money in Holland as would pay the debt
due here, if such a loan could be obtained; as to which, I was
altogether ignorant. To save time, I wrote to Mr. Dumas, to know
whether he thought it probable a loan could be obtained, enjoining on
him the strictest secrecy, and informing him I was making the inquiry
merely of my own motion, and without instruction. I enclose you his
answer. He thinks purchasers of the debt could be found, with a
sacrifice of a small part of the capital, and a postponement be
obtained of some of the first reimbursements. The proposition by him,
for an immediate adoption of this measure by me, was probably urged on
his mind by a desire to serve our country, more than a strict attention
to my duty, and the magnitude of the object. I hope, on the contrary,
that if it should be thought worth a trial, it may be put into the
hands of Mr. Adams, who knows the ground, and is known there, and whose
former successful negotiations in this line, would give better-founded
hopes of success on this occasion.

I formerly mentioned to you the hopes of preferment, entertained by the
Chevalier de La Luzerne. They have been baffled by events; none of the
vacancies taking place which had been expected. Had I pressed his being
ordered back, I have reason to believe the order would have been given.
But he would have gone back in ill humor with Congress, he would have
laid forever at their door the failure of a promotion then viewed as
certain; and this might have excited dispositions that would have
disappointed us of the good we hoped from his return. The line I have
observed with him has been, to make him sensible that nothing was more
desired by Congress than his return, but that they would not willingly
press it, so as to defeat him of a personal advantage. He sees his
prospects fail, and will return in the approaching spring, unless
something unexpected should turn up in his favor. In this case, the
Count de Moutier has the promise of succeeding to him, and, if I do not
mistake his character, he would give great satisfaction. So that I
think you may calculate on seeing one or the other, by midsummer.

It had been suspected that France and England might adopt those
concerted regulations of commerce for their West Indies, of which your
letter expresses some apprehensions. But the expressions in the 4th,
5th, 7th, 11th, 18th, and other articles of their treaty, which
communicate to the English the privileges of the most favored
_European_ nation only, has lessened, if not removed those fears. They
have clearly reserved a right of favoring, specially, any nation not
European; and there is no nation out of Europe, who could so probably
have been in their eye at that time, as ours. They are wise. They must
see it probable, at least, that any concert with England, will be but
of short duration; and they could hardly propose to sacrifice for that,
a connection with us, which may be perpetual.

We have been for some days in much inquietude for the Count de
Vergennes. He is very seriously ill. Nature seems struggling to decide
his disease into a gout. A swelled foot, at present, gives us a hope of
this issue. His loss would at all times have been great; but it would
be immense during the critical poise of European affairs existing at
this moment. I enclose you a letter from one of the foreign officers,
complaining of the non-payment of their interest. It is only one out of
many I have received. This is accompanied by a second copy of the
Moorish declaration sent me by Mr. Barclay. He went to Alicant to
settle with Mr. Lambe; but on his arrival there, found he was gone to
Minorca. A copy of his letter will inform you of this circumstance, and
of some others relative to Algiers, with his opinion on them. Whatever
the States may enable Congress to do for obtaining the peace of that
country, it is a separate question whether they will redeem our
captives, how, and at what price. If they decide to redeem them, I will
beg leave to observe, that it is of great importance that the first
redemption be made at as low a price as possible, because it will form
the future tariff. If these pirates find that they can have a very
great price for Americans, they will abandon proportionably their
pursuits against other nations, to direct them towards ours. That the
choice of Congress may be enlarged, as to the instruments they may use
for effecting the redemption, I think it my duty to inform them, that
there is here an order of priests called the Mathurins, the object of
whose institution is to beg alms for the redemption of captives. They
keep members always in Barbary, searching out the captives of their
country, and redeem, I believe, on better terms than any other body,
public or private. It occurred to me, that their agency might be
obtained for the redemption of our prisoners at Algiers. I obtained
conference with the General, and with some members of the order. The
General, with all the benevolence and cordiality possible, undertook to
act for us, if we should desire it. He told me that their last
considerable redemption was of about three hundred prisoners, who cost
them somewhat upwards of fifteen hundred livres apiece; but that they
should not be able to redeem ours as cheap as they do their own; and
that it must be absolutely unknown that the public concern themselves
in the operation, or the price would be greatly enhanced. The
difference of religion was not once mentioned, nor did it appear to me
to be thought of. It was a silent reclamation and acknowledgment of
fraternity, between two religions of the same family, which historical
events of ancient date had rendered more hostile to one another, than
to their common adversaries. I informed the General, that I should
communicate the good dispositions of his order to those who alone had
the authority to decide whatever related to our captives. Mr.
Carmichael informs me, that moneys have been advanced for the support
of our prisoners at Algiers, which ought to be replaced. I infer from
the context of his letter, that these advances have been made by the
court of Madrid. I submit the information to Congress.

A treaty of commerce is certainly concluded between France and Russia.
The particulars of it are yet secret.

I enclose the gazettes of France and Leyden to this time, and have the
honor of assuring you of those sentiments of perfect esteem and respect
with which I am, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO M. SOULÉS.

February 2, 1787.


SIR,--I send you the papers M. de Creve-coeur sent to Normandy for. The
account of the destruction of Wyoming begins page 40. You may rely
certainly on the author's facts, and you will be easily able to
separate from them his reflections. You can best judge whether an
account of that interesting settlement, condensed into a few lines,
might not form an agreeable episode in your history, and prepare the
mind more awfully for its final catastrophe. I will thank you to return
these papers as soon as you are done with them, that I may restore them
to the hands of M. de Creve-coeur before my departure, which will now
be in a few days. I have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient
humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY MR. ADAMS.

PARIS, February 6, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Your favors by Colonel Franks have come safely to hand. He
will set out from thence the 8th instant. The packet being to sail from
Havre the 10th, I enclose you the copy of a letter lately received from
Mr. Barclay, and of the paper it enclosed. In a letter from Mr.
Carmichael, is a postscript, dated December 25, in the following words:
"Since writing the preceding, the Portuguese Ambassador has pressed me
to hint, that the present moment is favorable to push our treaty with
the court." In the body of the letter he says: "The Count de Expilly
has promised me to continue his attention to our prisoners during his
stay at Algiers; and I have also engaged the Consul of Spain, who
remains there on his return, to take care of them. Advances have been
made for their support which ought to be refunded." I suppose these
advances have been made by order of Mr. Lambe, and that his powers
being at an end, it will be incumbent on us to take measures on that
subject. The Count de Vergennes is extremely ill. His disease is gouty.
We have for some days had hopes it would fix itself decidedly in the
foot. It shows itself there at times, as also in the shoulder, the
stomach, &c. Monsieur de Calonne is likewise ill, but his complaints
are of a rheumatic kind, which he has often had before. The illness of
these two ministers occasioned the postponement of the Assembly of the
Notables to the 14th, and probably will yet postpone it. Nothing is yet
known of the objects of that meeting. I send you a pamphlet giving a
summary account of all the meetings of a general nature which have
taken place heretofore. The treaty between Prussia and this country is
certainly concluded, but its contents are not yet known. I shall set
out for the waters of Aix on the 13th instant, so that I am unable to
say when and whence I shall have the honor of addressing you again. But
I take measures for the conveying to me on my road all letters, so that
should anything extraordinary require it, I can at all times be
recalled to Paris in a fortnight. I shall hope to hear from you at
times, as if I were in Paris. I thank you much for the valuable present
of your book. The subject of it is interesting, and I am sure it is
well treated. I shall take it on my journey, that I may have time to
study it. You told me once, you had thought of writing on hereditary
aristocracy. I wish you would carry it into execution. It would make a
proper sequel to the present work. I wish you all possible happiness,
and have the honor to be, with sentiments of sincere esteem and
affection, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MRS. BINGHAM.

PARIS, February 7, 1787.


I know, Madam, that the twelve month is not yet expired; but it will
be, nearly, before this will have the honor of being put into your
hands. You are then engaged to tell me, truly and honestly, whether you
do not find the tranquil pleasures of America, preferable to the empty
bustle of Paris. For, to what does that bustle tend? At eleven o'clock,
it is day, _chez madame_. The curtains are drawn. Propped on bolsters
and pillows, and her head scratched into a little order, the bulletins
of the sick are read, and the billets of the well. She writes to some
of her acquaintance, and receives the visits of others. If the morning
is not very thronged, she is able to get out and hobble round the cage
of the Palais Royal; but she must hobble quickly, for the _coiffeur's_
turn is come; and a tremendous turn it is! Happy, if he does not make
her arrive when dinner is half over! The torpitude of digestion a
little passed, she flutters half an hour through the streets, by way of
paying visits, and then to the spectacles. These finished, another half
hour is devoted to dodging in and out of the doors of her very sincere
friends, and away to supper. After supper, cards; and after cards, bed;
to rise at noon the next day, and to tread, like a mill horse, the same
trodden circle over again. Thus the days of life are consumed, one by
one, without an object beyond the present moment; ever flying from the
ennui of that, yet carrying it with us; eternally in pursuit of
happiness, which keeps eternally before us. If death or bankruptcy
happen to trip us out of the circle, it is matter for the buzz of the
evening, and is completely forgotten by the next morning. In America,
on the other hand, the society of your husband, the fond cares for the
children, the arrangements of the house, the improvements of the
grounds, fill every moment with a healthy and an useful activity. Every
exertion is encouraging, because, to present amusement, it joins the
promise of some future good. The intervals of leisure are filled by the
society of real friends, whose affections are not thinned to cob-web,
by being spread over a thousand objects. This is the picture, in the
light it is presented to my mind; now let me have it in yours. If we do
not concur this year, we shall the next; or if not then, in a year or
two more. You see I am determined not to suppose myself mistaken.

To let you see that Paris is not changed in its pursuits, since it was
honored with your presence, I send you its monthly history. But this
relating only to the embellishments of their persons, I must add, that
those of the city go on well also. A new bridge, for example, is begun
at the Place Louis Quinze; the old ones are clearing off the rubbish
which encumbered them in the form of houses; new hospitals erecting;
magnificent walls of inclosure, and Custom-houses at their entrances,
&c., &c., &c. I know of no interesting change among those whom you
honored with your acquaintance, unless Monsieur de Saint James was of
that number. His bankruptcy, and taking asylum in the Bastile, have
furnished matter of astonishment. His garden, at the Pont de Neuilly,
where, on seventeen acres of ground, he had laid out fifty thousand
louis, will probably sell for somewhat less money. The workmen of Paris
are making rapid strides towards English perfection. Would you believe,
that in the course of the last two years, they have learned even to
surpass their London rivals in some articles? Commission me to have you
a phaeton made, and, if it is not as much handsomer than a London one,
as that is than a _Fiacre_, send it back to me. Shall I fill the box
with caps, bonnets, &c.? Not of my own choosing, but--I was going to
say, of Mademoiselle Bertin's, forgetting, for the moment, that she too
is a bankrupt. They shall be chosen then by whom you please; or, if you
are altogether nonplused by her eclipse, we will call an _Assemblée des
Notables_ to help you out of the difficulty, as is now the fashion. In
short, honor me with your commands of any kind, and they shall be
faithfully executed. The packets now established from Havre to New
York, furnish good opportunities of sending whatever you wish.

I shall end where I began, like a Paris day, reminding you of your
engagement to write me a letter of respectable length, an engagement
the more precious to me, as it has furnished the occasion, after
presenting my respects to Mr. Bingham, of assuring you of the sincerity
of those sentiments of esteem and respect with which I have the honor
to be, dear Madam, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO GOVERNOR RANDOLPH.

PARIS, February 7, 1787.


SIR,--I have the honor of enclosing to your Excellency, a report of the
proceedings on the inauguration of the bust of the Marquis de La
Fayette in this city. This has been attended with a considerable, but a
necessary delay. The principle that the King is the sole fountain of
honor in this country opposed a barrier to our desires, which
threatened to be insurmountable. No instance of a similar proposition
from a foreign power, had occurred in their history. The admitting it
in this case, is a singular proof of the King's friendly disposition
towards the States of America, and of his personal esteem for the
Marquis de La Fayette.

I take this, the earliest occasion, of congratulating my country on
your Excellency's appointment to the chair of government, and of
assuring you with great sincerity, of those sentiments of perfect
esteem and respect, with which I have the honor to be, your
Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, February 8, 1787.


SIR,--The packet being to sail the day after tomorrow, I have awaited
the last possible moment of writing by her, in hopes I might be able to
announce some favorable change in the situation of the Count de
Vergennes. But none has occurred, and in the meantime he has become
weaker by the continuance of his illness. Though not desperately ill,
he is dangerously so. The Comptroller General, M. de Calonnes, has been
very ill also, but he is getting well. These circumstances have
occasioned the postponement of the Assemblée des Notables to the 14th
instant, and will probably occasion a further postponement. As I shall
set out this day sennight for the waters of Aix, you will probably hear
the issue of the Count de Vergennes' illness through some other
channel, before I shall have the honor of addressing you again. I may
observe the same, as to the final decision for the _effranchisement_ of
Honfleur, which is in a fair way of being speedily concluded. The
exertions of Monsieur de Creve-coeur, and particularly his influence
with the Duke d'Harcourt, the principal instrument in effecting it,
have been of chief consequence in this matter.

I have the honor to be, with the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. DUMAS.

PARIS, February 9, 1787.


SIR,--My last to you was dated December 25th; since which I have been
honored with your several favors of December the 29th, January the 5th,
9th and 23d. I thought that your affairs could not be more interesting
than they have been for a considerable time. Yet in the present moment
they are become more so, by the apparent withdrawing of so considerable
a personage in the drama, as the King of Prussia. To increase this
interest, another person, whose importance scarcely admits calculation,
is in a situation which fills us with alarm. Nature is struggling to
relieve him by a decided gout; she has my sincere prayers to aid her,
as I am persuaded she has yours. I have letters and papers from
America, as late as the 15th of December. The government of
Massachusetts had imprisoned three of the leaders of their insurgents.
The insurgents, being collected to the number of three or four hundred,
had sent in their petition to the government, praying another act of
pardon for their leaders and themselves, and, on this condition,
offering to go every man home, and conduct himself dutifully
afterwards. This is the latest intelligence.

I thank you for your attention to the question I had taken the liberty
of proposing to you. I think with you, that it would be advisable to
have our debt transferred to individuals of your country. There could,
and would be no objection to the guarantee remaining as you propose;
and a postponement of the first payments of capital, would surely be a
convenience to us. For though the resources of the United States are
great and growing, and their dispositions good, yet their machine is
new, and they have not got it to go well. It is the object of their
general wish at present, and they are all in movement, to set it in a
good train; but their movements are necessarily slow. They will surely
effect it in the end, because all have the same end in view; the
difficulty being only to get all the thirteen States to agree on the
same means. Divesting myself of every partiality, and speaking from
that thorough knowledge which I have of the country, their resources
and their principles, I had rather trust money in their hands, than in
that of any government on earth; because, though for awhile the
payments of the interest might be less regular, yet the final
reimbursement of the capital would be more sure.

I set out next week for the south of France, to try whether some
mineral waters in that quarter, much recommended, will restore the use
of my hand. I shall be absent from Paris two or three months; but I
take arrangements for the regular receipt of your favors, as if I were
here. It will be better, however, for you to put your letters to Mr.
Jay, under cover to Mr. Short, who remains here, and will forward them.

I have thought it my duty to submit to Congress the proposition about
the French debt, and may expect their answer in four months.

I have the honor to be, with sincere esteem and respect, Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MESSRS. BORGNIS DESBORDES FRÈRES.

PARIS, February 12, 1787.


GENTLEMEN,--Mr. Barclay, the American Consul General for France, being
at present out of the kingdom, I have given orders to Mr. Grand, banker
at Paris, to pay your draught for one hundred and eighty-six livres,
advanced by you for the relief of the shipwrecked Americans. I thank
you for your attention to these unfortunate people. It will rest with
Mr. Barclay to give such future directions as he shall think proper for
cases of this kind, which properly fall within the consular department.
A certainty that your kindness will meet his thanks, and that my
interference in his absence will be approved, has engaged me to do it
without any hesitation. I am just setting out on a journey of two or
three months, but Mr. Grand, as I have before mentioned, will pay your
draught for the 168 livres whenever you shall be pleased to make it. I
have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Gentlemen, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY MR. ADAMS.

PARIS, February 14, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--As I propose to write you on business by Mr. Cairnes, who
will set out in a few days for London, the object of the present letter
is only to inform you that the Count de Vergennes died yesterday
morning, and that the Count de Montmorin is appointed his successor,
and further to beg the favor of you to forward the enclosed by the
first vessel from London. I set out on my journey on Sunday the 18th. I
have the honor to be, with sentiments of very sincere affection and
respect, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, February 14, 1787.


SIR,--In the letter of the 8th instant, which I had the honor of
writing you, I informed you that the Count de Vergennes was dangerously
ill. He died yesterday morning, and the Count de Montmorin is appointed
his successor. Your personal knowledge of this gentleman, renders it
unnecessary for me to say anything of him.

Mr. Morris, during his office, being authorized to have the medals and
swords executed, which had been ordered by Congress, he authorized
Colonel Humphreys to take measures here for the execution. Colonel
Humphreys did so; and the swords were finished in time for him to carry
them. The medals not being finished, he desired me to attend to them.
The workman who was to make that of General Greene, brought me
yesterday, the medal in gold, twenty-three in copper, and the dye. Mr.
Short, during my absence, will avail himself of the first occasion
which shall offer, of forwarding the medals to you. I must beg leave,
through you, to ask the pleasure of Congress as to the number they
would choose to have struck. Perhaps they might be willing to deposit
one of each person, in every college of the United States. Perhaps they
might choose to give a series of them, to each of the crowned heads of
Europe, which would be an acceptable present to them. They will be
pleased to decide. In the meantime, I have sealed up the dye, and shall
retain it till I am honored with their orders as to this medal, and the
others also, when they shall be finished.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO M. LE PREVÔT DES MARCHANDS ET ECHEVINS DE PARIS.

PARIS, February 18, 1787.


SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of the letter with which you
have been pleased to honor me, together with the report on the
inauguration of the bust of the Major General the Marquis de La
Fayette. I availed myself of an opportunity which offered in the
moment, of transmitting them to the State of Virginia, with a faithful
representation of the favor with which the Prevôt des Marchands et
Echevins de Paris received their proposition, the zeal with which it
was pursued, and the dignity of its ultimate execution. Knowing the
attachment of my country to the character which was the subject of that
transaction, and the price they will set on the attentions of the
magistracy of Paris, I am safe in assuring you that they will feel
themselves infinitely obliged on this occasion.

The interest you are pleased to take in the happiness of our infant
States, your judicious admonitions as to the means of preserving it,
and the terms in which you particularly honor some of their members,
require my personal thanks, which I humbly offer, with all those
sentiments of homage and respect with which I have the honor to be,
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. CARMICHAEL.

PARIS, February 18, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--My last to you was dated December 26, since which I have
been honored with yours of December 17. I now enclose you a duplicate
of the vote for the recall of Mr. Lambe. I take the liberty, also, of
putting under cover to you our confirmation of the Morocco treaty,
together with a joint letter to Fennish. The fear that Mr. Barclay
might not be at Madrid has occasioned my giving you this trouble, as
well as that of addressing the letter properly, and of having it
transmitted.

I have received from Mr. Jay sundry despatches relative to the frigate
the South Carolina, and to a claim against the Court of Madrid founded
on the aid of that vessel in taking the Bahama and Providence islands,
with an instruction from Congress to confer with the Prince of
Luxembourg, and get him to interest the Duke de La Vauguyon to join you
in your solicitations of this matter. This is accordingly done, and you
will have the aid of the Duke. The despatches relative to this subject,
I have sealed up and addressed to you, but they will be delivered to
the Duke de La Vauguyon, to find a safe occasion of forwarding them. My
last news from America was of the 15th of December. The insurgents of
Massachusetts had sent in a petition to their government, praying the
release of their leaders in jail, and an act of pardon for themselves,
and offering thereon to retire every man to his home and to live
submissively. You will have heard of the death of the Count de
Vergennes, and appointment of Mons. de Montmorin. I was unlucky enough
five months ago to dislocate my right wrist, and though well set, I
have as yet no use of it, except that I can write, but in pain. I am
advised to try the use of mineral waters, and those of Aix in Provence
being as much recommended as any others, I combine with this object a
design of making the tour of those seaports with which we trade,
Marseilles, Bordeaux, Nantes, &c, and shall set out the day after
to-morrow, and expect to be absent three months. This may probably
prevent my having the honor of writing to you during that interval,
unless anything extraordinary should arise. I take measures for the
receipt of all letters addressed to me as regularly as were I here. I
have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. BARCLAY.

PARIS, February 18, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am now to acknowledge your separate favors of December
4th, and January 6th, and the joint one to Mr. Adams and myself of
January 6th; this last has been communicated to Congress, and to Mr.
Adams. You have my full and hearty approbation of the treaty you
obtained from Morocco, which is better and on better terms than I
expected. Mr. Adams and myself have annexed our confirmation to two of
the copies, one of which is gone to Congress; the other, with a joint
letter to Fennish, I now enclose to Mr. Carmichael, apprehending you
are not in Madrid. I concur clearly with you in opinion that, for many
reasons, Mr. Carmichael would be a proper person to negotiate our
business with Algiers, if it be negotiable with such means as we
possess. I have expressed, this opinion in my letters to America, but I
am sure we cannot raise the money necessary. Colonel Franks was gone to
London before I received your letter. He returned and embarked in the
packet for Havre, but nothing was done on the subject of accounts or
money. I was unlucky enough to dislocate my right wrist five months
ago, and though it was well set, I can yet make no use of it but to
write. I am advised to try mineral waters, and those of Aix in
Provence, being as much recommended as any others, I am induced to go
to them by the desire of making the tour of the ports with which we
trade, Marseilles, Bordeaux, Nantes, &c. I set out in two days and
shall be absent three months. The packets are finally fixed at Havre.
They sail every six weeks. Honfleur will, I think, certainly be made a
free port; and I flatter myself will become the centre for much of our
trade, and particularly that of rice. The death of Count de Vergennes,
and appointment of Monsieur de Montmorin, will reach you before this
letter does. I have letters, &c., from America as late as the 15th of
December. The insurgents of Massachusetts had prayed pardon for
themselves and their leaders in jail, and on these terms had offered to
retire and live peaceably at home. Mrs. Barclay and your family are
well, except they are somewhat apprehensive of a film growing over the
eye of your youngest daughter; but should it do so, it will be easily
removed. I have the honor to be, with much esteem and respect, dear
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, February 20, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of your favor of January
25th. Colonel Franks sailed in the packet of this month from Havre for
New York. The arrangement of the packets opens a direct communication
between Paris and America, and if we succeed, as I expect we will, in
getting Honfleur made a free port, I hope to see that place become the
deposit for our whale oil, rice, tobacco and furs, and that, from
thence, what is not wanted in the country may be distributed to others.
You remember giving me a letter of credit on Messrs. Willinck and
Staphorst for one thousand guineas to pay for the swords and medals.
When the swords were finished, I drew on the Vandemjers, with whom the
money was deposited, for sixty-five thousand livres, to pay for the
swords. They paid it. A medal is now finished, and others will very
soon be. But these gentlemen say they must have fresh orders. In the
meantime, the workmen complain. Will you be so good as to draw in favor
of Mr. Grand on Willinck, &c, for the balance of the thousand guineas
(which is about the sum that will be necessary), and send the bill to
Mr. Grand, who, in my absence, will negotiate it and pay the workmen. I
enclose you Vandemjers' answer. The meeting of the Notables on
Thursday, and the necessity of paying my court to our new minister,
will detain me till Friday, and perhaps till Tuesday next. Nothing is
known yet of the objects of this Assembly. I enclose you two new
pamphlets relative to it, and will inform you of whatever I can
discover relative to it during my stay. I learn with real pain the
resolution you have taken of quitting Europe. Your presence on this
side the Atlantic gave me a confidence that, if any difficulties should
arise within my department, I should always have one to advise with, on
whose counsels I could rely. I shall now feel bewidowed. I do not
wonder at your being tired out by the conduct of the court you are at.
But is there not room to do a great deal of good for us in Holland in
the department of money? No one can do it as well as yourself. But you
have taken your resolution on mature consideration, and I have nothing
to offer, therefore, but my regrets. If anything transpires from the
Notables before my departure worth communication, you shall yet hear
from me. In the meantime, believe me to be, with sincere esteem and
respect, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY MR. ADAMS.

PARIS, February 23, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--The Notables met yesterday; the King opened the Assembly
with a short speech, wherein he expressed his inclination to consult
with them on the affairs of his kingdom, to receive their opinions on
the plans he had digested, and to endeavor to imitate the head of his
family, Henry IV., whose name is so dear to the nation. The speech was
affectionate. The Garde des Sceaux spoke about twenty minutes,
complimented the clergy, the noblesse, the magistrates and tiers états.
The Comptroller General spoke about an hour. He enumerated the expenses
necessary to arrange his department when he came into it; he said his
returns had been minutely laid before the King; he took a review of the
preceding administrations, and more particularly of Mr. Neckar's; he
detailed the improvement which had been made; he portrayed the present
state of the finances, and sketched the several schemes proposed for
their improvement; he spoke on a change in the form of the taxes, the
removal of the interior custom-houses to the frontiers, provincial
administrations and some other objects. The Assembly was then divided
into committees. To-day, there was to be another grand Assembly, the
plans more fully explained and referred to the discussion of the
committees. The grand Assembly will meet once a week and vote
individually. The propriety of my attending the first audience day of
Count Montmorin, which will not be till the 27th, retards my departure
till then.

I have read your book with infinite satisfaction and improvement. It
will do great good in America. Its learning and its good sense will, I
hope, make it an institute for our politicians, old as well as young.
There is one opinion in it, however, which I will ask you to
reconsider, because it appears to me not entirely accurate, and not
likely to do good. Page 362, "Congress is not a legislative, but a
diplomatic assembly." Separating into parts the whole sovereignty of
our States, some of these parts are yielded to Congress. Upon these I
should think them both legislative and executive, and that would have
been judiciary also, had not the confederation required them for
certain purposes to appoint a judiciary. It has accordingly been the
decision of our courts that the confederation is a part of the law of
the land, and superior in authority to the ordinary laws, because it
cannot be altered by the legislature of any one State. I doubt whether
they are at all a diplomatic assembly. On the first news of this work
there were proposals to translate it. Fearing it might be murdered in
that operation, I endeavored to secure a good translator. This is done,
and I lend him my copy to translate from. It will be immediately
announced to keep others from attempting it. I am, with sincere esteem
and respect, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, February 23, 1787.


SIR,--The Assemblée des Notables being an event in the history of this
country which excites notice, I have supposed it would not be
disagreeable to you to learn its immediate objects, though no way
connected with our interests. The Assembly met yesterday; the King, in
a short but affectionate speech, informed them of his wish to consult
with them on the plans he had digested, and on the general good of his
people, and his desire to imitate the head of his family, Henry IV.,
whose memory is so dear to the nation. The Garde des Sceaux then spoke
about twenty minutes, chiefly in compliment to the orders present. The
Comptroller General, in a speech of about an hour, opened the budget,
and enlarged on the several subjects which will be under their
deliberation. He explained the situation of the finances at his
accession to office, the expenses which their arrangement had rendered
necessary, their present state, with the improvements made in them, the
several plans which had been proposed for their future improvement, a
change in the form of some of their taxes, the removal of the interior
custom-houses to the frontiers, and the institution of Provincial
Assemblies. The Assembly was then divided into committees, with a
prince of the blood at the head of each. In this form, they are to
discuss separately the subjects which will be submitted to them. Their
decision will be reported by two members to the minister, who, on view
of the separate decisions of all the committees, will make such changes
in his plans as will best accommodate them to their views, without too
much departing from his own, and will then submit them to the vote (but
I believe not to the debate) of the General Assembly, which will be
convened for this purpose one day in every week, and will vote
individually.

The event of the Count de Vergennes' death, of which I had the honor to
inform you in a letter of the 14th instant, the appointment of the
Count Montmorin, and the propriety of my attending at his first
audience, which will be on the 27th, have retarded the journey I had
proposed, a few days.

I shall hope, on my return, to meet here new powers for the consular
convention, as under those I have, it will be impossible to make the
changes in the convention which may be wished for.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient and most humble servant.




TO RICHARD PETERS.

PARIS, February 26, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Your favor of October 1, covering the letter and bill to
Captain Capitaine, did not come to my hands till yesterday. I wrote to
him immediately, to inform him it should be delivered here at any
moment. We talk and think of nothing here but the Assemblée des
Notables. Were all the puns collected, to which this Assembly has given
rise, I think they would make a larger volume than the "Encyclopédie."
The government is said to want eighty millions of livres revenue more
than they have. They propose to give to the people provincial
administrations, and to make other improvements. It is a pity they had
not more of the virtue called economy, of which we have something to
spare. I hope the company of Mrs. Peters and your little ones have
cured all your aches and pains both of body and mind. That you and they
may continue forever clear of them, is the sincere prayer of, dear Sir,
your friend and servant.




TO THE MARQUIS DE LA FAYETTE.

PARIS, February 28, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am just now in the moment of my departure. Monsieur de
Montmorin having given us audience at Paris yesterday, I missed the
opportunity of seeing you once more. I am extremely pleased with his
modesty, the simplicity of his manners, and his dispositions toward us.
I promise myself a great deal of satisfaction in doing business with
him. I hope he will not give ear to any unfriendly suggestions. I
flatter myself I shall hear from you sometimes. Send your letters to my
hotel, as usual, and they will be forwarded to me. I wish you success
in your meeting. I should form better hopes of it, if it were divided
into two Houses, instead of seven. Keeping the good model of your
neighboring country before your eyes, you may get on, step by step,
towards a good constitution. Though that model is not perfect, yet, as
it would unite more suffrages than any new one which could be proposed,
it is better to make that the object. If every advance is to be
purchased by filling the royal coffers with gold, it will be gold well
employed. The King, who means so well, should be encouraged to repeat
these Assemblies. You see how we republicans are apt to preach, when we
get on politics. Adieu, my dear friend. Yours affectionately.




TO MADAME LA COMTESSE DE TESSE.

NISMES, March 20, 1787.


Here I am, Madam, gazing whole hours at the Maison Quarrée, like a
lover at his mistress. The stocking weavers and silk spinners around it
consider me a hypochondriac Englishman, about to write with a pistol
the last chapter of his history. This is the second time I have been in
love since I left Paris. The first was with a Diana at the Chateau de
Laye-Epinaye in Beaujolois, a delicious morsel of sculpture, by M. A.
Slodtz. This, you will say, was in rule, to fall in love with a female
beauty; but with a house! it is out of all precedent. No, Madam, it is
not without a precedent in my own history. While in Paris, I was
violently smitten with the Hotel de Salm, and used to go to the
Tuileries almost daily, to look at it. The _loueuse des chaises_,
inattentive to my passion, never had the complaisance to place a chair
there, so that, sitting on the parapet, and twisting my neck round to
see the object of my admiration, I generally left it with a
_torti-colli_.

From Lyons to Nismes I have been nourished with the remains of Roman
grandeur. They have always brought you to my mind, because I know your
affection for whatever is Roman and noble. At Vienna I thought of you.
But I am glad you were not there; for you would have seen me more angry
than, I hope, you will ever see me. The Prætorian Palace, as it is
called, comparable, for its fine proportions, to the Maison Quarrée,
defaced by the barbarians who have converted it to its present purpose,
its beautiful fluted Corinthian columns cut out, in part, to make space
for Gothic windows, and hewed down, in the residue, to the plane of the
building, was enough, you must admit, to disturb my composure. At
Orange, too, I thought of you. I was sure you had seen with pleasure
the sublime triumphal arch of Marius at the entrance of the city. I
went then to the Arenæ. Would you believe, Madam, that in this
eighteenth century, in France, under the reign of Louis XVI., they are
at this moment pulling down the circular wall of this superb remain, to
pave a road? And that, too, from a hill which is itself an entire mass
of stone, just as fit, and more accessible? A former intendant, a M. de
Basville, has rendered his memory dear to the traveller and amateur, by
the pains he took to preserve and restore these monuments of antiquity.
The present one (I do not know who he is) is demolishing the object, to
make a good road to it. I thought of you again, and I was then in great
good humor, at the Pont du Gard, a sublime antiquity, and well
preserved. But most of all here, where Roman taste, genius, and
magnificence, excite ideas analogous to yours at every step. I could no
longer oppose the inclination to avail myself of your permission to
write to you, a permission given with too much complaisance by you, and
used by me with too much indiscretion. Madame de Tott did me the same
honor. But she, being only the descendant of some of those puny heroes
who boiled their own kettles before the walls of Troy, I shall write to
her from a Grecian, rather than a Roman canton; when I shall find
myself, for example, among her Phocæan relations at Marseilles.

Loving, as you do Madam, the precious remains of antiquity, loving
architecture, gardening, a warm sun and a clear sky, I wonder you have
never thought of moving Chaville to Nismes. This, as you know, has not
always been deemed impracticable; and, therefore, the next time a
_Sur-intendant des batiments du roi_, after the example of M. Colbert,
sends persons to Nismes to move the Maison Quarrée to Paris, that they
may not come empty handed, desire them to bring Chaville with them, to
replace it. _À propos_ of Paris. I have now been three weeks from
there, without knowing anything of what has passed. I suppose I shall
meet it all at Aix, where I have directed my letters to be lodged,
_poste restante_. My journey has given me leisure to reflect on this
Assemblée des Notables. Under a good and a young King, as the present,
I think good may be made of it. I would have the deputies then, by all
means, so conduct themselves as to encourage him to repeat the calls of
this Assembly. Their first step should be, to get themselves divided
into two chambers instead of seven; the Noblesse and the Commons
separately. The second, to persuade the King, instead of choosing the
deputies of the Commons himself, to summon those chosen by the people
for the Provincial administrations. The third, as the Noblesse is too
numerous to be all of the Assemblée, to obtain permission for that body
to choose its own deputies. Two Houses, so elected, would contain a
mass of wisdom which would make the people happy, and the King great;
would place him in history where no other act can possibly place him.
They would thus put themselves in the track of the best guide they can
follow; they would soon overtake it, become its guide in turn, and lead
to the wholesome modifications wanting in that model, and necessary to
constitute a rational government. Should they attempt more than the
established habits of the people are ripe for, they may lose all, and
retard indefinitely the ultimate object of their aim. These, Madam, are
my opinions; but I wish to know yours, which, I am sure, will be
better.

From a correspondent at Nismes, you will not expect news. Were I to
attempt to give you news, I should tell you stories one thousand years
old. I should detail to you the intrigues of the courts of the Cæsars,
how they affect us here, the oppressions of their prætors, prefects,
&c. I am immersed in antiquities from morning to night. For me, the
city of Rome is actually existing in all the splendor of its empire. I
am filled with alarms for the event of the irruptions daily making on
us, by the Goths, the Visigoths, Ostrogoths, and Vandals, lest they
should re-conquer us to our original barbarism. If I am sometimes
induced to look forward to the eighteenth century, it is only when
recalled to it by the recollection of your goodness and friendship, and
by those sentiments of sincere esteem and respect with which I have the
honor to be Madam, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO THE MARQUIS DE LA FAYETTE.

NICE, April 11, 1787.


Your head, my dear friend, is full of notable things; and being better
employed, therefore, I do not expect letters from you. I am constantly
roving about, to see what I have never seen before, and shall never see
again. In the great cities, I go to see what travellers think alone
worthy of being seen; but I make a job of it, and generally gulp it all
down in a day. On the other hand, I am never satiated with rambling
through the fields and farms, examining the culture and cultivators,
with a degree of curiosity which makes some take me to be a fool, and
others to be much wiser than I am. I have been pleased to find among
the people a less degree of physical misery than I had expected. They
are generally well clothed, and have a plenty of food, not animal
indeed, but vegetable, which is as wholesome. Perhaps they are
over-worked, the excess of the rent required by the landlord obliging
them to too many hours of labor in order to produce that, and wherewith
to feed and clothe themselves. The soil of Champagne and Burgundy I
have found more universally good than I had expected, and as I could
not help making a comparison with England, I found that comparison more
unfavorable to the latter than is generally admitted. The soil, the
climate, and the productions are superior to those of England, and the
husbandry as good, except in one point; that of manure. In England,
long leases for twenty-one years, or three lives, to wit, that of the
farmer, his wife, and son, renewed by the son as soon as he comes to
the possession, for his own life, his wife's and eldest child's, and so
on, render the farms there almost hereditary, make it worth the
farmer's while to manure the lands highly, and give the landlord an
opportunity of occasionally making his rent keep pace with the improved
state of the lands. Here the leases are either during pleasure, or for
three, six, or nine years, which does not give the farmer time to repay
himself for the expensive operation of well manuring, and, therefore,
he manures ill, or not at all. I suppose, that could the practice of
leasing for three lives be introduced in the whole kingdom, it would,
within the term of your life, increase agricultural productions fifty
per cent.; or were any one proprietor to do it with his own lands, it
would increase his rents fifty per cent., in the course of twenty-five
years. But I am told the laws do not permit it. The laws then, in this
particular, are unwise and unjust, and ought to give that permission.
In the southern provinces, where the soil is poor, the climate hot and
dry, and there are few animals, they would learn the art, found so
precious in England, of making vegetable manure, and thus improving
these provinces in the article in which nature has been least kind to
them. Indeed, these provinces afford a singular spectacle. Calculating
on the poverty of their soil, and their climate by its latitude only,
they should have been the poorest in France. On the contrary, they are
the richest, from one fortuitous circumstance. Spurs or ramifications
of high mountains, making down from the Alps, and, as it were,
reticulating these provinces, give to the valleys the protection of a
particular inclosure to each, and the benefit of a general stagnation
of the northern winds produced by the whole of them, and thus
countervail the advantage of several degrees of latitude. From the
first olive fields of Pierrelatte, to the orangeries of Hieres, has
been continued rapture to me. I have often wished for you. I think you
have not made this journey. It is a pleasure you have to come, and an
improvement to be added to the many you have already made. It will be a
great comfort to you, to know, from your own inspection, the condition
of all the provinces of your own country, and it will be interesting to
them at some future day, to be known to you. This is, perhaps, the only
moment of your life in which you can acquire that knowledge. And to do
it most effectually, you must be absolutely incognito, you must ferret
the people out of their hovels as I have done, look into their kettles,
eat their bread, loll on their beds under pretence of resting yourself,
but in fact, to find if they are soft. You will feel a sublime pleasure
in the course of this investigation, and a sublimer one hereafter, when
you shall be able to apply your knowledge to the softening of their
beds, or the throwing a morsel of meat into their kettle of vegetables.

You will not wonder at the subjects of my letters; they are the only
ones which have been presented to my mind for some time past; and the
waters must always be what are the fountains from which they flow.
According to this, indeed, I should have intermixed, from beginning to
end, warm expressions of friendship to you. But according to the ideas
of our country, we do not permit ourselves to speak even truths, when
they may have the air of flattery. I content myself, therefore, with
saying once for all, that I love you, your wife and children. Tell them
so, and adieu. Yours affectionately.




TO WILLIAM SHORT.

NICE, April 12, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--At Marseilles, they told me I should encounter the rice
fields of Piedmont soon after crossing the Alps. Here they tell me
there are none nearer than Vercelli and Novarra, which is carrying me
almost to Milan. I fear that this circumstance will occasion me a
greater delay than I had calculated on. However I am embarked in the
project, and shall go through with it. To-morrow, I set out on my
passage over the Alps, being to pursue it ninety-three miles to Coni,
on mules, as the snows are not yet enough melted to admit carriages to
pass. I leave mine here, therefore, proposing to return by water from
Genoa. I think it will be three weeks before I get back to Nice. I find
this climate quite as delightful as it has been represented. Hieres is
the only place in France, which may be compared with it. The climates
are equal. In favor of this place, are the circumstances of gay and
dissipated society, a handsome city, good accommodations, and some
commerce. In favor of Hieres, are environs of delicious and extensive
plains, a society more contracted, and therefore more capable of
esteem, and the neighborhood of Toulon, Marseilles and other places, to
which excursions may be made. Placing Marseilles in comparison with
Hieres, it has extensive society, a good theatre, freedom from military
control, and the most animated commerce. But its winter climate is far
inferior. I am now in the act of putting my baggage into portable form
for my bat-mule; after praying you therefore, to let my daughter know I
am well, and that I shall not be heard of again in three weeks, I take
my leave of you for that time, with assurances of the sincere esteem
with which I am, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

MARSEILLES, May 4, 1787.


SIR,--I had the honor of receiving at Aix your letter of February the
9th, and immediately wrote to the Count de Montmorin, explaining the
delay of the answer of Congress to the King's letter, and desired Mr.
Short to deliver that answer with my letter to Monsieur de Montmorin,
which he informs me he has accordingly done.

My absence prevented my noting to you, in the first moment, the
revolution which has taken place at Paris, in the department of
finance, by the substitution of Monsieur de Fourqueux in the place of
Monsieur de Calonne, so that you will have heard of it through other
channels before this will have the honor of reaching you.

Having staid at Aix long enough to prove the inefficacy of the waters,
I came on to this place for the purpose of informing myself here, as I
mean to do at the other sea-port towns, of whatever may be interesting
to our commerce. So far as carried on in our own bottoms, I find it
almost nothing, and so it must probably remain till something can be
done with the Algerines. Though severely afflicted with the plague,
they have come out within these few days, and showed themselves in
force along the coast of Genoa, cannonading a little town and taking
several vessels.

Among other objects of inquiry, this was the place to learn something
more certain on the subject of rice, as it is a great emporium for that
of the Levant and of Italy. I wished particularly to know whether it
was the use of a different machine for cleaning, which brought European
rice to market less broken than ours, as had been represented to me by
those who deal in that article in Paris. I found several persons who
had passed through the rice country of Italy, but not one who could
explain to me the nature of the machine. But I was given to believe
that I might see it myself immediately on entering Piedmont. As this
would require but about three weeks, I determined to go and ascertain
this point, as the chance only of placing our rice above all rivalship
in quality, as it is in color, by the introduction of a better machine,
if a better existed, seemed to justify the application of that much
time to it. I found the rice country to be in truth Lombardy, one
hundred miles further than had been represented, and that though called
Piedmont rice, not a grain is made in the country of Piedmont. I passed
through the rice fields of the Venellese and Milanese, about sixty
miles, and returned from thence last night, having found that the
machine is absolutely the same as ours, and of course, that we need not
listen more to that suggestion. It is a difference in the species of
grain, of which the government of Turin is so sensible, that, as I was
informed, they prohibit the exportation of rough rice on pain of death.
I have taken measures, however, which I think will not fail for
obtaining a quantity of it, and I bought on the spot a small parcel,
which I have with me. As further details on this subject to Congress
would be misplaced, I propose, on my return to Paris, to communicate
them, and send the rice to the society at Charleston for promoting
agriculture, supposing that they will be best able to try the
experiment of cultivating the rice of this quality, and to communicate
the species to the two States of South Carolina and Georgia, if they
find it answer. I thought the staple 'of these two States was entitled
to this attention, and that it must be desirable to them to be able to
furnish rice of the two qualities demanded in Europe, especially, as
the greater consumption is in the forms for which the Lombardy quality
is preferred. The mass of our countrymen being interested in
agriculture, I hope I do not err in supposing that in a time of
profound peace, as the present, to enable them to adapt their
productions to the market, to point out markets for them, and endeavor
to obtain favorable terms of reception, is within the line of my duty.

My journey into this part of the country has procured me information
which I will take the liberty of communicating to Congress. In October
last I received a letter dated Montpelier, October the 2d, 1786,
announcing to me that the writer was a foreigner, who had a matter of
very great consequence to communicate to me, and desired I would
indicate the channel through which it might pass safely. I did so.

I received soon after a letter in the following words, omitting only
the formal parts. [_A translation of it is here given._]

"I am a native of Brazil. You are not ignorant of the frightful slavery
under which my country groans. This continually becomes more
insupportable since the epoch of your glorious independence, for the
cruel Portuguese omit nothing which can render our condition more
wretched, from an apprehension that we may follow your example. The
conviction, that these usurpers against the laws of nature and humanity
only meditate new oppressions, has decided us to follow the guiding
light which you have held out to us, to break our chains, to revive our
almost expiring liberty, which is nearly overwhelmed by that force,
which is the sole foundation of the authority that Europeans exercise
over American. But it is necessary that some power should extend
assistance to the Brazilians, since Spain would certainly unite herself
with Portugal; and in spite of our advantages for defence, we could not
make it effectual, or, at least, it would be imprudent to hazard the
attempt without some assurance of success. In this state of affairs,
Sir, we can with propriety look only to the United States, not only
because we are following her example, but, moreover, because nature, in
making us inhabitants of the same continent, has in some sort united us
in the bonds of a common patriotism. On our part, we are prepared to
furnish the necessary supplies of money, and at all times to
acknowledge the debt of gratitude due to our benefactors. I have thus,
Sir, laid before you a summary of my views. It is in discharge of this
commission that I have come to France, since I could not effect it in
America without exciting suspicion. It now remains for you to decide
whether those views can be accomplished. Should you desire to consult
your nation on them, it is in my power to give you all the information
you may require."

As, by this time, I had been advised to try the waters of Aix, I wrote
to the gentleman my design, and that I would go off my road as far as
Nismes, under the pretext of seeing the antiquities of that place, if
he would meet me there. He met me, and the following is the sum of the
information I received from him: "Brazil contains as many inhabitants
as Portugal. They are, 1. Portuguese. 2. Native whites. 3. Black and
mulatto slaves. 4. Indians, civilized and savage. 1. The Portuguese are
few in number, mostly married there, have lost sight of their native
country, as well as the prospect of returning to it, and are disposed
to become independent. 2. The native whites form the body of their
nation. 3. The slaves are as numerous as the free. 4. The civilized
Indians have no energy, and the savage would not meddle. There are
twenty thousand regular troops. Originally these were Portuguese. But
as they died off, they were replaced by natives, so that these compose
at present the mass of the troops, and may be counted on by their
native country. The officers are partly Portuguese, partly Brazilians;
their bravery is not doubted, and they understand the parade, but not
the science of their profession. They have no bias for Portugal, but no
energy either for anything. The priests are partly Portuguese, partly
Brazilians, and will not interest themselves much. The Noblesse are
scarcely known as such. They will, in no manner, be distinguished from
the people. The men of letters are those most desirous of a revolution.
The people are not much under the influence of their priests, most of
them read and write, possess arms, and are in the habit of using them
for hunting. The slaves will take the side of their masters. In short,
as to the question of revolution, there is but one mind in that
country. But there appears no person capable of conducting a
revolution, or willing to venture himself at its head, without the aid
of some powerful nation, as the people of their own might fail them.
There is no printing press in Brazil. They consider the North American
revolution as a precedent for theirs. They look to the United States as
most likely to give them honest support, and, from a variety of
considerations, have the strongest prejudices in our favor. This
informant is a native and inhabitant of Rio Janeiro, the present
metropolis, which contains fifty thousand inhabitants, knows well St.
Salvador, the former one, and the mines d'or, which are in the centre
of the country. These are all for a revolution; and, constituting the
body of the nation, the other parts will follow them. The King's fifth
of the mines yields annually thirteen millions of crusadoes or half
dollars. He has the sole right of searching for diamonds and other
precious stones, which yield him about half as much. His income from
those two resources alone, then, is about ten millions of dollars
annually; but the remaining part of the produce of the mines, being
twenty-six millions, might be counted on for effecting a revolution.
Besides the arms in the hands of the people, there are public
magazines. They have abundance of horses, but only a part of their
country would admit the service of horses. They would want cannon,
ammunition, ships, sailors, soldiers and officers, for which they are
disposed to look to the United States, it being always understood that
every service and furniture will be well paid. Corn costs about twenty
livres the one hundred pounds. They have flesh in the greatest
abundance, insomuch, that in some parts they kill beeves for the skin
only. The whale fishery is carried on by Brazilians altogether, and not
by Portuguese; but in very small vessels, so that the fishermen know
nothing of managing a large ship. They would want of us, at all times,
shipping, corn and salt fish. The latter is a great article, and they
are at present supplied with it from Portugal. Portugal, being without
either army or navy, could not attempt an invasion under a twelvemonth.
Considering of what it would be composed, it would not be much to be
feared, and, if it failed, they would probably never attempt a second.
Indeed, this source of their wealth being intercepted, they are
scarcely capable of a first effort. The thinking part of the nation are
so sensible of this, that they consider an early separation inevitable.
There is an implacable hatred between the Brazilians and Portuguese; to
reconcile which, a former minister adopted the policy of letting the
Brazilians into a participation of public offices, but subsequent
administrations have reverted to the ancient policy of keeping the
administration in the hands of native Portuguese. There is a mixture of
natives of the old appointments still remaining in office. If Spain
should invade them on their southern extremities, these are so distant
from the body of their settlements, that they could not penetrate
thence; and Spanish enterprise is not formidable. The mines d'or are
among mountains inaccessible to any army, and Rio Janeiro is considered
the strongest port in the world after Gibraltar. In case of a
successful revolution, a republican government in a single body would
probably be established."

I took care to impress on him, through the whole of our conversation,
that I had neither instructions nor authority to say a word to anybody
on this subject, and that I could only give him my own ideas, as a
single individual; which were, that we were not in a condition at
present to meddle nationally in any war; that we wished particularly to
cultivate the friendship of Portugal, with whom we have an advantageous
commerce. That yet a successful revolution in Brazil could not be
uninteresting to us. That prospects of lucre might possibly draw
numbers of individuals to their aid, and purer motives our officers,
among whom are many excellent. That our citizens, being free to leave
their own country individually, without the consent of their
governments, are equally free to go to any other.

A little before I received the first letter of the Brazilian, a
gentleman informed me there was a Mexican in Paris, who wished to have
some conversation with me. He accordingly called on me. The substance
of the information I drew from him was as follows. He is himself a
native of Mexico, where his relations are, principally. He left it at
about seventeen years of age, and seems now to be about thirty-three or
thirty-four. He classes and characterizes the inhabitants of that
country, as follows: 1. The natives of Old Spain, possessed of most of
the offices of government, and firmly attached to it. 2. The clergy,
equally attached to the government. 3. The natives of Mexico, generally
disposed to revolt, but without instruction, without energy, and much
under the dominion of their priests. 4. The slaves, mulatto and black;
the former enterprising and intelligent, the latter brave, and of very
important weight, into whatever scale they throw themselves; but he
thinks they will side with their masters. 5. The conquered Indians,
cowardly, not likely to take any side, nor important which they take.
6. The free Indians, brave and formidable, should they interfere, but
not likely to do so, as being at a great distance. I asked him the
numbers of these several classes, but he could not give them. The
first, he thought very inconsiderable; that the second formed the body
of the freemen; the third equal to the two first the fourth, to all the
preceding; and, as to the fifth, he could form no idea of their
proportion. Indeed, it appeared to me, that his conjectures as to the
others, were on loose grounds. He said he knew from good information,
there were three hundred thousand inhabitants in the city of Mexico. I
was still more cautious with him than with the Brazilian, mentioning it
as my private opinion (unauthorized to say a word on the subject
otherwise) that a successful revolution was still at a distance with
them; that I feared they must begin by enlightening and emancipating
the minds of their people; that, as to us, if Spain should give us
advantageous terms of commerce, and remove other difficulties, it was
not probable that we should relinquish certain and present advantages,
though smaller, for uncertain and future ones, however great. I was led
into this caution by observing that this gentleman was intimate at the
Spanish ambassador's, and that he was then at Paris, employed by Spain
to settle her boundaries with France, on the Pyrenees. He had much the
air of candor, but that can be borrowed; so that I was not able to
decide about him in my own mind.

Led by a unity of subject, and a desire to give Congress as general a
view of the disposition of our southern countrymen, as my information
enables me, I will add an article which, old and insulated, I did not
think important enough to mention at the time I received it. You will
remember, Sir, that during the late war, the British papers often gave
details of a rebellion in Peru. The character of those papers
discredited the information. But the truth was, that the insurrections
were so general, that the event was long on the poise. Had Commodore
Johnson, then expected on that coast, touched and landed there two
thousand men, the dominion of Spain in that country would have been at
an end. They only wanted a point of union, which this body would have
constituted. Not having this, they acted without concert, and were at
length subdued separately. This conflagration was quenched in blood;
two hundred thousand souls, on both sides, having perished; but the
remaining matter is very capable of combustion. I have this information
from a person who was on the spot at the time, and whose good faith,
understanding, and means of information, leave no doubt of the facts.
He observed, however, that the numbers above supposed to have perished,
were on such conjectures only as he could collect.

I trouble Congress with these details, because, however distant we may
be, both in condition and dispositions, from taking an active part in
any commotions in that country, nature has placed it too near us, to
make its movements altogether indifferent to our interests, or to our
curiosity.

I hear of another _Arret_ of this court, increasing the duties on
foreign stock-fish, and the premium on their own, imported into their
islands; but not having yet seen it, I can say nothing certain on it. I
hope the effect of this policy will be defeated by the practice which,
I am told, takes place on the Banks of Newfoundland, of putting our
fish into the French fishing-boats, and the parties sharing the
premium, instead of ours paying the duty.

I am in hopes Mr. Short will be able to send you the medals of General
Gates, by this packet. I await a general instruction as to these
medals. The academies of Europe will be much pleased to receive each a
set.

I propose to set out the day after to-morrow for Bordeaux, (by the
canal of Languedoc,) Nantes, L'Orient and Paris.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO M. GUIDE.

MARSEILLES, May 6, 1787.


SIR,--A desire of seeing a commerce commenced between the dominions of
His Majesty, the King of Sardinia, and the United States of America,
and a direct exchange of their respective productions, without passing
through a third nation, led me into the conversation which I had the
honor of having with you on that subject, and afterwards with Monsieur
Tallon, at Turin, to whom I promised that I would explain to you, in
writing, the substance of what passed between us. The articles of your
produce wanted with us, are brandies, wines, oil, fruits, and
manufactured silks: those with which we can furnish you, are indigo,
potash, tobacco, flour, salt fish, furs and peltries, ships and
materials for building them. The supply of tobacco, particularly, being
in the hands of government solely, appeared to me to offer an article
for beginning immediately the experiment of direct commerce. That of
the first quality can be had, at first hand, only from James river, in
Virginia; those of the second and third, from the same place and from
Baltimore, in Maryland. The first quality is delivered in the ports of
France at thirty-eight livres the quintal, the second at thirty-six
livres, the third at thirty-four livres, weight and money of France, by
individuals generally. I send you the copy of a large contract, wherein
the three qualities are averaged at thirty-six livres. They may be
delivered at Nice for those prices. Indeed, it is my opinion, that by
making shipments of your own produce to those places, and buying the
tobaccos on the spot, they may be had more advantageously. In this
case, it would be expedient that merchants of Nice, Turin, and America,
should form a joint concern for conducting the business in the two
countries. Monsieur Tallon desired me to point out proper persons in
America, who might be addressed for this purpose. The house of the most
extensive reputation, concerned in the tobacco trade, and on the
firmest funds, is that of Messrs. Ross and Pleasants, at Richmond, in
Virginia. If it should be concluded, on your part, to make any attempt
of this kind, and to address yourselves to these gentlemen, or any
others, it would be the best to write them your ideas, and receive
theirs, before you make either purchases or shipments. A more hasty
conduct might occasion loss, and retard, instead of encouraging the
establishment of this commerce. I would undertake to write, at the same
time, to these, or any other merchants whom you should prefer, in order
to dispose them favorably, and as disinterestedly as possible, for the
encouragement of this essay. I must observe to you, that our vessels
are fearful of coming into the Mediterranean on account of the
Algerines; and that, if you should freight vessels, those of the French
will be most advantageous for you, because received into our ports
without paying any duties on some of those articles, and lighter than
others on all of them. English vessels, on the other hand, are
distinguished by paying heavier duties than those of any other nation.
Should you desire any further information, or to pass letters with
certainty to any mercantile house in America, do me the favor to
address yourselves to me, at Paris, and I shall do whatever depends on
me, for this object.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of high esteem and respect,
Sir, your most obedient humble servant.




TO WILLIAM CARMICHAEL.

PARIS, June 14, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Having got back to Paris three days ago, I resume
immediately the correspondence with which you have been pleased to
honor me. I wish I could have begun it with more agreeable information
than that furnished me by Mr. Grand, that the funds of the United
States here are exhausted, and himself considerably in advance; and by
the Board of Treasury at New York, that they have no immediate prospect
of furnishing us supplies. We are thus left to shift for ourselves,
without previous warning. As soon as they shall replenish Mr. Grand's
hands, I will give you notice, that you may recommence your usual
drafts on him; unless the board should provide a separate fund for you,
dependent on yourself alone, which I have strongly and repeatedly
pressed on them, in order to remove the indecency of suffering your
drafts to pass through any intermediate hand for payment.

My letters from America came down to the 24th of April. The
disturbances in the Eastern States were entirely settled. I do not
learn that the government had made any examples. Mr. Hancock's health
being re-established, the want of which had occasioned him to resign
the government of Massachusetts, he has been re-elected to the
exclusion of Governor Bowdoin. New York still refuses to pass the
impost in any form, and, were she to pass it, Pennsylvania will not
uncouple it from the supplementary funds. These two States and Virginia
are the only ones, my letters say, which have paid anything into the
Continental treasury, for a twelve month past. I send you a copy of a
circular letter from Congress to the several States, insisting on their
removing all obstructions to the recovery of British debts. This was
hurried, that it might be delivered to the Assembly of New York before
they rose. It was delivered, but they did nothing in consequence of it.
The convention to be assembled at Philadelphia will be an able one. Ten
States were known to have appointed delegates. Maryland was about to
appoint; Connecticut was doubtful; and Rhode Island had refused. We are
sure, however, of eleven States. South Carolina has prohibited the
importation of slaves for three years; which is a step towards a
perpetual prohibition. Between six and seven hundred thousand acres of
land are actually surveyed into townships, and the sales are to begin
immediately. They are not to be sold for less than a dollar the acre,
in public certificates. I wrote you from Bordeaux on the subject of
Colonel Smith. I was sorry I missed him there, for other reasons as
well as from a curiosity to know his errand. The Notables have laid the
foundation of much good here; you have seen it detailed in the public
papers. The Prince of Wales is likely to recover from his illness,
which was very threatening. It is feared that three powers have
combined to lift the Prince of Orange out of his difficulties. Have you
yet the cypher of which I formerly wrote to you, or any copy of it?

I am, with sincere esteem, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO MR. DUMAS.

PARIS, June 14, 1787.


SIR,--I arrived at this place three days ago, and avail myself of the
first possible moment of acknowledging the receipt of your favors of
the 5th and 7th of June. The letters they accompanied for Mr. Jay shall
be sent by the packet, which sails the 25th instant, and by a
passenger. My letters from America are none later than the 24th of
April. The disturbances in the Eastern States were entirely settled. I
do not learn that the government required any capital punishments. We
promise ourselves good from the Convention holding at Philadelphia. It
consists of the ablest men in America. It will surely be the instrument
of referring to Congress the regulation of our trade. This may enable
them to carry into effect a general impost which one or two obstinate
States have so long prevented. Between six and seven hundred thousand
acres of land are now surveyed into townships, and will be immediately
sold. The backwardness of the States to bring money into the public
treasury has increased rather than diminished. This has prevented the
treasury board from remitting any money to this place for some time
past, and Mr. Grand has given me notice that their funds in his hands
are exhausted, and himself considerably in advance. This renders it
necessary for us to suspend all draughts on him until he shall have
received supplies from the Board of Treasury, to whom I write to press
remittances. The moment we shall have wherewithal to answer your
accustomary draughts, I will exercise the pleasing office of giving you
notice of it. Indeed, I perceive by the papers that Mr. Adams is gone
over to Holland. I am not without hopes that his object may be to
procure supplies of money, and that your exertions joined with his may
give relief to us all. I have no answer from Congress on the subject
which has been thought of between us. I am afraid we may consider the
refusal of the impost as an answer. I am exceedingly anxious to see the
turn the affairs of your country may take. It will surely be seen soon
whether for the better or worse. I wish nothing may be gathering in the
horizon to obscure the prospects of the patriotic party. My prayers for
their prosperity are warm, as are the sentiments of personal esteem and
respect with which I have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient, and
most humble servant.




TO J. BANNISTER, JUNIOR.

PARIS, June 19, 1787.


DEAR SIR--I have received your favor of April the 23d, from New York,
and am sorry to find you have had a relapse. Time and temperance,
however, will cure you; to which add exercise. I hope you have long ago
had a happy meeting with your friends, with whom a few hours would be
to me an ineffable feast. The face of Europe appears a little turbid,
but all will subside. The Empress endeavored to bully the Turk, who
laughed at her, and she is going back. The Emperor's reformations have
occasioned the appearance of insurrection in Flanders, and he,
according to character, will probably tread back his steps. A change of
system here, with respect to the Dutch, is suspected; because the Kings
of Prussia and England openly espouse the cause of the Stadtholder, and
that of the Patriots is likely to fall. The American acquaintances whom
you left here, not being stationary, you will hardly expect news of
them. Mrs. Barrett, lately dead, was, I think, known to you. I had a
letter from Ledyard lately, dated at St. Petersburg. He had but two
shirts, and yet more shirts than shillings. Still he was determined to
obtain the palm of being the first circumambulator of the earth. He
says, that having no money, they kick him from place to place, and thus
he expects to be kicked round the globe. Are you become a great walker?
You know I preach up that kind of exercise. Shall I send you a
_conte-pas_? It will cost you a dozen louis, but be a great stimulus to
walking, as it will record your steps. I finished my tour a week or ten
days ago. I went as far as Turin, Milan, Genoa; and never passed three
months and a half more delightfully. I returned through the canal of
Languedoc, by Bordeaux, Nantes, L'Orient, and Rennes; then returned to
Nantes and came up the Loire to Orleans. I was alone through the whole,
and think one travels more usefully when alone, because he reflects
more.

Present me in the most friendly terms to Mrs. Bannister, and to your
father, and be assured of the sincere esteem of, dear Sir, your friend
and servant.




TO JAMES MADISON.[3]

PARIS, June 20, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I wrote you last on the 30th of January, with a postscript
of February the 5th. Having set out the last day of that month to try
the waters of Aix, and been journeying since, till the 10th instant, I
have been unable to continue my correspondence with you. In the
meantime, I have received your several favors of February the 16th,
March the 18th and 19th, and April the 23d. The last arrived here about
the 25th of May, while those of March the 18th and 19th, though written
five weeks earlier, arrived three weeks later. I mention this to show
you how uncertain is the conveyance through England.

      [3] Much of this letter is in cypher, but the notes annexed to it
      have enabled the Editor to decipher and publish it.

The idea of separating the executive business of the confederacy from
Congress, as the judiciary is already, in some degree, is just and
necessary. I had frequently pressed on the members individually, while
in Congress, the doing this by a resolution of Congress for appointing
an executive committee, to act during the sessions of Congress, as the
committee of the States was to act during their vacations. But the
referring to this committee all executive business, as it should
present itself, would require a more persevering self-denial than I
suppose Congress to possess. It will be much better to make that
separation by a federal act. The negative, proposed to be given them on
all the acts of the several legislatures, is now, for the first time,
suggested to my mind. _Prima facie_, I do not like it. It fails in an
essential character; that the hole and the patch should be
commensurate. But this proposes to mend a small hole by covering the
whole garment. Not more than one out of one hundred State acts concern
the confederacy. This proposition, then, in order to give them one
degree of power, which they ought to have, gives them ninety-nine more,
which they ought not to have, upon a presumption that they will not
exercise the ninety-nine. But upon every act, there will be a
preliminary question, Does this act concern the confederacy? And was
there ever a proposition so plain, as to pass Congress without a
debate? Their decisions are almost always wise; they are like pure
metal. But you know of how much dross this is the result. Would not an
appeal from the State judicature to a federal court, in all cases where
the act of Confederation controlled the question, be as effectual a
remedy, and exactly commensurate to the defect? A British creditor, for
example, sues for his debt in Virginia; the defendant pleads an act of
the State, excluding him from their courts; the plaintiff urges the
Confederation, and the treaty made under that, as controlling the State
law; the judges are weak enough to decide according to the views of
their legislature. An appeal to a federal court sets all to rights. It
will be said, that this court may encroach on the jurisdiction of the
State courts. It may. But there will be a power, to wit, Congress, to
watch and restrain them. But place the same authority in Congress
itself, and there will be no power above them, to perform the same
office. They will restrain within due bounds, a jurisdiction exercised
by others, much more rigorously than if exercised by themselves.

I am uneasy at seeing that the sale of our western lands is not yet
commenced. That valuable fund for the immediate extinction of our debt
will, I fear, be suffered to slip through our fingers. Every delay
exposes it to events which no human foresight can guard against. When
we consider the temper of the people of that country, derived from the
circumstances which surround them, we must suppose their separation
possible, at every moment. If they can be retained till their
governments become settled and wise, they will remain with us always,
and be a precious part of our strength and our virtue. But this affair
of the Mississippi, by showing that Congress is capable of hesitating
on a question, which proposes a clear sacrifice of the western, to the
maritime States, will with difficulty be obliterated. The proposition
of my going to Madrid, to try to recover there the ground which has
been lost at New York, by the concession of the vote of seven States, I
should think desperate. With respect to myself, weighing the pleasure
of the journey and bare possibility of success, in one scale, and the
strong probability of failure and the public disappointment directed on
me, in the other, the latter preponderates. Add to this, that jealousy
might be excited in the breast of a person, who could find occasions of
making me uneasy.

The late changes in the ministry here excite considerable hopes. I
think we gain in them all. I am particularly happy at the re-entry of
Malesherbes into the Council, His knowledge and integrity render his
value inappreciable, and the greater to me, because, while he had no
views of office, we had established together the most unreserved
intimacy. So far, too, I am pleased with Montmorin. His honesty
proceeds from the heart as well as the head, and therefore may be more
surely counted on. The King loves business, economy, order, and
justice, and wishes sincerely the good of his people; but he is
irascible, rude, very limited in his understanding, and religious,
bordering on bigotry. He has no mistress, loves his queen, and is too
much governed by her. She is capricious like her brother, and governed
by him; devoted to pleasure and expense; and not remarkable for any
other vices or virtues. Unhappily the King shows a propensity for the
pleasures of the table. That for drink has increased lately, or, at
least, it has become more known.

For European news in general, I will refer you to my letter to Mr. Jay.
Is it not possible, that the occurrences in Holland may excite a desire
in many, of leaving that country and transferring their effects out of
it, and thus make an opening for shifting into their hands, the debts
due to this country, to its officers, and Farmers? It would be surely
eligible. I believe Dumas, if put on the watch, might alone suffice;
but he surely might, if Mr. Adams should go when the moment offers.
Dumas has been in the habit of sending his letters open to me, to be
forwarded to Mr. Jay. During my absence, they passed through Mr.
Short's hands, who made extracts from them, by which I see he has been
recommending himself and me for the money negotiations in Holland. It
might be thought, perhaps, that I have encouraged him in this. Be
assured, my dear Sir, that no such idea ever entered my head. On the
contrary, it is a business which would be the most disagreeable to me
of all others, and for which I am the most unfit person living. I do
not understand bargaining, nor possess the dexterity requisite for the
purpose. On the other hand, Mr. Adams, whom I expressly and sincerely
recommend, stands already on ground for that business, which I could
not gain in years. Pray set me to rights in the minds of those who may
have supposed me privy to this proposition. _En passant_, I will
observe with respect to Mr. Dumas, that the death of the Count de
Vergennes places Congress more at their ease, how to dispose of him.
Our credit has been ill treated here in public debate, and our debt
here deemed apocryphal. We should try to transfer this debt elsewhere,
and leave nothing capable of exciting ill thoughts between us. I shall
mention in my letter to Mr. Jay, a disagreeable affair which Mr.
Barclay has been thrown into, at Bordeaux. An honester man cannot be
found, nor a slower, nor more indecisive one. His affairs, too, are so
embarrassed and desperate, that the public reputation is, every moment,
in danger of being compromitted with him. He is perfectly amiable and
honest, with all his embarrassments.

By the next packet, I shall be able to send you some books, as also
your watch and pedometer. The two last are not yet done. To search for
books, and forward them to Havre, will require more time than I had
between my return and the departure of this packet. Having been a
witness, heretofore, to the divisions in Congress on the subject of
their foreign ministers, it would be a weakness in me to suppose none
with respect to myself, or to count with any confidence on the renewal
of my commission, which expires on the 10th day of March next; and the
more so, as instead of requiring the disapprobation of seven States, as
formerly, that of one suffices for a recall, when Congress consists of
only seven States, two, when of eight, &c., which I suppose to be
habitually their numbers at present. Whenever I leave this place, it
will be necessary to begin my arrangements six months before my
departure; and these, once fairly begun and under way, and my mind set
homewards, a change of purpose could hardly take place. If it should be
the desire of Congress that I should continue still longer, I could
wish to know it, at farthest, by the packet which will sail from New
York in September. Because, were I to put off longer the quitting my
house, selling my furniture, &c., I should not have time left to wind
up my affairs; and having once quitted, and sold off my furniture, I
could not think of establishing myself here again. I take the liberty
of mentioning this matter to you, not with a desire to change the
purpose of Congress, but to know it in time. I have never fixed in my
mind, the epoch of my return, so far as shall depend on myself, but I
never supposed it very distant. Probably I shall not risk a second vote
on this subject. Such trifling things may draw on me the displeasure of
one or two States, and thus submit me to the disgrace of a recall.

I thank you for the paccan nuts, which accompanied your letter of
March. Could you procure me a copy of the bill for proportioning crimes
and punishments, in the form in which it was ultimately rejected by the
House of Delegates? Young Mr. Bannister desired me to send him
regularly the _Mercure de France_. I will ask leave to do this through
you, and that you will adopt such method of forwarding them to him, as
will save him from being submitted to postage, which they would not be
worth. As a compensation for your trouble, you will be free to keep
them till you shall have read them. I am, with sentiments of the most
sincere esteem, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, June 21, 1787


SIR,--I had the honor of addressing you in a letter of May the 4th,
from Marseilles, which was to have gone by the last packet. But it
arrived a few hours too late for that conveyance, and has been
committed to a private one, passing through England, with a promise
that it should go through no post office.

I was desirous, while at the seaports, to obtain a list of the American
vessels which have come to them since the peace, in order to estimate
their comparative importance to us, as well as the general amount of
our commerce with this country, so far as carried on in our own
bottoms. At Marseilles, I found there had been thirty-two, since that
period; at Cette, not a single one; at Bayonne, one of our free ports,
only one. This last fact I learned from other information, not having
visited that place; as it would have been a deviation from my route,
too considerable for the importance of the object. At Bordeaux, Nantes,
and L'Orient, I could not obtain lists in the moment; but am in hopes I
shall be able to get them ere long. Though more important to us, they
will probably be more imperfect than that of Marseilles. At Nantes, I
began with Monsieur Dobrée an arrangement of his claims. I visited the
military stores, which have been detained there so long, opened some
boxes of each kind, and found the state of their contents much better
than had been represented. An exact list of the articles is to be sent
me.

The importations into L'Orient of other fish oils, besides those of the
whale, brought to my notice there a defect in the letter of Monsieur de
Calonne, of October the 22d, which letter was formerly communicated to
you. In that, _whale_ oil only was named. The other fish oils,
therefore, have continued to pay the old duties. In a conference with
Monsieur de Villedeuil, the present Comptroller General, since my
return, I proposed the extending the exemption to all _fish oils_,
according to the letter of the Hanseatic treaty, which had formed the
basis of the regulations respecting us. I think this will be agreed to.
The delays of office first, then the illness of Monsieur de Calonne,
and lastly, his removal and the throng of business occasioned by the
Assemblée des Notables, have prevented the reducing the substance of
the letter into the form of an _Arret_, as yet; though I have continued
soliciting it as much as circumstances would bear. I am now promised
that it shall be done immediately, and that it shall be so far
retrospective to the date of the letter, as that all duties paid since
that, shall be refunded.

The new accessions to the ministry are valued here. Good is hoped from
the Archbishop of Toulouse, who succeeds the Count de Vergennes as
_Chef du Counseil de Finance_. Monsieur de Villedeuil, the Comptroller
General, has been approved by the public, in the offices he has
heretofore exercised. The Duke de Nivernois, called to the Council, is
reckoned a good and able man; and Monsieur de Malesherbes, called also
to the Council, is unquestionably the first character in the kingdom,
for integrity, patriotism, knowledge, and experience in business. There
is a fear that the Maréchal de Castries is disposed to retire.

The face of things in Europe is a little turbid at present; but
probably all will subside. The Empress of Russia, it is supposed, will
not push her pretensions against the Turks to actual war. Weighing the
fondness of the Emperor for innovation, against his want of
perseverance, it is difficult to calculate what he will do with his
discontented subjects in Brabant and Flanders. If those provinces alone
were concerned, he would probably give back; but this would induce an
opposition to his plan, in all his other dominions. Perhaps he may be
able to find a compromise. The cause of the Patriots in Holland is a
little clouded at present. England and Prussia seem disposed to
interpose effectually. The former has actually ordered a fleet of six
sail of the line, northwardly, under Gore; and the latter threatens to
put her troops into motion. The danger of losing such a weight in their
scale, as that of Prussia, would occasion this court to prefer
conciliation to war. Add to this the distress of their finances, and
perhaps not so warm a zeal in the new ministry for the innovations in
Holland. I hardly believe they will think it worth while to purchase
the change of constitution proposed there, at the expense of a war. But
of these things you will receive more particular and more certain
details from Mr. Dumas, to whom they belong.

Mr. Eden is appointed Ambassador from England to Madrid. To the hatred
borne us by his court and country, is added a recollection of the
circumstances of the unsuccessful embassy to America, of which he made
a part. So that I think he will carry to Madrid dispositions to do us
all the ill he can.

The late change in the ministry is very favorable to the prospects of
the Chevalier de La Luzerne. The Count de Montmorin, Monsieur de
Malesherbes, and Monsieur de Lamoignon, the Garde des Sceaux, are his
near relations. Probably something will be done for him, and without
delay. The promise of the former administration to the Count de
Moutier, to succeed to this vacancy, should it take place, will perhaps
be performed by the present one.

Mr. Barclay has probably informed you of his having been arrested in
Bordeaux, for a debt contracted in the way of his commerce. He
immediately applied to the parliament of that place, who ordered his
discharge. This took place after five days' actual imprisonment. I
arrived at Bordeaux a few days after his liberation. As the Procureur
General of the King had interested himself to obtain it, with uncommon
zeal, and that too on public principles, I thought it my duty to wait
on him and return him my thanks. I did the same to the president of the
parliament, for the body over which he presided; what would have been
an insult in America, being an indispensable duty here. You will see by
the enclosed printed paper, on what grounds the Procureur insisted on
Mr. Barclay's liberation. Those on which the parliament ordered it, are
not expressed. On my arrival here, I spoke with the minister on that
subject. He observed that the character of consul is no protection in
this country against process for debt; that as to the character with
which Mr. Barclay had been invested at the court of Morocco, it was
questionable whether it would be placed on the diplomatic line, as it
had not been derived immediately from Congress; that, if it were, it
would have covered him to Paris only, where he had received his
commission, had he proceeded directly thither, but that his long stay
at Bordeaux must be considered as terminating it there. I observed to
him, that Mr. Barclay had been arrested almost immediately on his
arrival at Bordeaux. But, says he, the arrest was made void by the
parliament, and still he has continued there several weeks. True, I
replied, but his adversaries declared they would arrest him again, the
moment he should go out of the jurisdiction of the parliament of
Bordeaux, and have actually engaged the Maréchaussée on the road, to do
it. This seemed to impress him. He said he could obtain a letter of
safe conduct which would protect him to Paris, but that, immediately on
his arrival here, he would be liable to arrest. I asked him if such a
letter could not be obtained to protect him to Paris, and back to
Bordeaux, and even to America? He said, that for that, the consent of
the greater part of his creditors would be necessary; and even with
this, it was very doubtful whether it could be obtained; still if I
would furnish him with that consent, he would do what should depend on
him. I am persuaded he will, and have written to Mr. Barclay to obtain
the consent of his creditors. This is the footing on which this matter
stands at present. I have stated it thus particularly, that you may
know the truth, which will probably be misrepresented in the English
papers, to the prejudice of Mr. Barclay. This matter has been a great
affliction to him, but no dishonor, where its true state is known.
Indeed he is incapable of doing anything not strictly honorable.

In a letter of August the 30th, 1785, I had the honor of mentioning to
you what had passed here, on the subject of a convention for the
regulation of the two post offices. I now enclose you a letter from the
Baron D'Ogny, who is at the head of that department, which shows that
he still expects some arrangement. I have heard it said that M. de
Creve-coeur is authorized to treat on this subject. You doubtless know
if this be true. The articles may certainly be better adjusted there,
than here. This letter from the Baron D'Ogny was in consequence of an
application from a servant of mine, during my absence, which would not
have been made had I been here. Nor will it be repeated; it being my
opinion and practice to pay small sums of money, rather than to risk
favors.

I have the honor to enclose you also, copies of a letter and papers
from the Maréchal de Castries, on the claim of an individual against
the State of South Carolina, for services performed on board the
Indian; and the petition of another, on a like claim; also copies of
letters received from O'Bryan at Algiers, and from Mr. Lambe. A letter
of the 26th of May, from Mr. Montgomery, at Alicant, informs me, that
by a vessel arrived at Carthagena from Algiers, they learn the death of
the Dey of that republic. Yet, as we hear nothing of it through any
other channel, it may be doubted. It escaped me at the time of my
departure to Aix, to make arrangements for sending you the gazettes
regularly, by the packets. The whole are now sent, though a great part
of them are so old as to be not worth perusal. Your favor of April the
24th has been duly received. I have the honor to be, with sentiments of
the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO MADAME DE CORNY.

PARIS, June 30, 1787.


On my return to Paris, it was among my first intentions to go to the
rue Chussée d'Antin, No. 17, and inquire after my friends whom I had
left there. I was told they were in England. And how do you like
England, Madam? I know your taste for the works of art gives you a
little disposition to Anglomania. Their mechanics certainly exceed all
others in some lines. But be just to your own nation. They have not
patience, it is true, to set rubbing a piece of steel from morning till
night, as a lethargic Englishman will do, full charged with porter. But
do not their benevolence, their cheerfulness, their amiability, when
compared with the growling temper and manners of the people among whom
you are, compensate their want of patience? I am in hopes that when the
splendor of their shops, which is all that is worth looking at in
London, shall have lost their charm of novelty, you will turn a wistful
eye to the people of Paris, and find that you cannot be so happy with
any others. The Bois de Boulogne invites you earnestly to come and
survey its beautiful verdure, to retire to its umbrage from the heats
of the season. I was through it to-day, as I am every day. Every tree
charged me with this invitation to you. Passing by la Muette, it wished
for you as a mistress. You want a country house. This is for sale; and
in the Bois de Boulogne, which I have always insisted to be most worthy
of your preference. Come then, and buy it. If I had had confidence in
your speedy return, I should have embarrassed you in earnest with my
little daughter. But an impatience to have her with me, after her
separation from her friends, added to a respect for your ease, has
induced me to send a servant for her.

I tell you no news, because you have correspondents infinitely more _au
fait_ of the details of Paris than I am. And I offer you no services,
because I hope you will come as soon as the letter could, which should
command them. Be assured, however, that nobody is more disposed to
render them, nor entertains for you a more sincere and respectful
attachment, than him who, after charging you with his compliments to
Monsieur de Corny, has the honor of offering you the homage of those
sentiments of distinguished esteem and regard, with which he is, dear
Madam, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, July 1, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I returned about three weeks ago from a very useless voyage;
useless, I mean, as to the object which first suggested it, that of
trying the effect of the mineral waters of Aix, in Provence, on my
hand. I tried these, because recommended among six or eight others as
equally beneficial, and because they would place me at the beginning of
a tour to the seaports of Marseilles, Bordeaux, Nantes and L'Orient,
which I had long meditated, in hopes that a knowledge of the places and
persons concerned in our commerce, and the information to be got from
them, might enable me sometimes to be useful. I had expected to satisfy
myself, at Marseilles, of the causes of the difference of quality
between the rice of Carolina, and that of Piedmont, which is brought in
quantities to Marseilles. Not being able to do it, I made an excursion
of three weeks into the rice country beyond the Alps, going through it
from Vercelli to Pavia, about sixty miles. I found the difference to
be, not in the management, as had been supposed both here and in
Carolina, but in the species of rice; and I hope to enable them in
Carolina, to begin the cultivation of the Piedmont rice, and carry it
on, hand in hand, with their own, that they may supply both qualities;
which is absolutely necessary at this market. I had before endeavored
to lead the depôt of rice from Cowes to Honfleur, and hope to get it
received there on such terms, as may draw that branch of commerce from
England to this country. It is an object of two hundred and fifty
thousand guineas a year. While passing through the towns of Turin,
Milan and Genoa, I satisfied myself of the practicability of
introducing our whale oil for their consumption, and suppose it would
be equally so, in the other great cities of that country. I was sorry
that I was not authorized to set the matter on foot. The merchants with
whom I chose to ask conferences, met me freely, and communicated fully,
knowing I was in a public character. I could, however, only prepare a
disposition to meet our oil merchants. On the article of tobacco, I was
more in possession of my ground; and put matters into a train for
inducing their government to draw their tobaccos directly from the
United States, and not, as heretofore, from Great Britain. I am now
occupied with the new ministry here, to put the concluding hand to the
new regulations for our commerce with this country, announced in the
letter of Monsieur de Calonnes, which I sent you last fall. I am in
hopes, in addition to those, to obtain a suppression of the duties on
tar, pitch and turpentine, and an extension of the privileges of
American _whale_ oil, to their _fish_ oils in general. I find that the
quantity of cod-fish oil brought to L'Orient, is considerable. This
being got off hand (which will be in a few days) the chicaneries and
vexations of the Farmers on the article of tobacco, and their elusions
of the order of Bernis, call for the next attention. I have reasons to
hope good dispositions in the new ministry towards our commerce with
this country. Besides endeavoring, on all occasions, to multiply the
points of contact and connection with this country, which I consider as
our surest mainstay under every event, I have had it much at heart to
remove from between us every subject of misunderstanding or irritation.
Our debts to the King, to the Officers, and the Farmers, are of this
description. The having complied with no part of our engagements in
these, draws on us a great deal of censure, and occasioned a language
in the Assemblée des Notables, very likely to produce dissatisfaction
between us. Dumas being on the spot in Holland, I had asked of him some
time ago, in confidence, his opinion of the practicability of
transferring these debts from France to Holland, and communicated his
answer to Congress, pressing them to get you to go over to Holland, and
try to effect this business. Your knowledge of the ground, and former
successes, occasioned me to take this liberty without consulting you,
because I was sure you would not weigh your personal trouble against
public good. I have had no answer from Congress; but hearing of your
journey to Holland, have hoped that some money operations had led you
there. If it related to the debts of this country, I would ask a
communication of what you think yourself at liberty to communicate, as
it might change the form of my answers to the eternal applications I
receive. The debt to the officers of France carries an interest of
about two thousand guineas, so we may suppose its principal is between
thirty and forty thousand. This makes more noise against us, than all
our other debts put together.

I send you the _Arrets_ which begin the reformation here, and some
other publications respecting America; together with copies of letters
received from O'Bryan and Lambe. It is believed that a naval armament
has been ordered at Brest, in correspondence with that of England. We
know, certainly, that orders are given to form a camp in the
neighborhood of Brabant, and that Count Rochambeau has the command of
it. Its amount, I cannot assert. Report says fifteen thousand men. This
will derange the plans of economy. I take the liberty of putting under
your cover, a letter for Mrs. Kinloch, of South Carolina, with a
packet, and will trouble you to inquire for her, and have them
delivered. The packet is of great consequence, and therefore referred
to her care, as she will know the safe opportunities of conveying it.
Should you not be able to find her, and can forward the packet to its
address, by any very safe conveyance, I will beg you to do it. I have
the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect friendship and
esteem, dear Sir, your most obedient and most humble servant.




TO DAVID HARTLEY.

PARIS, July 2, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I received lately your favor of April the 23d, on my return
from a journey of three or four months; and am always happy in an
occasion of recalling myself to your memory. The most interesting
intelligence from America, is that respecting the late insurrection in
Massachusetts. The cause of this has not been developed to me, to my
perfect satisfaction. The most probable is, that those individuals were
of the imprudent number of those, who have involved themselves in debt
beyond their abilities to pay, and that a vigorous effort in that
government to compel the payment of private debts, and raise money for
public ones, produced the resistance. I believe you may be assured,
that an idea or desire of returning to anything like their ancient
government, never entered into their heads. I am not discouraged by
this. For thus I calculate. An insurrection in one of thirteen States,
in the course of eleven years that they have subsisted, amounts to one
in any particular State, in one hundred and forty-three years, say a
century and a half. This would not be near as many, as have happened in
every other government that has ever existed. So that we shall have the
difference between a light and a heavy government, as clear gain. I
have no fear, but that the result of our experiment will be, that men
may be trusted to govern themselves without a master. Could the
contrary of this be proved, I should conclude, either that there is no
God, or that he is a malevolent being. You have heard of the federal
convention, now sitting at Philadelphia, for the amendment of the
Confederation. Eleven States appointed delegates certainly; it was
expected that Connecticut would also appoint, the moment its Assembly
met. Rhode Island had refused. I expect they will propose several
amendments; that that relative to our commerce will probably be adopted
immediately, but that the others must wait to be adopted, one after
another, in proportion as the minds of the States ripen for them. Dr.
Franklin enjoys good health. I shall always be happy to hear from you,
being with sentiments of very sincere esteem and respect, dear Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO BENJAMIN VAUGHAN.

PARIS, July 2, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Your favor of February the 16th, came to my hands in the
moment I was setting out on a tour through the southern parts of France
and northern of Italy, from which I am but just now returned. I avail
myself of the earliest moment to acknowledge its receipt, and to thank
you for the box of magnets which I found here. Though I do not know
certainly, by, or from whom they come, I presume they came by Colonel
Smith, who was here in my absence, and from Messrs. Nairne and Blunt,
through your good offices. I think your letter of February the 16th,
flatters me with the expectation of another, with observations, on the
hygrometers I had proposed. I value what comes from you too much, not
to remind you of it. Your favor by Mr. Garnett also, came during my
absence. I presume he has left Paris, as I can hear nothing of him. I
have lost the opportunity, therefore, of seeing his method of resisting
friction, as well as of showing, by attentions to him, respect for
yourself and your recommendations. Mr. Paine (Common Sense) is here on
his way to England. He has brought the model of an iron bridge, with
which he supposes a single arch of four hundred feet, may be made. It
has not yet arrived in Paris. Among other projects, with which we begin
to abound in America, is one for finding the latitude by the variation
of the magnetic needle. The author supposes two points, one near each
pole, through the northern of which, pass all the magnetic meridians of
the northern hemisphere, and through the southern, those of the
southern hemisphere. He determines their present position and
periodical revolution. It is said, his publication is plausible. I have
not seen it.

What are you going to do with your naval armament on your side the
channel? Perhaps you will ask me, what they are about to do here? A
British navy and Prussian army hanging over Holland on one side, a
French navy and army hanging over it on the other, looks as if they
thought of fighting. Yet I think both parties too wise for that, too
laudably intent on economizing, rather than on further embarrassing
their finances. May they not propose to have a force on the spot, to
establish some neutral form of a constitution, which these powers will
cook up among themselves, without consulting the parties for whom it is
intended? The affair of Geneva shows such combinations possible.
Wretched, indeed, is the nation in whose affairs foreign powers are
once permitted to intermeddle. Lord Wycombe is with us at present. His
good sense, information and discretion, are much beyond his years, and
promise good things for your country.

I beg you to accept assurances of the esteem and respect with which I
have the honor to be, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO DR. WILLIAM GORDON.

PARIS, July 2, 1787.


SIR,--Being just returned from a tour through the southern parts of
France and northern of Italy, I could not till this moment, acknowledge
the receipt of your obliging letter with the papers accompanying it. It
happened unluckily also that those addressed to the Marquis de La
Fayette, were under my cover. I put them into his hands the moment of
my return. From the opportunities you have had of coming at facts known
as yet to no other historian, from your dispositions to relate them
fairly, and from your known talents, I have sanguine expectations that
your work will be a valuable addition to historical science; and the
more so, as we have little yet on the subject of our war, which merits
respect. I fear, however, that this is not the field from which you are
to expect profit. The translation will sell here; but few read English.
Be assured, that nothing shall be wanting on my part to encourage a
preference of the original to a translation; but it will not be till
the fall that either will be called for, because, during summer, the
readers are in the country. I got from a bookseller here about forty
guineas for a first copy of Dr. Ramsay's work, which he had translated.
If this would be an object with you, I offer you my service. I have the
honor to be, with sentiments of great esteem, Sir, your most obedient,
and most humble servant.




TO T. B. HOLLIS, ESQ.

PARIS, July 2, 1787.


SIR,--On my return from a tour through the southern parts of France and
northern of Italy, I found here the present of books you had been so
kind as to send me. I should value them highly for their intrinsic
merit, but much more as coming from you. You will have seen that one of
our republics has experienced those commotions which the newspapers
have been always ascribing to all of them. I am not satisfied what has
been the cause of this, but the most probable account is, that these
individuals were of those who have so imprudently involved themselves
in debt; and that a vigorous exertion in their government to enforce
the payment of private debts, and raise money for the public ones,
occasioned the insurrection. One insurrection in thirteen States in the
course of eleven years that they have existed, amounts to one in any
individual State in one hundred and forty-three years, say a century
and a half. This will not weigh against the inconveniences of a
government of force, such as are monarchies and aristocracies. You see
I am not discouraged by this little difficulty; nor have I any doubt
that the result of our experiment will be, that men are capable of
governing themselves without a master. I have the honor to be, with
sentiments of the highest esteem and respect, Sir, your most obedient,
and most humble servant.




TO MR. BONDFIELD.

PARIS, July 2, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Revising the letters and notes in my possession on the
subject of our commerce, I observe you say in your letter of December
12, that we pay alien duties in the ports of France, supposed the
double of what we ought to pay. If by this you mean that we are not on
as favorable a footing as Spain, it would be vain to remonstrate on
that subject. The family compact expressly excluded all other nations
from the advantages the two parties ceded to each other; but if there
be any other nation which enjoys any greater advantages in the ports of
France than we do, I should wish to know it, because, if it be not in
consequence of a particular compensation, I should hope to remove it.
Will you be so good as to explain the matter? and shall I ask the
further favor of you to forward the enclosed letter by the first vessel
going from your port to Virginia. I wish to hear from Mr. Barclay, who,
I suppose, is still with you, and whose service and comfort I have
sincerely at heart. I am, with much esteem and respect, dear Sir, your
most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. JAMES MANNY.

PARIS, July 2, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--The reason why the receipt of your favor of May 21, has been
thus unacknowledged, was my absence on a tour round the sea-port towns,
from which I am just returned. In the meantime, the occasion of your
inquiry relative to Mr. Morris' bills has passed; nor could I now
explain the reason of their protest. I understand, however, that they
are since honored. The effect, therefore, will only be to show that
there is a limit even to his credit.

Recent appearances in Europe would seem to threaten war. On one side,
England sending a navy of observation to hover over Holland, and
Prussia an army; this country sending a navy and army to hover over the
other side of the same country; yet it is morally sure that all these
powers desire peace most ardently. It remains to see, then, whether
they mean any more than to arrange a kind of constitution which shall
be merely neutral, and to force it on the United Netherlands, as done
in the case of Geneva. I need not write you American news. You have it
of later date than I have. I shall, therefore, only add assurances of
the esteem and respect with which I am, dear Sir, your friend and
servant.




TO M. L'ABBÉ MORELLET.

PARIS, July 2, 1787.


I am sorry, my dear Sir, that your interest should be affected by the
ill behavior of Barrois; but when you consider the facts, you will be
sensible that I could not have indulged his indolence further without
increasing the injury to a more punctual workman. Stockdale, of London,
had asked leave to print my Notes. I agreed to it, and promised he
should have the plate of the map as soon as it should be corrected, and
the copies struck off for you and myself. He thereupon printed his
edition completely in three weeks. The printer, who was to strike off
two hundred and fifty maps for me, kept the plate but five days. It was
then delivered to Barrois, with notice that it could not be left longer
with him than should suffice to strike off his number. Repeated
applications for it by Mr. Short and my servant were only answered by
repeated promises and times of delivery fixed, no one of which was
performed. When I returned, he had been possessed of the plate upwards
of two months. I was astonished and confounded to be told it had not
been sent to Stockdale, and that his edition had been lying dead on his
hands three months. I sent to Barrois the very day of my return, to let
him know, that justice to Stockdale did not permit me to defer sending
him the plate any longer, yet I would wait five days, at the end of
which he must deliver me the plate, whether his maps were done or not.
I received no answer, but waited ten days. I then sent for the plate.
The answer was, he was not at home. I sent again the next day. Answer,
he was not at home. I sent the third day. Not at home. I then ordered
the messenger to go back, and wait till he should come home. This
produced an answer of two lines, _qu'il alloit soigner son ouvrier_? I
wrote him word in return to deliver the plate instantly. This I think
was on Saturday or Sunday. He told the messenger he would let me have
it the Thursday following. I took patience, and sent on the Friday, but
telling the messenger if he refused to deliver it, to inform him I
would be plagued no more with sending messages, but apply to the
police. He then delivered it, and I sent it off immediately to London.
He had kept it three months, of which three weeks were after my return.
I think, Sir, you will be satisfied that justice to Stockdale, justice
to myself who had passed my word for sending on the plate, and
sensibility to the shuffling conduct of Barrois, permitted me to act no
otherwise. But no matter. Let his ill behavior make no odds between you
and me. It will affect your interest, and that suffices to determine me
to order back the plate as soon as Stockdale has done with it. He will
not require more days than Barrois months, so that it will be here
before you can want it. But it must never go into Barrois' hands again,
nor of any person depending on him, or under his orders. The workman
who struck off the two hundred and fifty for me seems to have been
diligent enough. Either he, or any other workman you please of that
description, shall have it to strike what number you wish. I forgot to
observe, in its proper place, that when I was in the midst of my
difficulties, I did myself the honor of calling on you, as well to have
that of asking after your health on my return as of asking your
assistance to obtain the plate. Unluckily you were gone to Versailles,
so I was obliged to proceed as well as I could. It is no excuse for
Barrois to say he could not get his Imprimeur to proceed. He should
have applied to another. But as to you, it shall be set to rights in
the manner I have before stated. Accept my regret that you were in the
hands of so undeserving a workman, and one who placed me under the
necessity of interrupting a work which interested you. Be assured, at
the same time, of the sincerity of those sentiments of esteem and
respect with which I have the honor to be, dear Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.



[_The following observations appear to have been addressed to the Count
de Montmorin, about the 6th of July, 1787._]

Observations on the letter of Monsieur de Calonnes to Monsieur
Jefferson, dated Fontainebleau, October 22, 1786.

A committee was appointed, in the course of the last year, to take a
view of the subjects of commerce which might be brought from the United
States of America, in exchange for those of France, and to consider
what advantages and facilities might be offered to encourage that
commerce. The letter of Monsieur de Calonnes was founded on their
report. It was conclusive as to the articles on which satisfactory
information had been then obtained, and reserved, for future
consideration, certain others, needing further inquiry. It is proposed
now to review those unfinished articles, that they may also be
comprehended in the _Arret_, and the regulations on this branch of
commerce, be rendered complete.

1. The letter promised to diminish the "Droits du Roi et d'amirauté,"
payable by an American vessel entering into a port of France, and to
reduce what should remain into a single duty, which shall be regulated
by the draught of the vessel, or her number of masts. It is doubted
whether it will be expedient to regulate the duty in either of these
ways. If by the draught of water, it will fall unequally on us as a
nation; because we build our vessels sharp-bottomed, for swift sailing,
so that they draw more water than those of other nations, of the same
burthen. If by the number of masts, it will fall unequally on
individuals; because we often see ships of one hundred and eighty tons,
and brigs of three hundred and sixty. This, then, would produce an
inequality among individuals, of six to one. The present principle is
the most just, to regulate by the burthen. It is certainly desirable,
that these duties should be reduced to a single one. Their names and
numbers perplex and harass the merchant more than their amount; subject
him to imposition, and to the suspicion of it when there is none. An
intention of general reformation in this article, has been accordingly
announced, with augmentation as to foreigners. We are in hopes, that
this augmentation is not to respect us; because it is proposed as a
measure of reciprocity, whereas, in some of our States, no such duties
exist, and in the others, they are extremely light; because we have
been made to hope a diminution, instead of augmentation; and because
this distinction cannot draw on France any just claims from other
nations; the _Jura gentis amicissimcæ_, conferred by her late treaties,
having reference expressly to the nations of Europe only; and those
conferred by the more ancient ones, not being susceptible of any other
interpretation, nor admitting a pretension of reference to a nation
which did not then exist, and which has come into existence under
circumstances, distinguishing its commerce from that of all other
nations. Merchandise received from them, takes employment from the poor
of France; ours gives it; theirs is brought in the last stage of
manufacture; ours in the first; we bring our tobaccos to be
manufactured into snuff, our flax and hemp into linen and cordage, our
furs into hats, skins into saddlery, shoes and clothing; we take
nothing till it has received the last hand.

2. Fish oils. The Hanseatic treaty was the basis on which the
diminution of duty on this article was asked and granted. It is
expressly referred to as such, in the letter of Monsieur de Calonnes.
Instead, however, of the expression, "huile et graisse de baleine et
d'autres poissons," used in that treaty, the letter uses the terms,
"huiles de baleine, spermaceti, et tout ce qui est compris sous ces
dénominations." And the Farmers have availed themselves of this
variation, to refuse the diminution of duty on the oils of the _vache
marine_, _chein de mer_, _esturgeon_, and other fish. It is proposed,
therefore, to re-establish in the _Arret_, the expression of the
Hanseatic treaty, and to add, from the same treaty, the articles
"baleine coupée et fanon de baleine."

The letter states these regulations as finally made by the King. The
merchants, on this supposition, entered into speculations. But they
found themselves called on for the old duties, not only on other fish
oils, but on the whale oil. Monsieur de Calonnes always promised that
the _Arret_ should be retrospective to the date of the letter, so as to
refund to them the duties they had thus been obliged to pay. To this,
attention is prayed in forming the _Arret_. His Majesty having been
pleased, as an encouragement to the importation of our fish oils, to
abolish the _Droits de fabrication_, it is presumed that the purpose
announced, of continuing those duties on foreign oils, will not be
extended to us.

3. Rice. The duty on this is only seven and a half deniers the quintal,
or about one-quarter per cent. on its first cost. While this serves to
inform a government of the quantities imported, it cannot discourage
that importation. Nothing further, therefore, is necessary on this
article.

4. Pot-asse. This article is of principal utility to France, in her
bleacheries of linen, glass works, and soap works; and the potash of
America, being made of green wood, is known to be the best in the
world. All duty on it was therefore abolished by the King. But the city
of Rouen levies on it a duty of twenty sols the quintal, which is very
sensible in its price, brings it dearer to the bleacheries near Paris,
to those of Beauvais, Laval, etc., and to the glass works, and
encourages them to give a preference to the potash or soude of other
nations. This is a counteraction of the views of the King, expressed in
the letter, which it is hoped will be prevented.

5. Turpentine, tar and pitch, were not decided on, on the former
occasion. Turpentine (_terebenthine_) pays ten sols the quintal, and
ten sols the livre, making fifteen sols the quintal; which is ten per
cent. on its prime cost. Tar (_goudron brai gras_) pays eight livres
the _leth_ of twelve barrels, and ten sols the livre, amounting to
twenty sols the barrel; which is twelve and a half per cent. on its
prime cost. Pitch (_brai sec_) pays ten sols the quintal, and ten sols
the livre, making fifteen sols the quintal; which is twenty per cent.
on its prime cost. Duties of from ten to twenty per cent. on articles
of heavy carriage, prevent their importation. They eat up all the
profits of the merchant, and often subject him to loss. This has been
much the case with respect to turpentine, tar and pitch, which are
principal articles of remittance for the State of North Carolina. It is
hoped, that it will coincide with the views of government, in making
the present regulations, to suppress the duties on these articles,
which, of all others, can bear them best.




TO T. M. RANDOLPH, JUNIOR.

PARIS, July 6, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Your favor of April the 14th, came here during my absence on
a journey through the southern parts of France and northern of Italy,
from which I am but lately returned. This cause alone has prevented
your receiving a more early answer to it. I am glad to find, that among
the various branches of science presenting themselves to your mind, you
have fixed on that of politics as your principal pursuit. Your country
will derive from this a more immediate and sensible benefit. She has
much for you to do. For, though we may say with confidence, that the
worst of the American constitutions is better than the best which ever
existed before, in any other country, and that they are wonderfully
perfect for a first essay, yet every human essay must have defects. It
will remain, therefore, to those now coming on the stage of public
affairs, to perfect what has been so well begun by those going off it.
Mathematics, Natural Philosophy, Natural History, Anatomy, Chemistry,
Botany, will become amusements for your hours of relaxation, and
auxiliaries to your principal studies. Precious and delightful ones
they will be. As soon as such a foundation is laid in them, as you may
build on as you please, hereafter, I suppose you will proceed to your
main objects, Politics, Law, Rhetoric, and History. As to these, the
place where you study them is absolutely indifferent. I should except
Rhetoric, a very essential member of them, and which I suppose must be
taught to advantage where you are. You would do well, therefore, to
attend the public exercises in this branch also, and to do it with very
particular diligence. This being done, the question arises, where you
shall fix yourself for studying Politics, Law, and History? I should
not hesitate to decide in favor of France, because you will, at the
same time, be learning to speak the language of that country, become
absolutely essential under our present circumstances. The best method
of doing this, would be to fix yourself in some family where there are
women and children, in Passy, Auteuil, or some other of the little
towns in reach of Paris. The principal hours of the day, you will
attend to your studies, and in those of relaxation, associate with the
family. You will learn to speak better from women and children in three
months, than from men in a year. Such a situation, too, will render
more easy a due attention to economy of time and money. Having pursued
your main studies here, about two years, and acquired a facility in
speaking French, take a tour of four or five months through this
country and Italy, return then to Virginia, and pass a year in
Williamsburg, under the care of Mr. Wythe; and you will be ready to
enter on the public stage, with superior advantages. I have proposed to
you, to carry on the study of the law with that of politics and
history. Every political measure will, forever, have an intimate
connection with the laws of the land; and he, who knows nothing of
these, will always be perplexed, and often foiled by adversaries having
the advantage of that knowledge over him. Besides, it is a source of
infinite comfort to reflect, that under every chance of fortune, we
have a resource in ourselves from which we may be able to derive an
honorable subsistence. I would, therefore, propose not only the study,
but the practice of the law for some time, to possess yourself of the
habit of public speaking. With respect to modern languages, French, as
I have before observed, is indispensable. Next to this, the Spanish is
most important to an American. Our connection with Spain is already
important, and will become daily more so. Besides this, the ancient
part of American history is written chiefly in Spanish. To a person who
would make a point of reading and speaking French and Spanish, I should
doubt the utility of learning Italian. These three languages, being all
degeneracies from the Latin, resemble one another so much, that I doubt
the probability of keeping in the head a distinct knowledge of them
all. I suppose that he who learns them all, will speak a compound of
the three, and neither perfectly. The journey which I propose to you
need not be expensive, and would be very useful. With your talents and
industry, with science, and that steadfast honesty which eternally
pursues right, regardless of consequences, you may promise yourself
everything--but health, without which there is no happiness. An
attention to health, then, should take place of every other object. The
time necessary to secure this by active exercises, should be devoted to
it, in preference to every other pursuit. I know the difficulty with
which a studious man tears himself from his studies, at any given
moment of the day. But his happiness, and that of his family, depend on
it. The most uninformed mind, with a healthy body, is happier than the
wisest valetudinarian. I need not tell you, that if I can be useful to
you in any part of this, or any other plan you shall adopt, you will
make me happy by commanding my services.

Will you be so good, Sir, as to return my most respectful thanks for
the diploma with which I am honored by the society instituted with you,
for the encouragement of the study of Natural History? I am afraid it
will never be in my power to contribute anything to the object of the
institution. Circumstances have thrown me into a very different line of
life, and not choice, as I am happy to find in your case. In the year
1781, while confined to my room by a fall from my horse, I wrote some
Notes, in answer to the inquiries of M. de Marbois, as to the natural
and political state of Virginia. They were hasty and undigested; yet as
some of these touch slightly on some objects of its natural history, I
will take the liberty of asking the society to accept a copy of them.
For the same reason, and because, too, they touch on the political
condition of our country, I will beg leave to present you with a copy,
and ask the favor of you to find a conveyance for them from London to
Edinburgh. They are printed by Stockdale, bookseller, Piccadilly, and
will be ready in three or four weeks from this time. I will direct him
to deliver two copies to your order.

Repeating, constantly, the proffer of my services, I shall only add
assurances of the esteem and attachment with which I am, dear Sir, your
friend and servant.




TO EDWARD RUTLEDGE, ESQ.

PARIS, July 14, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I received your favor of the 14th of October in the moment I
was setting out on a tour of the sea port towns of this country, from
which I have been not long returned. I received it, too, with that kind
of heartfelt pleasure which always attends the recollection of ancient
affections. I was glad to find that the adaptation of your rice to this
market was considered worth attention, as I had supposed it. I set out
from hence impressed with the idea the rice-dealers here had given me,
that the difference between your rice and that of Piedmont proceeded
from a difference in the machine for cleaning it. At Marseilles I hoped
to know what the Piedmont machine was; but I could find nobody who knew
anything of it. I determined, therefore, to sift the matter to the
bottom, by crossing the Alps into the rice country. I found their
machine exactly such a one as you had described to me in Congress in
the year 1783. There was but one conclusion then to be drawn, to wit,
that the rice was of a different species, and I determined to take
enough to put you in seed; they informed me, however, that its
exportation in the husk was prohibited, so I could only bring off as
much as my coat and surtout pockets would hold. I took measures with a
muleteer to run a couple of sacks across the Apennines to Genoa, but
have not great dependence on its success. The little, therefore, which
I brought myself, must be relied on for fear we should get no more; and
because, also, it is genuine from Vercilli, where the best is made of
all the Sardinian Lombardy, the whole of which is considered as
producing a better rice than the Milanese. This is assigned as the
reason for the strict prohibition. Piedmont rice sold at Nice, (the
port of its exportation,) when I was there, at seventeen livres French,
the French hundred weight. It varies from time to time as the price of
wheat does with us. The price of Carolina rice at Bordeaux, Nantes,
L'Orient and Havre, varies from sixteen florins to twenty-four florins
the French quintal, which is equal to one hundred and nine pounds our
weight. The best ports to send it to are Bordeaux and Havre, (or Rouen,
which is the same thing as Havre,) but it is essential that it arrive
here a month before the commencement of Lent, when the principal demand
is made for it. Carolina rice, after being sorted here into several
qualities, sells from six sols to ten sols the French pound, retail,
according to the quality. Unsorted and wholesale about thirty florins
the French quintal. Piedmont rice is of but one quality, which sells at
retail at ten sous the French pound, and wholesale is about three or
four livres dearer than yours. In order to induce your countrymen to
ship their rice here directly, I have proposed to some merchants here
to receive consignments, allowing the consigner to draw in the moment
of shipping for as much as he could sell on the spot, and the balance
when it should be sold. But they say this is impossible. They are to
consider and inform me what are the most favorable terms on which they
can receive it. I am told that freight, insurance, and commission are
about four livres the French quintal to a sea-port town. I have written
so long a letter on the subject of rice to Mr. Drayton for the Society
of Agriculture, that I will trouble you with no further particulars,
but refer you to that. Indeed, I am sensible I have written too much on
the subject. Being absolutely ignorant of it myself, it was impossible
for me to know what particulars merited communication. I thought it
best, therefore, to communicate everything. After writing that letter,
I received one from Mr. Izard, by which I found that he had examined
the rice-process in Lombardy. He was so much more capable than myself
of giving the details, that I had at one moment determined to suppress
my letter. However, observing that he considered the rice at Piedmont
to be of the same species with yours, and suspecting myself certainly
that it is not, I determined to hazard my letter and all those
criticisms which fall justly on an ignorant person writing on a subject
to those much more learned in it than himself. A part of my letter,
too, related to the olive tree and caper, the first of which would
surely succeed in your country, and would be an infinite blessing after
some fifteen or twenty years. The caper would also probably succeed,
and would offer a very great and immediate profit. I thank you for your
obliging mention of my worthless Notes on Virginia. Worthless and bad
as they are, they have been rendered more so, as I am told, by a
translation into French. That I may have neither merit nor demerit not
my own, I have consented to their publication in England. I advised the
bookseller to send two hundred copies to Philadelphia, and two hundred
to Richmond, supposing that number might be sold in the United States;
but I do not know whether he will do it. If you will give me leave, I
will send you a copy of the original impression. I congratulate you, my
dear friend, on the law of your State, for suspending the importation
of slaves, and for the glory you have justly acquired by endeavoring to
prevent it forever. This abomination must have an end. And there is a
superior bench reserved in heaven for those who hasten it. The
distractions of Holland thicken apace. They begin to cut one another's
throats heartily. I apprehend the neighboring powers will interfere;
but it is not yet clear whether in concert or by taking opposite sides.
It is a poor contest, whether they shall have one, or many masters.
Your nephew is arrived here in good health. My first interview with him
has impressed me much in his favor. Present me very respectfully to
Mrs. Rutledge, as well as to your brother and his house. Accept
yourself assurances of the sincere esteem and respect with which I am,
dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY MR. ADAMS.

PARIS, July 17, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I have been duly honored with yours of the 10th instant, and
am happy to hear of the success of your journey to Amsterdam. There can
be no doubt of its ratification by Congress. Would to heaven they would
authorize you to take measures for transferring the debt of this
country to Holland, before you leave Europe. Most especially is it
necessary to get rid of the debt to the officers. Their connections at
Court are such as to excite very unfavorable feelings there against us,
and some very hard things have been said (particularly in the Assemblée
des Notables) on the prospect relative to our debts. The payment of the
interest to the officers would have kept them quiet; but there are two
years now due to them. I dare not draw for it without instructions,
because in the instances in which I have hitherto ventured to act
uninstructed, I have never been able to know whether they have been
approved in the private sentiments of the members of Congress, much
less by any vote. I have pressed on them the expediency of transferring
the French debts to Holland, in order to remove everything which may
excite irritations between us and this nation. I wish it may be done
before this ministry may receive ill impressions of us. They are at
present very well disposed. I send you by Mr. Appleton some pamphlets,
and have the honor to be, with sentiments of very cordial esteem, your
affectionate and humble servant.




TO MR. JOSEPH FENWICK.

PARIS, July 21, 1787.


SIR,--I am this moment honored with your letter of the 16th, and wish
it was in my power to give you the information desired on the subject
of tobaccos.

The complaint has been universal that the Farmers General have not
complied with the order of government. I have, therefore, desired that
they may be called on to report precisely what tobacco they have
purchased on the terms prescribed by the order, that if it shall appear
they have not bought the whole quantity, they may be compelled to do it
immediately. It is impossible to foresee whether any new regulations
will be made to take place on the expiration of the contract of Mr.
Morris. I shall certainly press for something to be done by way of
antidote to the monopoly under which this article is placed in France.
The moment anything is decided which may be interesting to our
commerce, I shall take great care to communicate it to them through Mr.
Bondfield; though I do not expect anything interesting to take place
very soon. I am, with much regard, Sir, your most obedient humble
servant.




TO STEPHEN CATHALAN, JUNIOR.

PARIS, July 21, 1787.


SIR,--I received your favor of May the 9th just as I was stepping into
the barge on my departure from Cette; which prevented my answering it
from that place. On my arrival here, I thought I would avail myself of
the opportunity of paying your balance, to make a little acquaintance
with Sir John Lambert. One or two unsuccessful attempts to find him at
home, with the intermediate procrastinations well known to men of
business, prevented my seeing him till yesterday, and have led me on to
this moment, through a perpetual remorse of conscience for not writing
to you, and to the constant belief that it would be to-morrow and
to-morrow. At length, I have seen him, paid him the eighty-five livres
which you have been so kind as to advance for me, and am actually at my
writing-table, returning you thanks for this kindness, and to yourself
and the family for the thousand others I received at their hands, at
Marseilles. My journey, after leaving you, wanted nothing but the
company of Madame Cathalan and yourself, to render it perfectly
agreeable. I felt the want of it peculiarly on the Canal de Languedoc,
where, with society, the mode of travelling would have been charming. I
was much indebted to M. Minaudier for a good equipment from Agde, and
unceasing attentions to that place; for which I was indebted to your
recommendations as well as to his goodness.

I am honored with your father's letter of June the 30th; and, as he
does not read English, and I cannot write French, I must beg leave to
answer him through you. I thank him for his hints on the subject of
tobacco. I am now pressing for arrangements as to that article, to take
place on the expiration of Mr. Morris' contract, and the order of
Bernis. What form this business will take, or what will be the nature
of the arrangements, or whether there will be any, I am as yet unable
to say. I will take care to inform you the moment there is a decision.

The public business with which Mr. Barclay has been charged rendering
it necessary for him to repair to Congress, and the interest of his
creditors, his family and himself requiring his return to America, he
has departed for that country. I know nothing of Mr. Barclay's affairs
in this country. He has good possessions in America, which, he assured
me, were much more than sufficient to satisfy all the demands against
him. He went, determined to convert those immediately into money, and
to collect the debts due to him there, that he might be enabled to pay
his debts. My opinion of his integrity is such, as to leave no doubt in
my mind, that he will do everything in his power to render justice to
his creditors, and I know so well his attachment to M. Cathalan, as to
be satisfied, that if he makes any difference among his creditors, he
will be among the most favored. Mr. Barclay is an honest and honorable
man, and is more goaded towards the payment of his debts by his own
feelings, than by all the processes of law which could be set on foot
against him.

No arrangements having ever been made as yet, for cases like that of
the carpenter of the American ship Sally, I am unable to answer on that
subject. I am in hopes, his money will last till he recovers his
senses, or till we can receive instructions what to do in that and
similar cases.

Mr. Cathalan wishes a copy of my Notes on Virginia. If you will be so
good as to advise me by what channel they will go safely, I will do
myself the honor of sending a copy, either of the original or of the
translation. Present me affectionately to Mrs. Cathalan, the mother and
daughter; tell the latter I feed on the hopes of seeing her one day at
Paris. My friendly respects wait also on your father; and on yourself,
assurances of the esteem and consideration with which I have the honor
to be, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO THE DELEGATES OF RHODE ISLAND.

PARIS, July 22, 1787.


GENTLEMEN,--I was honored, in the month of January last, with a letter
from the honorable the Delegates of Rhode Island in Congress, enclosing
a letter from the corporation of Rhode Island College to his most
Christian Majesty, and some other papers. I was then in the hurry of
preparation for a journey into the south of France, and therefore
unable, at that moment, to make the inquiries which the object of the
letter rendered necessary. As soon as I returned, which was in the last
month, I turned my attention to that object, which was the
establishment of a professorship of the French language in the College,
and the obtaining a collection of the best French authors, with the aid
of the King. That neither the College nor myself might be compromitted
uselessly, I thought it necessary to sound, previously, those who were
able to inform me what would be the success of the application. I was
assured, so as to leave no doubt, that it would not be complied with;
that there had never been an instance of the King's granting such a
demand in a foreign country, and that they would be cautious of setting
the precedent: that, in this moment, too, they were embarrassed with
the difficult operation of putting down all establishments of their
own, which could possibly be dispensed with, in order to bring their
expenditures down to the level of their receipts. Upon such information
I was satisfied, that it was most prudent not to deliver the letter,
and spare to both parties the disagreeableness of giving and receiving
a denial. The King did give to two colleges in America copies of the
works printing in the public press. But were this to be obtained for
the College of Rhode Island, it would extend only to a volume or two of
Buffon's works, still to be printed, Manilius' Astronomicon, and one or
two other works in the press, which are of no consequence. I did not
think this an object for the College, worth being pressed. I beg the
favor of you, gentlemen, to assure the corporation, that no endeavors
of mine should have been spared, could they have effected their wish;
and that they have been faithfully used in making the preliminary
enquiries which are necessary, and which ended in an assurance that
nothing could be done. These papers having been transmitted to me
through your delegation, will, I hope, be an apology for my availing
myself of the same channel, for communicating the result.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Gentlemen, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO THE COUNT DE MONTMORIN.

PARIS, July 23, 1787.


SIR,--I had the honor, a few days ago, of putting into the hands of
your Excellency, some observations on the other articles of American
produce, brought into the ports of this country. That of our tobaccos,
from the particular form of their administration here, and their
importance to the King's revenues, has been placed on a separate line,
and considered separately. I will now ask permission to bring that
subject under your consideration.

The mutual extension of their commerce was among the fairest advantages
to be derived to France and the United States, from the independence of
the latter. An exportation of eighty millions, chiefly in raw
materials, is supposed to constitute the present limits of the commerce
of the United States with the nations of Europe; limits, however, which
extend as their population increases. To draw the best proportion of
this into the ports of France, rather than of any other nation, is
believed to be the wish and interest of both. Of these eighty millions,
thirty are constituted by the single article of tobacco. Could the
whole of this be brought into the ports of France, to satisfy its own
demands, and the residue to be re-vended to other nations, it would be
a powerful link of commercial connection. But we are far from this.
Even her own consumption, supposed to be nine millions, under the
administration of the monopoly to which it is farmed, enters little, as
an article of exchange, into the commerce of the two nations. When this
article was first put into Farm, perhaps it did not injure the
commercial interests of the kingdom; because nothing but British
manufactures were then allowed to be given in return for American
tobaccos. The laying the trade open, then, to all the subjects of
France, could not have relieved her from a payment in money.
Circumstances are changed; yet the old institution remains. The body to
which this monopoly was given, was not mercantile. Their object is to
simplify as much as possible, the administration of their affairs. They
sell for cash; they purchase, therefore, with cash. Their interest,
their principles and their practice, seem opposed to the general
interest of the kingdom, which would require, that this capital article
should be laid open to a free exchange for the productions of this
country. So far does the spirit of simplifying their operations govern
this body, that relinquishing the advantages to be derived from a
competition of sellers, they contracted some time ago with a single
person (Mr. Morris), for three years' supplies of American tobacco, to
be paid for in cash. They obliged themselves too, expressly, to employ
no other person to purchase in America, during that term. In
consequence of this, the mercantile houses of France, concerned in
sending her productions to be exchanged for tobacco, cut off, for three
years, from the hope of selling these tobaccos in France, were of
necessity to abandon that commerce. In consequence of this, too, a
single individual, constituted sole purchaser of so great a proportion
of the tobaccos made, had the price in his own power. A great reduction
in it took place, and that, not only on the quantity he bought, but on
the whole quantity made. The loss to the States producing the article,
did not go to cheapen it for their friends here. Their price was fixed.
What was gained on their consumption, was to enrich the person
purchasing it; the rest, the monopolists and merchants of other
countries. The effect of this operation was vitally felt by every
farmer in America, concerned in the culture of this plant. At the end
of the year, he found he had lost a fourth or a third of his revenue;
the State, the same proportion of its subjects of exchange with other
nations: the manufactures of this country, too, were either not to go
there at all, or go through the channel of a new monopoly, which, freed
from the control of competition in prices and qualities, was not likely
to extend their consumption. It became necessary to relieve the two
countries from the fatal effects of this double monopoly. I had the
honor of addressing a letter, on the 15th day of August, 1785, to his
late excellency, the Count de Vergennes, upon this subject, a copy of
which I do myself the honor herein to enclose. The effectual mode of
relief was to lay the commerce open. But the King's interest was also
to be guarded. A committee was appointed to take this matter into
consideration; and the result was, an order to the Farmers General,
that no such contract should be made again. And to furnish such aliment
as might keep that branch of commerce alive, till the expiration of the
present contract, they were required to put the merchants in general,
on a level with Mr. Morris, for the quantity of twelve or fifteen
thousand hogsheads a year. That this relief, too, might not be
intercepted from the merchants of the two suffering nations by those of
a neighboring one, and that the transportation of so bulky an article
might go to nourish their own shipping, no tobaccos were to be counted
of this purchase, but those brought in French or American vessels. Of
this order, made at Bernis, his Excellency, Count de Vergennes, was
pleased to honor me with a communication, by a letter of the 30th of
May, 1786, desiring that I would publish it as well in America, as to
the American merchants in France. I did so; communicating it to
Congress at the same time. This order, thus viewed with the
transactions which produced it, will be seen to have been necessary;
and its punctual and candid execution has been rendered still more so,
by the speculations of the merchants, entered into on the faith of it.
Otherwise, it would become the instrument of their ruin instead of
their relief. A twelve month has elapsed some time since; and it is
questioned whether the Farmers General have purchased, within that
time, the quantity prescribed, and on the conditions prescribed. It
would be impossible for the merchants to prove the negative; it will be
easy for the Farmers General to show the affirmative, if it exists. I
hope that a branch of commerce of this extent will be thought
interesting enough to both nations, to render it the desire of your
Excellency to require, as I deem it my duty to ask, a report of the
purchases they have made, according to the conditions of the order of
Bernis, specifying, in that report, 1, the quantities purchased; 2, the
prices paid; 3, the dates of the purchase and payment; 4, the flag of
the vessel in which imported; 5, her name; 6, her port of delivery; and
7, the name of the seller. The four first articles make part of the
conditions required by the order of Bernis; the three last may be
necessary for the correction of any errors which should happen to arise
in the report.

But the order of Bernis was never considered but as a temporary relief.
The radical evil will still remain. There will be but one purchaser in
the kingdom, and the hazard of his refusal will damp every mercantile
speculation. It is very much to be desired, that before the expiration
of this order, some measure may be devised, which may bring this great
article into free commerce between the two nations. Had this been
practicable at the time it was put into Farm, that mode of collecting
the revenue would probably never have been adopted; now that it has
become practicable, it seems reasonable to discontinue this mode, and
to substitute some of those practised on other imported articles, on
which a revenue is levied, without absolutely suppressing them in
commerce. If the revenue can be secured, the interests of a few
individuals will hardly be permitted to weigh against those of as many
millions, equally subjects of his Majesty, and against those, too, of a
nation allied to him by all the ties of treaty, of interest and of
affection. The privileges of the most favored nation, have been
mutually exchanged by treaty. But the productions of other nations,
which do not rival those of France, are suffered to be bought and sold
freely within the kingdom. By prohibiting all his Majesty's subjects
from dealing in tobacco, except with a single company, one third of the
exports of the United States are rendered uncommerciable here. This
production is so peculiarly theirs, that its shackles affect no other
nation. A relief from these shackles, will form a memorable epoch in
the commerce of the two nations. It will establish at once a great
basis of exchange, serving like a point of union to draw to it other
members of our commerce. Nature, too, has conveniently assorted our
wants and our superfluities, to each other. Each nation has exactly to
spare, the articles which the other wants. We have a surplus of rice,
tobacco, furs, peltry, potash, lamp oils, timber, which France wants;
she has a surplus of wines, brandies, esculent oils, fruits and
manufactures of all kinds, which we want. The governments have nothing
to do, but _not to hinder_ their merchants from making the exchange.
The difference of language, laws and customs, will be some obstacle for
a time; but the interest of the merchants will surmount them. A more
serious obstacle is our debt to Great Britain. Yet, since the treaty
between this country and that, I should not despair of seeing that debt
paid, in part, with the productions of France, if our produce can
obtain here, a free course of exchange for them. The distant prospect
is still more promising. A century's experience has shown, that we
double our numbers every twenty or twenty-five years. No circumstance
can be foreseen, at this moment, which will lessen our rate of
multiplication for centuries to come. For every article of the
productions and manufactures of this country, then, which can be
introduced into the habit there, the demand will double every twenty or
twenty-five years. And to introduce the habit, we have only to let the
merchants alone. Whether we may descend, by a single step, from the
present state, to that of perfect freedom of commerce in this article,
whether any, and what, intermediate operation may be necessary to
prepare the way to this, what cautions must be observed for the
security of his Majesty's revenue, which we do not wish to impair, will
rest with the wisdom of his ministers, whose knowledge of the subject
will enable them to devise the best plans, and whose patriotism and
justice will dispose them to pursue them. To the friendly dispositions
of your Excellency, of which we have had such early and multiplied
proofs, I take the liberty of committing this subject, particularly
trusting that some method may be devised, of reconciling the collection
of his Majesty's revenues, with the interests of the two nations; and
have the honor of assuring you, of those sincere sentiments of esteem
and respect, with which I am your Excellency's most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO MR. SKIPWITH.

PARIS, July 28, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--A long journey has prevented me from writing to any of my
friends, for some time past. This was undertaken with a view to benefit
a dislocated and ill-set wrist, by the mineral waters of Aix, in
Provence. Finding this hope vain, I was led from other views to cross
the Alps as far as Turin, Milan, Genoa; to follow the Mediterranean as
far as Cette, the canal of Languedoc, the Garonne, etc., to Paris. A
most pleasing journey it proved; arts and agriculture offering
something new at every step, and often things worth our imitation. But
the accounts from our country give me to believe that we are not in a
condition to hope for the imitation of anything good. All my letters
are filled with details of our extravagance. From these accounts, I
look back to the time of the war as a time of happiness and enjoyment,
when amidst the privation of many things not essential to happiness, we
could not run in debt, because nobody would trust us; when we practised
by necessity the maxim of buying nothing but what we had money in our
pockets to pay for; a maxim which, of all others, lays the broadest
foundation for happiness. I see no remedy to our evils, but an open
course of law. Harsh as it may seem, it would relieve the very patients
who dread it, by stopping the course of their extravagance, before it
renders their affairs entirely desperate. The eternal and bitter
strictures on our conduct which teem in every London paper, and are
copied from them into others, fill me with anxiety on this subject. The
state of things in Europe is rather threatening at this moment. The
innovations of the Emperor in his dominions have excited a spirit of
resistance. His subjects in Brabant and Flanders are arming, and he has
put forty-five thousand troops in motion towards that country. I
believe they will come to blows. The parties in Holland have already
spilt too much blood to be easily stopped. If left to themselves, I
apprehend the Stadtholderians will be too strong; and if foreign powers
interfere, the weight is still on their side. England and Prussia will
be too much for France. As it is certain that neither of these powers
wish for war, and that England and France are particularly averse to
it, perhaps the matter may end in an armed mediation. If the mediators
should not agree, they will draw their negotiations into length, and
trust to the chapter of accidents for their final solution. With
respect to our country, it stands well with the present ministry here.
The non-payment of our debt is against us. We are occupied in procuring
favorable terms of reception for our produce.

Adieu, my dear Sir, and be assured of the sentiments of sincere esteem
of your affectionate friend and servant.




TO J. W. EPPES.

PARIS, July 28, 1787.


DEAR JACK,--The letter which you were so kind as to write to me the 22d
of May, 1786, was not delivered to me till the 3d of May, 1787, when it
found me in the neighborhood of Marseilles. Before that time, you must
have taken your degree, as mentioned in your letter. Those public
testimonies which are earned by merit, and not by solicitation, may
always be accepted without the imputation of vanity. Of this nature is
the degree which your masters proposed to confer on you. I congratulate
you sincerely on it. It will be a pleasing event to yourself; it will
be the same to your parents and friends, and to none more than myself.
Go on deserving applause, and you will be sure to meet with it; and the
way to deserve it is, to be good, and to be industrious. I am sure you
will be good, and hope you will be industrious. As to your future plan,
I am too distant from you to advise you on sure grounds. In general, I
am of opinion, that till the age of about sixteen, we are best employed
on languages; Latin, Greek, French, and Spanish, or such of them as we
can. After this, I think the College of William and Mary the best place
to go through the courses of Mathematics, Natural Philosophy in its
different branches, and Law. Of the languages I have mentioned, I think
Greek the least useful. Write me word, from time to time, how you go
on. I shall always be glad to assist you with any books you may have
occasion for, and you may count with certainty on every service I can
ever render you, as well as on the sincere esteem of, dear Jack, yours
affectionately.




TO ALEXANDER DONALD.

PARIS, July 28, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I received with infinite satisfaction your letter of the 1st
of March; it was the first information I had of your being in America.
There is no person whom I shall see again with more cordial joy,
whenever it shall be my lot to return to my native country; nor any one
whose prosperity in the meantime will be more interesting to me. I
find, as I grow older, that I set a higher value on the intimacies of
my youth, and am more afflicted by whatever loses one of them to me.
Should it be in my power to render any service in your shipment of
tobacco to Havre de Grace, I shall do it with great pleasure. The order
of Bernis has, I believe, been evaded by the Farmers General as much as
possible. At this moment, I receive information from most of the
seaports, that they refuse taking any tobacco, under the pretext that
they have purchased their whole quantity. From Havre I have heard
nothing, and believe you will stand a better chance there than anywhere
else. Being one of the ports of manufacture, too, it is entitled to a
higher price. I have now desired, that the Farmers may make a distinct
return of their purchases, which are conformable to the order of
Bernis. If they have really bought their quantity, _on those terms_, we
must be satisfied; if they have not, I shall propose their being
obliged to make it up instantly. There is a considerable accumulation
of tobacco in the ports.

Among many good qualities which my countrymen possess, some of a
different character unhappily mix themselves. The most remarkable are,
indolence, extravagance, and infidelity to their engagements. Cure the
two first, and the last would disappear, because it is a consequence of
them, and not proceeding from a want of morals. I know of no remedy
against indolence and extravagance, but a free course of justice.
Everything else is merely palliative; but unhappily, the evil has
gained too generally the mass of the nation, to leave the course of
justice unobstructed. The maxim of buying nothing without the money in
our pockets to pay for it, would make of our country one of the
happiest upon earth. Experience during the war proved this; as I think
every man will remember, that under all the privations it obliged him
to submit to, during that period, he slept sounder, and awaked happier
than he can do now. Desperate of finding relief from a free course of
justice, I look forward to the abolition of all credit, as the only
other remedy which can take place. I have seen, therefore, with
pleasure, the exaggerations of our want of faith, with which the London
papers teem. It is indeed, a strong medicine for sensible minds, but it
is a medicine. It will prevent their crediting us abroad, in which case
we cannot be credited at home. I have been much concerned at the losses
produced by the fire of Richmond. I hope you have escaped them. It will
give me much pleasure to hear from you, as often as you can spare a
moment to write. Be assured that nobody entertains for you sentiments
of more perfect and sincere esteem than, dear Sir, your friend and
servant.




TO WILLIAM DRAYTON.

PARIS, July 30, 1787.


SIR,--Having observed that the consumption of rice in this country, and
particularly in this capital, was very great, I thought it my duty to
inform myself from what markets they draw their supplies, in what
proportion from ours, and whether it might not be practicable to
increase that proportion. This city being little concerned in foreign
commerce, it is difficult to obtain information on particular branches
of it in the detail. I addressed myself to the retailers of rice, and
from them received a mixture of truth and error, which I was unable to
sift apart in the first moment. Continuing, however, my inquiries, they
produced at length this result: that the dealers here were in the habit
of selling two qualities of rice, that of Carolina, with which they
were supplied chiefly from England, and that of Piedmont; that the
Carolina rice was long, slender, white and transparent, answers well
when prepared with milk, sugar, &c., but not so well when prepared _au
gras_; that that of Piedmont was shorter, thicker, and less white, but
that it presented its form better when dressed _au gras_, was better
tasted, and, therefore, preferred by good judges for those purposes;
that the consumption of rice, in this form, was much the most
considerable, but that the superior beauty of the Carolina rice,
seducing the eye of those purchasers who are attached to appearances,
the demand for it was upon the whole as great as for that of Piedmont.
They supposed this difference of quality to proceed from a difference
of management; that the Carolina rice was husked with an instrument
that broke it more, and that less pains were taken to separate the
broken from the unbroken grains, imagining that it was the broken
grains which dissolved in oily preparations; that the Carolina rice
costs somewhat less than that of Piedmont; but that being obliged to
sort the whole grains from the broken, in order to satisfy the taste of
their customers, they ask and receive as much for the first quality of
Carolina, when sorted, as for the rice of Piedmont; but the second and
third qualities, obtained by sorting, are sold much cheaper. The
objection to the Carolina rice then, being, that it crumbles in certain
forms of preparation, and this supposed to be the effect of a less
perfect machine for husking, I flattered myself I should be able to
learn what might be the machine of Piedmont, when I should arrive at
Marseilles, to which place I was to go in the course of a tour through
the seaport towns of this country. At Marseilles, however, they
differed as much in account of the machines, as at Paris they had
differed about other circumstances. Some said it was husked between
mill-stones, others between rubbers of wood in the form of mill-stones,
others of cork. They concurred in one fact, however, that the machine
might be seen by me, immediately on crossing the Alps. This would be an
affair of three weeks. I crossed them and went through the rice country
from Vercelli to Pavia, about sixty miles. I found the machine to be
absolutely the same with that used in Carolina, as well as I could
recollect a description which Mr. E. Rutledge had given me of it. It is
on the plan of a powder mill. In some of them, indeed, they arm each
pestle with an iron tooth, consisting of nine spikes hooked together,
which I do not remember in the description of Mr. Rutledge. I therefore
had a tooth made, which I have the honor of forwarding you with this
letter; observing, at the same time, that as many of their machines are
without teeth as with them, and of course, that the advantage is not
very palpable. It seems to follow, then, that the rice of Lombardy (for
though called Piedmont rice, it does not grow in that county but in
Lombardy) is of a different species from that of Carolina; different in
form, in color and in quality. We know that in Asia they have several
distinct species of this grain. Monsieur Poivre, a former Governor of
the Isle of France, in travelling through several countries of Asia,
observed with particular attention the objects of their agriculture,
and he tells us, that in Cochin-China they cultivate six several kinds
of rice, which he describes, three of them requiring water, and three
growing on highlands. The rice of Carolina is said to have come from
Madagascar, and De Poivre tells us, it is the white rice which is
cultivated there. This favors the probability of its being of a
different species originally, from that of Piedmont; and time, culture
and climate may have made it still more different. Under this idea, I
thought it would be well to furnish you with some of the Piedmont rice,
unhusked, but was told it was contrary to the laws to export it in that
form. I took such measures as I could, however, to have a quantity
brought out, and lest these should fail, I brought, myself, a few
pounds. A part of this I have addressed to you by the way of London; a
part comes with this letter; and I shall send another parcel by some
other conveyance, to prevent the danger of miscarriage. Any one of them
arriving safe, may serve to put in seed, should the society think it an
object. This seed too, coming from Vercelli, where the best rice is
supposed to grow, is more to be depended on than what may be sent me
hereafter. There is a rice from the Levant, which is considered as of a
quality still different, and some think it superior to that of
Piedmont. The troubles which have existed in that country for several
years back, have intercepted it from the European market, so that it is
become almost unknown. I procured a bag of it, however, at Marseilles,
and another of the best rice of Lombardy, which are on their way to
this place, and when arrived, I will forward you a quantity of each,
sufficient to enable you to judge of their qualities when prepared for
the table. I have also taken measures to have a quantity of it brought
from the Levant, unhusked. If I succeed, it shall be forwarded in like
manner. I should think it certainly advantageous to cultivate, in
Carolina and Georgia, the two qualities demanded at market; because the
progress of culture, with us, may soon get beyond the demand for the
white rice; and because too, there is often a brisk demand for the one
quality, when the market is glutted with the other. I should hope there
would be no danger of losing the species of white rice, by a confusion
with the other. This would be a real misfortune, as I should not
hesitate to pronounce the white, upon the whole, the most precious of
the two, for us. The dry rice of Cochin-China has the reputation of
being the whitest to the eye, best flavored to the taste, and most
productive. It seems then to unite the good qualities of both the
others known to us. Could it supplant them, it would be a great
happiness, as it would enable us to get rid of those ponds of stagnant
water, so fatal to human health and life. But such is the force of
habit, and caprice of taste, that we could not be sure beforehand it
would produce this effect. The experiment, however, is worth trying,
should it only end in producing a third quality, and increasing the
demand. I will endeavor to procure some to be brought from
Cochin-China. The event, however, will be uncertain and distant.

I was induced, in the course of my journey through the south of France,
to pay very particular attention to the objects of their culture,
because the resemblance of their climate to that of the southern parts
of the United States, authorizes us to presume we may adopt any of
their articles of culture, which we would wish for. We should not wish
for their wines, though they are good and abundant. The culture of the
vine is not desirable in lands capable of producing anything else. It
is a species of gambling, and of desperate gambling too, wherein,
whether you make much or nothing, you are equally ruined. The middling
crop alone is the saving point, and that the seasons seldom hit.
Accordingly, we see much wretchedness among this class of cultivators.
Wine, too, is so cheap in these countries, that a laborer with us,
employed in the culture of any other article, may exchange it for wine,
more and better than he could raise himself. It is a resource for a
country, the whole of whose good soil is otherwise employed, and which
still has some barren spots, and surplus of population to employ on
them. There the vine is good, because it is something in the place of
nothing. It may become a resource to us at a still earlier period; when
the increase of population shall increase our productions beyond the
demand for them, both at home and abroad. Instead of going on to make
an useless surplus of them, we may employ our supernumerary hands on
the vine. But that period is not yet arrived.

The almond tree is also so precarious, that none can depend for
subsistence on its produce, but persons of capital.

The caper, though a more tender plant, is more certain in its produce,
because a mound of earth of the size of a cucumber hill, thrown over
the plant in the fall, protects it effectually against the cold of
winter. When the danger of frost is over in the spring, they uncover
it, and begin its culture. There is a great deal of this in the
neighborhood of Toulon. The plants are set about eight feet apart, and
yield, one year with another, about two pounds of caper each, worth on
the spot sixpence sterling per pound. They require little culture, and
this may be performed either with the plough or hoe. The principal work
is the gathering of the fruit as it forms. Every plant must be picked
every other day, from the last of June till the middle of October. But
this is the work of women and children. This plant does well in any
kind of soil which is dry, or even in walls where there is no soil, and
it lasts the life of a man. Toulon would be the proper port to apply
for them. I must observe, that the preceding details cannot be relied
on with the fullest certainty, because, in the canton where this plant
is cultivated, the inhabitants speak no written language, but a medley,
which I could understand but very imperfectly.

The fig and mulberry are so well known in America, that nothing need be
said of them. Their culture, too, is by women and children, and,
therefore, earnestly to be desired in countries where there are slaves.
In these, the women and children are often employed in labors
disproportioned to their sex and age. By presenting to the master
objects of culture, easier and equally beneficial, all temptation to
misemploy them would be removed, and the lot of this tender part of our
species be much softened. By varying, too, the articles of culture, we
multiply the chances for making something, and disarm the seasons in a
proportionable degree, of their calamitous effects.

The olive is a tree the least known in America, and yet the most worthy
of being known. Of all the gifts of heaven to man, it is next to the
most precious, if it be not the most precious. Perhaps it may claim a
preference even to bread, because there is such an infinitude of
vegetables, which it renders a proper and comfortable nourishment. In
passing the Alps at the Col de Tende, where they are mere masses of
rock, wherever there happens to be a little soil, there are a number of
olive trees, and a village supported by them. Take away these trees,
and the same ground in corn would not support a single family. A pound
of oil, which can be bought for three or four pence sterling, is
equivalent to many pounds of flesh, by the quantity of vegetables it
will prepare, and render fit and comfortable food. Without this tree,
the country of Provence and territory of Genoa would not support
one-half, perhaps not one-third, their present inhabitants. The nature
of the soil is of little consequence if it be dry. The trees are
planted from fifteen to twenty feet apart, and when tolerably good,
will yield fifteen or twenty pounds of oil yearly, one with another.
There are trees which yield much more. They begin to render good crops
at twenty years old, and last till killed by cold, which happens at
some time or other, even in their best positions in France. But they
put out again from their roots. In Italy, I am told, they have trees
two hundred years old. They afford an easy but constant employment
through the year, and require so little nourishment, that if the soil
be fit for any other production, it may be cultivated among the olive
trees without injuring them. The northern limits of this tree are the
mountains of the Cevennes, from about the meridian of Carcassonne to
the Rhone, and from thence, the Alps and Apennines as far as Genoa, I
know, and how much farther I am not informed. The shelter of these
mountains may be considered as equivalent to a degree and a half of
latitude, at least, because westward of the commencement of the
Cevennes, there are no olive trees in 43-1/2° or even 43° of latitude,
whereas, we find them _now_ on the Rhone at Pierrelatte, in 44-1/2°,
and _formerly_ they were at Tains, above the mouth of the Isere, in
45°, sheltered by the near approach of the Cevennes and Alps, which
only leave there a passage for the Rhone. Whether such a shelter exists
or not in the States of South Carolina and Georgia, I know not. But
this we may say, either that it exists or that it is not necessary
there, because we know that they produce the orange in open air; and
wherever the orange will stand at all, experience shows that the olive
will stand well, being a hardier tree. Notwithstanding the great
quantities of oil made in France, they have not enough for their own
consumption, and, therefore, import from other countries. This is an
article, the consumption of which will always keep pace with its
production. Raise it, and it begets its own demand. Little is carried
to America, because Europe has it not to spare. We, therefore, have not
learned the use of it. But cover the southern States with it, and every
man will become a consumer of oil, within whose reach it can be brought
in point of price. If the memory of those persons is held in great
respect in South Carolina who introduced there the culture of rice, a
plant which sows life and death with almost equal hand, what
obligations would be due to him who should introduce the olive tree,
and set the example of its culture! Were the owner of slaves to view it
only as the means of bettering their condition, how much would he
better that by planting one of those trees for every slave he
possessed! Having been myself an eye witness to the blessings which
this tree sheds on the poor, I never had my wishes so kindled for the
introduction of any article of new culture into our own country. South
Carolina and Georgia appear to me to be the States, wherein its
success, in favorable positions at least, could not be doubted, and I
flattered myself it would come within the views of the society for
agriculture to begin the experiments which are to prove its
practicability. Carcassonne is the place from which the plants may be
most certainly and cheaply obtained. They can be sent from thence by
water to Bordeaux, where they may be embarked on vessels bound for
Charleston. There is too little intercourse between Charleston and
Marseilles to propose this as the port of exportation. I offer my
services to the society for the obtaining and forwarding any number of
plants which may be desired.

Before I quit the subject of climates, and the plants adapted to them,
I will add, as a matter of curiosity, and of some utility, too, that my
journey through the southern parts of France, and the territory of
Genoa, but still more the crossing of the Alps, enabled me to form a
scale of the tenderer plants, and to arrange them according to their
different powers of resisting cold. In passing the Alps at the Col de
Tende, we cross three very high mountains successively. In ascending,
we lose these plants, one after another, as we rise, and find them
again in the contrary order as we descend on the other side; and this
is repeated three times. Their order, proceeding from the tenderest to
the hardiest, is as follows: caper, orange, palm, aloe, olive,
pomegranate, walnut, fig, almond. But this must be understood of the
plant only; for as to the fruit, the order is somewhat different. The
caper, for example, is the tenderest plant, yet, being so easily
protected, it is among the most certain in its fruit. The almond, the
hardiest, loses its fruit the oftenest, on account of its forwardness.
The palm, hardier than the caper and orange, never produces perfect
fruit here.

I had the honor of sending you, the last year, some seeds of the sulla
of Malta, or Spanish St. Foin. Lest they should have miscarried, I now
pack with the rice a canister of the same kind of seed, raised by
myself. By Colonel Franks, in the month of February last, I sent a
parcel of acorns of the cork oak, which I desired him to ask the favor
of the Delegates of South Carolina in Congress to forward to you.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO FRANCIS HOPKINSON, ESQ.

PARIS, August 1, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--A journey into the southern parts of France and northern of
Italy must apologize to you for the length of time elapsed since my
last, and for the delay of acknowledging the receipt of your favors of
November 8 and December 9, 1786, and April 14, 1787. Your two phials of
essence de l'Orient arrived during that interval, and got separated
from the letters which accompanied them, so that I could not be sure
which was your first preparation, and which was your second. But I
suppose, from some circumstances, that the small phial was the first,
and the larger one the second. This was entirely spoiled, so that
nothing was distinguishable from it. The matter in the small phial was
also too much spoiled for use; but the pearl merchant, from whom I got
my details, said he could judge, from what remained, that it had been
very good; that you had a very considerable knowledge in the manner of
preparing, but that there was still one thing wanting which made the
secret of the art; that this is not only a secret of the art, but of
every individual workman who will not communicate to his fellows,
believing his own method the best; that of ten different workmen, all
will practice different operations, and only one of the ten be the
right one; that the secret consists only in preparing the fish, all the
other parts of the process in the pearl manufactory being known. That
experience has proved it to be absolutely impossible for the matter to
cross the sea without being spoiled; but that if you will send some in
the best state you can, he will make pearls of it, and send to you that
you may judge of them yourself. He says the only possible method of
making anything of it would be for a workman to go over. He would not
engage in this, nor would he buy, because he says it is their custom to
have contracts for nine years' supply from the fishermen, and that his
contract furnishes him with as much as he can sell in the present
declining state of the pearl trade; that they have been long getting
out of fashion, polite people not wearing them at all, and the poor not
able to give a price; that their calling is, in fact, annihilating;
that when he renews his contract he shall be obliged to reduce the
price he pays twenty-five per cent.; that the matter sells from five to
eight livres the French pound, but most generally at six livres. He
showed me a necklace of twelve strands, which used to sell at ten
livres, and now sells for two and a half. He observed that the length
of time the matter will keep depends on the strength of the spirit of
wine. The result is, then, that you must send me a sample of your very
best, and write what you would propose after weighing these
circumstances. The leg and feathers of the bird are also arrived; but
the comb, which you mention as annexed to the foot, has totally
disappeared. I suppose this is the effect of its drying. I have not yet
had an opportunity of giving it to Monsieur de Buffon, but expect to do
it soon. I thank you for the trouble you have taken with Madame
Champne's letters, and must give you another, that of enquiring for
James Lillie, belonging to the privateer General Mercer, of
Philadelphia, the property of Iroon, Carsons and Semple. Richard Graham
& Co., merchants of Philadelphia, seem to have been also interested;
and Isaac Robinson, Graham's son-in-law, to have commanded her. For the
details I refer you to the enclosed paper I received from a Madame
Ferrier, sister to James Lillie, from which you will perceive he has
not been heard of since 1779. I receive many of these applications
which humanity cannot refuse, and I have no means of complying with
them but by troubling gentlemen on the spot. This, I hope, will be my
apology. I am obliged to you for subscribing to the Columbian Magazine
for me. I find it a good thing, and am sure it will be better from the
time you have undertaken it. I wish you had commenced before the month
of December, for then the abominable forgery inserted in my name in the
last page, would never have appeared. This, I suppose, the compilers
took from English papers, those infamous fountains of falsehood. Is it
not surprising that our newswriters continue to copy from those papers,
though every one who knows anything of them, knows they are written by
persons who never go out of their garret nor read a paper? The real
letter alluded to was never meant to have been public, and therefore
was hastily and carelessly dictated while I was obliged to use the pen
of another. It became public, however. I send you a genuine copy to
justify myself in your eyes against the absurd thing they have fathered
upon me in the Magazine. Mr. Payne is here with his bridge, which is
well thought of. The Academy, to whom it is submitted, have not yet
made their report. I have shipped on board the Mary, Captain Howland,
bound from Havre to New York, a box containing the subsequent
livraisons of the Encyclopedie for yourself and Doctor Franklin from
those formerly sent you to the twenty-two inclusive. I think there are
also in it some new volumes of the Bibliotheque physico-économique for
you. I had received duplicates of some books (in sheets) for the
colleges of Philadelphia and Williamsburg. Whether I packed one copy in
your box, and one in Madison's, or both in his, I do not remember. You
will see and be so good as to deliver the one to the College of
Philadelphia, if in your box. The box is directed to Doctor Franklin,
and will be delivered to Mr. Madison at New York. I will send you
either by this occasion or the next, the cost, expenses, etc., etc.
Present me in the most respectful and friendly terms to Dr. Franklin
and his grandson, to Mr. Rittenhouse and family, Mrs. Hopkinson the
elder and younger. My daughter (my elder one I mean, for both are here
now) presents her respects also to your mother. I am, with sentiments
of sincere affection, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO RALPH IZARD, ESQ.

PARIS, August 1, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am to thank you for the laws and newspapers sent me by the
M. de Chateaufort. Your favor of April 4th, has also been duly
received. I am happy to find that the idea of diverting the rice trade
from England to France is thought to be impracticable. A journey which
I made from Marseilles lately, in Lombardy, in order to acquire
information relative to their rice, has corrected the misinformation
which the retailers of rice in this capital had given me. I am
satisfied that the rice of Lombardy is of a different species from
yours. The exportation of it in the husk being prohibited, I could not
bring with me but as much as my pockets would hold, which I have sent
to your society of agriculture. It may serve to raise seed from. I have
taken measures for a couple of sacks, but I do not make sure of them,
nor rely so much on their quality as on the parcel I brought myself. I
have written so fully on this subject to Mr. Drayton, that, without
repeating it here, I will take the liberty of referring you to that
letter. I have endeavored to prevail upon the merchants in this country
to engage in the rice trade. I enclose you the proposals of Messrs.
Berard & Co., for that effect. They are a very solid house. One of them
resides here. Their principal establishment is at L'Orient, where they
would prefer receiving consignments of rice; but they will receive them
anywhere else, and should suppose Honfleur the best port, and next to
that Bordeaux. You observe they will answer bills to the amount of
twelve or fifteen livres the French quintal, if accompanying the bill
of lading, and will pay the surplus of the proceeds as soon as
received. If they sell at Havre or Rouen, they may receive ready money,
and of course pay the balance soon; if they sell at Paris, it must be
on a year's credit (because this will be to the retailers). The money,
therefore, will be received later, but it will be at least six livres
the quintal more; a difference well worth waiting for. I know of no
mercantile house in France of surer bottom.

Affairs in Europe seem to threaten war. Yet I think all may be settled
without it. The Emperor disapproves of the concessions made to the
Netherlands by their governors, but called for deputies to consult on
the matter. They have sent deputies without power to yield a jot, and
go on arming. From the character of their Sovereign, it is probable he
will avail himself of this deputation to concede their demands. The
affairs of Holland are so thoroughly embroiled, that they would
certainly produce a war if France and England were in a condition for
it. But they are not, and they will, therefore, find out some
arrangement either perpetual or temporary to stop the progress of the
civil war begun in that country. A spirit of distrust in the government
here, and confidence in their own force and rights, is pervading all
ranks. It will be well if it awaits the good which will be worked by
the provincial assemblies, and will content itself with that. The
parliament demand an assembly of the States; they are supported by the
ministers of the nation, and the object of asking that assembly is to
fix a constitution, and to limit expenses. They refuse to register any
edict for a new tax. This has so far lessened the credit of government,
that the purse of the money lender is shut. They speak here as freely
as Junius wrote. Yet it is possible that in the event of war, the
spirit of the nation would rise to support a cause which is approved--I
mean that of Holland.

I have had the Messrs. Le Coulteux sounded on the subject of lending
money. I had before tried the same thing with others. But nothing is to
be obtained for persons on our side the water. They have no confidence
in our laws. Besides, all the money men are playing deeply in the
stocks of the country. The spirit of "_agiotage_" (as they call it) was
never so high in any country before. It will probably produce as total
deprivation of morals as the system of law did. All the money of France
is now employed in this, none being free even for the purposes of
commerce, which suffers immensely from this cause.

Before I conclude, I must add, on the subject of rice, that, what
cannot arrive here a month before the carême, would miss its sale, and
must therefore go to another market. The merchant, however, to whom it
is consigned, will be competent to this measure whenever he finds it a
necessary one. I beg leave to be presented very respectfully to Mrs.
Izard and your family, and to assure you of the sincere sentiments of
esteem and attachment with which I am, dear Sir, your friend and
servant.





TO JAMES MADISON.

PARIS, August 2, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--My last was of June the 20th. Yours, received since that
date, are of May the 15th, and June the 6th. In mine I acknowledged the
receipt of the paccan nuts which came sealed up. I have reason to
believe those in the box have arrived at L'Orient. By the Mary, Captain
Howland, lately sailed from Havre to New York, I shipped three boxes of
books, one marked J. M. for yourself, one marked B. F. for Dr.
Franklin, and one marked W. H. for William Hay in Richmond. I have
taken the liberty of addressing them all to you, as you will see by the
enclosed bill of lading, in hopes you would be so good as to forward
the other two. You will have opportunities of calling on the gentlemen
for the freight, etc. In yours you will find the books noted in the
account, inclosed herewith. You have now Mabby's works complete, except
that on Poland, which I have never been able to get, but shall not
cease to search for. Some other volumes are wanting, too, to complete
your collection of Chronologies. The fourth volume of D'Albon was lost
by the bookbinder, and I have not yet been able to get one to replace
it. I shall continue to try. The Mémoires sur les droits et impositions
en Europe, (cited by Smith,) was a scarce and excessively dear book.
They are now reprinting it. I think it will be in three or four
quartos, of from nine to twelve livres a volume. When it is finished, I
shall take a copy for you. Amelot's travels into China, I can learn
nothing of. I put among the books sent you two somewhat voluminous, and
the object of which will need explanation; these are the Tableau de
Paris and L'espion Anglois. The former is truly a picture of private
manners in Paris, but presented on the dark side, and a little darkened
moreover. But there is so much truth in its groundwork, that it will be
well worth your reading. You will then know Paris (and probably the
other large cities of Europe) as well as if you had been there for
years. L'espion Anglois is no caricature. It will give you a just idea
of the wheels by which the machine of government is worked here. There
are in it also many interesting details of the last war, which, in
general, may be relied on. It may be considered as the small history of
great events. I am in hopes, when you shall have read them, you will
not think I have misspent your money for them. My method for making out
this assortment was, to revise the list of my own purchases since the
invoice of 1785, and to select such as I had found worth your having.
Besides this, I have casually met with and purchased some few curious
and cheap things.

I must trouble you on behalf of a Mr. Thomas Burke, at Loughburke, near
Loughrea, in Ireland, whose brother, James Burke, is supposed to have
died in 1785, on his passage from Jamaica, or St. Eustatius to New
York. His property on board the vessel is understood to have come to
the hands of alderman Groom at New York. The enclosed copy of a letter
to him, will more fully explain it. A particular friend of mine here
applies to me for information, which I must ask the favor of you to
procure, and forward to me.

Writing news to others, much pressed in time, and making this letter
one of private business, I did not intend to have said anything to you
on political subjects. But I must press one subject. Mr. Adams informs
me he has borrowed money in Holland, which, if confirmed by Congress,
will enable them to pay, not only the interest due here to the foreign
officers, but the principal. Let me beseech you to reflect on the
expediency of transferring this debt to Holland. All our other debts in
Europe do not injure our reputation so much as this. These gentlemen
have connections both in and out of office, and these again their
connections, so that our default on this article is further known, more
blamed, and excites worst dispositions against us, than you can
conceive. If you think as I do, pray try to procure an order for paying
off their capital. Mr. Adams adds, that if any certain tax is provided
for the payment of interest, Congress may borrow enough in Holland to
pay off their whole debts in France, both public and private, to the
crown, to the Farmers, and to Beaumarchais. Surely it will be better to
transfer these debts to Holland. So critical is the state of that
country, that I imagine the moneyed men of it would be glad to place
their money in foreign countries, and that Mr. Adams could borrow there
for us, without a certain tax for the interest, and saving our faith
too, by previous explanations on that subject. This country is really
supposed on the eve of a * * * *. Such a spirit has risen within a few
weeks, as could not have been believed. They see the great deficit in
their revenues, and the hopes of economy lessen daily. The parliament
refuse to register any act for a new tax, and require an Assembly of
the States. The object of this Assembly is evidently to give law to the
King, to fix a constitution, to limit expenses. These views are said to
gain upon the nation.[4]



      [4] The parts of this letter marked by asterisks, are in cypher
      and unintelligible.

A final decision of some sort should be made on Beaumarchais' affairs.

I am, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem, dear Sir, your friend
and servant.




TO THOMAS BARCLAY.

PARIS, August 3, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of your several favors
of June the 29th, and July the 6th and 8th.

I am of opinion that the affair of Geraud and Roland in Holland had
better be committed to Mr. Dumas in Holland, as lawsuits must be always
attended to by some person on the spot. For the same reason, I think
that of La Vayse and Puchilberg should be managed by the agent at
L'Orient, and Gruel's by the agent at Nantes. I shall always be ready
to assist the agents of L'Orient and Nantes in any way in my power; but
were the details to be left to me, they would languish necessarily, on
account of my distance from the place, and perhaps suffer too, for want
of verbal consultations with the lawyers entrusted with them. You are
now with Congress, and can take their orders on the subject. I shall,
therefore, do nothing in these matters, in reliance that you will put
them into such channel as they direct, furnishing the necessary
documents and explanations.



With respect to the French affair, being perfectly satisfied myself, I
have not ceased, nor shall I cease, endeavoring to satisfy others, that
your conduct has been that of an honest and honorable debtor, and
theirs the counterpart of Shylock in the play. I enclose you a letter
containing my testimony on your general conduct, which I have written
to relieve a debt of justice pressing on my mind, well knowing, at the
same time, you will not stand in need of it in America. Your conduct is
too well known to Congress, your character to all the world, to need
any testimonials.

The moment I close my despatches for the packet, which will be the 9th
instant, I shall, with great pleasure, go to pay my respects to Mrs.
Barclay at St. Germains, to satisfy her on the subject of your
transactions, and to assure her that my resources shall be hers, as
long as I have any. A multitude of letters to write, prevents my
entering into the field of public news, further than to observe, that
it is extremely doubtful whether the affairs of Holland will, or will
not produce a war between France, on one side, and England and Prussia,
on the other.

I beg you to accept assurances of the sincere esteem and respect with
which I have the honor to be, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO MR. BARCLAY.

PARIS, August 3, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--As you have acted since my arrival in France, in the
characters of Consul-General for that country, and Minister to the
Court of Morocco, and also as agent in some particular transactions for
the State of Virginia, I think it is a duty to yourself, to truth, and
to justice, on your departure for America, to declare that, in all
these characters, as far as has come within my notice, you have acted
with judgment, with attention, with integrity and honor. I beg you to
accept this feeble tribute to truth, and assurances of sincere
attachment and friendship from, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY EDWARD RANDOLPH.

PARIS, August 3, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--A journey into the southern parts of France, and northern of
Italy, has prevented my sooner acknowledging the receipt of your
private favors of July 12th, 1786, and January 28 and May 3, 1787. I am
anxious to hear what you have done in your federal convention. I am in
hopes at least you will persuade the States to commit their commercial
arrangements to Congress, and to enable them to pay their debts,
interest and capital. The coercive powers supposed to be wanting in the
federal head, I am of opinion they possess by the law of nature, which
authorizes one party to an agreement to compel the other to
performance. A delinquent State makes itself a party against the rest
of the confederacy.

We have at present two fires kindled in Europe; 1, in Brabant. The
Emperor, the moment of his return to Vienna, disavowed the concessions
which had been made by his governors to quiet the Brabantines. They
prepared, therefore, for regular resistance. But as the Emperor had, at
the same time, called for deputies to be sent to Vienna to consult on
their affairs, they have sent them, but without power to conclude
anything, and in the meantime they go on arming. The enterprising,
unpersevering, capricious, Thrasonic character of their Sovereign
renders it probable he will avail himself of this little condescendence
in the Brabantines to recede from all his innovations. 2. The Dutch are
every now and then cutting one another's throats. The party of the
Stadtholder is strongest within the confederacy, and is gaining ground.
He has a majority in the States General, and a strong party in the
States of Holland. His want of money is supplied by his cousin George.
England and Prussia abet his usurpations, and France the patriotic
party. Were England and France in a condition to go to war, there is no
question but they would have been at it before now. But their
insuperable poverty renders it probable they will compel a suspension
of hostilities, and either arrange and force a settlement on the Dutch,
or if they cannot agree themselves on this, they will try to protract
things by negotiation. Can I be useful to you here in anything in the
purchase of books, of wines, of fruits, of modes for Mrs. Randolph, or
anything else? As to books, they are cheaper here than in England,
excepting those in Latin, Greek, or English. As to wines, I have the
best Vignerons of Bordeaux, Burgundy and Frontinan. Genuine wines can
never be had but of the Vigneron. The best of Bordeaux cost three
livres the bottle, but good may be bought for two. Command me freely,
assured that I shall serve you cheerfully, and that I am with respects
to Mrs. Randolph and attachment to yourself, dear Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR OF VIRGINIA.

PARIS, August 3, 1787.


SIR,--I am to acknowledge the receipt of your Excellency's letters of
January 28th, and May 4th, which have come to hand since the date of
mine of February 7th. Immediately on the receipt of the former I caused
enquiry to be made relative to the bayonets, and found that they had
certainly been packed with the muskets. Your Excellency's favor of May
4th renders unnecessary the sending the proofs. There have been shipped
in the whole from Bordeaux 3,400 stand of arms, and from Havre 3,406
cartouch boxes, which I hope have come safely to hand. Besides these
there has been a shipment from Bordeaux of powder, etc., made by Mr.
Barclay. This was but the half of what was intended, and of what Mr.
Barclay had contracted for. But his bill on Mr. Grand was protested on
a misconception of Mr. Grand's, who, by a mixture of your account with
that of the United States, had supposed he had but about 12,000 livres
of your money in his hands. I was absent on a journey, and happened in
the course of that to meet with Mr. Barclay at Bordeaux, and we
concluded to send you half the quantity. Since my return, I have not
been able to have your account exactly settled so as to render it now;
but am able to say in general and with certainty, that everything sent
you has been paid, and that after paying Houdon 3,000 livres for the
second bust of the Marquis de La Fayette now nearly ready to be sent
off for you, and 10,000 livres the second payment due towards General
Washington's statue, there will remain enough in Mr. Grand's hands to
pay for a quantity of powder, &c, equal to that sent you by Mr. Barclay
from Bordeaux, which shall accordingly be done. This balance on hand
includes 5,300 livres paid by Mr. Littlepage, which, though he has sent
us a bill for, six or eight months ago, we had refused to receive till
the arrival of your Excellency's letter informing me it had not been
paid in America; it was therefore applied for and received by Mr. Grand
a few days ago. Mr. Barclay drew on me for the balance of his account
with the State of Virginia, 2,370 livres, which I paid; besides these
he afterwards discovered an omission of 108_l._ 8_s._ in his account,
which I pay also, so as to leave your account with him balanced. There
is, however, the articles of expenses for young Mercier, which he has
neither entered in your account, nor charged to me in my private
account. It yet remains due to him, therefore, and I shall pay it to
him if he applies to me. I should have called for it, but that he was
gone to America before I discovered the omission. Should the State have
further occasion for arms, your Excellency will be able to judge,
combining quality and price, whether those of Liege or of France are to
be preferred. I shall with cheerfulness obey your future orders on this
or any other account, and have the honor to be, with sentiments of the
most perfect esteem and respect, your Excellency's most obedient, and
most humble servant.

P. S.--The original of the report on the inauguration of the bust of
the Marquis de La Fayette accompanies this.




TO WILLIAM HAY.

PARIS, August 4, 1787.


SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of your two favors of April
26, and May 3. I have forwarded, by a vessel lately sailed from Havre
to New York, a box marked W. H., containing the livraisons of the
Encyclopédie subsequent to those Dr. Currie has delivered you, to the
22d inclusive. They are sent to the care of Mr. Madison at Congress,
who will forward the box to you. There is in it, also, the same
livraisons to Colonel Monroe. I will continue to forward them once or
twice a year, as they come out. I have stated in a letter to Dr. Currie
the cost and expenses of the first twenty-two livraisons, to enable
yourself and himself to settle. The future shall be charged to you or
him, as your agreement shall be. It is really a most valuable work, and
almost supplies the place of a library.

I receive from too many quarters the account of the distresses of my
countrymen to doubt their truth--distresses brought on themselves by a
feebleness of mind which calculates very illy its own happiness. It is
a miserable arithmetic which makes any single privation whatever so
painful as a total privation of everything which must necessarily
follow the living so far beyond our income. What is to extricate us I
know not, whether law, or loss of credit. If the sources of the former
are corrupted, so as to prevent justice the latter must supply its
place, leave us possessed of our infamous gains, but prevent all future
ones of the same character.

Europe is in a moment of crisis. The innovations by their sovereign in
the Austrian Netherlands have produced in the people a determination to
resist. The Emperor, by disavowing the concessions made by his
governors to quiet the people, seemed to take up the gauntlet which
they had thrown. Yet it is rather probable he will recede, and all be
hushed up there. The Dutch parties are in a course of hostilities which
it will be difficult to suspend. A war would have been begun before
this, between this country on one side, and England and Prussia on the
other, had the parties been in a condition for war. Perhaps England
might have raised supplies, but it would be on a certainty of being
crushed under them. This country would find greater difficulty. There
is, however, a difference in her favor which might reduce her on a
level with England: that is, that it would be a popular war here, and
an unpopular one in England. Probably the weakness of the two countries
will induce them to join in compelling a suspension of hostilities, and
to make an arrangement for them, or if they cannot agree in that, they
will spin the matter into length by negotiation. In fact, though both
parties are arming, I do not expect any speedy commencement of
hostilities. I am, with very great respect and esteem, Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO DR. DAVID RAMSAY.

PARIS, August 4, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I have to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of November
8 and April 7, and the pleasure to inform you that the translation of
your book sells well, and is universally approved. Froulle will send
you some copies of it, by the first opportunity. I am happy to hear you
are occupied on the general history. It is a subject worthy your pen. I
observe Stockdale in London has printed your work and advertised it for
sale. Since I wrote to you on the subject of rice, I have had an
opportunity of examining the rice-fields of Lombardy, and having
committed my observations to writing, in a letter to Mr. Drayton, as
President of the Agricultural Society, I will take the liberty of
referring you to that letter, in which probably there is little new to
your countrymen, though all was new to me. However, if there be a
little new and useful, it will be my reward. I have been pressing on
the merchants here the expediency of enticing the rice-trade to
Bordeaux and Honfleur. At length, I have received the enclosed
propositions. They are a firm and very solid house. I wish they may
produce the effect desired. I have enclosed a copy to Mr. Izard, but
forgot to mention to him, on the subject of white plains and hoes
(particularly named in his letter to me), that this house will begin by
furnishing them from England, which they think they can do as cheap as
you can receive them directly from England. The allowance made to
wholesale purchasers will countervail the double voyage. They hope that
after a while they can have them imitated here. Will you be so good as
to mention this to Mr. Izard? I fear that my zeal will make me expose
myself to ridicule in this business, for I am no merchant, and still
less knowing in the culture of rice. But this risk becomes a duty by
the bare possibility of doing good. You mention in your letter, your
instalment law as needing apology. I have never heard the payment by
instalment complained of in Europe. On the contrary, in the conferences
Mr. Adams and myself had with merchants in London, they admitted the
necessity of them. It is only necessary that the terms be faithfully
observed, and the payments be in real money. I am sensible that there
are defects in our federal government, yet they are so much lighter
than those of monarchies, that I view them with much indulgence. I
rely, too, on the good sense of the people for remedy, whereas the
evils of monarchical government are beyond remedy. If any of our
countrymen wish for a King, give them Æsop's fable of the frogs who
asked a King; if this does not cure them, send them to Europe. They
will go back good republicans. Whether we shall have war or not, is
still doubtful. I conclude we shall not, from, the inability of both
France and England to undertake a war. But our friend George is rather
remarkable for doing exactly what he ought not to do. He may,
therefore, force on a war in favor of his cousin of Holland. I am, with
very great esteem, Sir, your most obedient humble servant.




TO EDWARD CARRINGTON.

PARIS, August 4, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Since mine of the 16th of January, I have been honored by
your favors of April the 24th and June the 9th. I am happy to find that
the States have come so generally into the schemes of the federal
convention, from which, I am sure, we shall see wise propositions. I
confess, I do not go as far in the reforms thought necessary, as some
of my correspondents in America; but if the convention should adopt
such propositions, I shall suppose them necessary. My general plan
would be, to make the States one as to everything connected with
foreign nations, and several as to everything purely domestic. But with
all the imperfections of our present government, it is without
comparison the best existing, or that ever did exist. Its greatest
defect is the imperfect manner in which matters of commerce have been
provided for. It has been so often said, as to be generally believed,
that Congress have no power by the Confederation to enforce anything;
for example, contributions of money. It was not necessary to give them
that power expressly; they have it by the law of nature. When two
parties make a compact, there results to each a power of compelling the
other to execute it. Compulsion was never so easy as in our case, where
a single frigate would soon levy on the commerce of any State the
deficiency of its contributions; nor more safe than in the hands of
Congress, which has always shown that it would wait, as it ought to do,
to the last extremities, before it would execute any of its powers
which are disagreeable. I think it very material, to separate, in the
hands of Congress, the executive and legislative powers, as the
judiciary already are, in some degree. This, I hope, will be done. The
want of it has been the source of more evil than we have experienced
from any other cause. Nothing is so embarrassing nor so mischievous, in
a great assembly, as the details of execution. The smallest trifle of
that kind occupies as long as the most important act of legislation,
and takes place of everything else. Let any man recollect, or look
over, the files of Congress; he will observe the most important
propositions hanging over, from week to week, and month to month, till
the occasions have passed them, and the things never done. I have ever
viewed the executive details as the greatest cause of evil to us,
because they in fact place us as if we had no federal head, by
diverting the attention of that head from great to small subjects; and
should this division of power not be recommended by the convention, it
is my opinion Congress should make itself, by establishing an executive
committee.



I have the honor to be, with sincere esteem and respect, dear Sir, your
most obedient, most humble servant.




TO DR. JAMES CURRIE.

PARIS, August 4, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am favored with your letter of May the 2d, and most
cordially sympathise in your late immediate losses. It is a situation
in which a man needs the aid of all his wisdom and philosophy. But as
it is better to turn from the contemplation of our misfortunes to the
resources we possess of extricating ourselves, you will, of course,
have found solace in your vigor of mind, health of body, talents,
habits of business, in the consideration that you have time yet to
retrieve everything, and a knowledge that the very activity necessary
for this, is a state of greater happiness than the unoccupied one, to
which you had a thought of retiring. I wish the bulk of my extravagant
countrymen had as good prospects and resources as you. But with many of
them, a feebleness of mind makes them afraid to probe the true state of
their affairs, and procrastinate the reformation which alone can save
something, to those who may yet be saved. How happy a people were we
during the war, from the single circumstance that we could not run in
debt! This counteracted all the inconveniences we felt, as the present
facility of ruining ourselves overweighs all the blessings of peace. I
know no condition happier than that of a Virginia farmer might be,
conducting himself as he did during the war. His estate supplies a good
table, clothes himself and his family with their ordinary apparel,
furnishes a small surplus to buy salt, sugar, coffee, and a little
finery for his wife and daughters, enables him to receive and to visit
his friends, and furnishes him pleasing and healthy occupation. To
secure all this, he needs but one act of self-denial, to put off buying
anything till he has the money to pay for it. Mr. Ammonett did not
come. He wrote to me, however, and I am making inquiry for the town and
family he indicated. As yet, neither can be heard of, and were they to
be found, the length of time would probably bar all claims against
them. I have seen no object present so many desperate faces. However,
if inquiry can lighten our way, that shall not be wanting, and I will
write to him as soon as we discover anything, or despair of
discovering. Littlepage has succeeded well in Poland. He has some
office, it is said, worth five hundred guineas a year. The box of seeds
you were so kind as to forward me came safe to hand. The arrival of my
daughter, in good health, has been a source of immense comfort to me.
The injury of which you had heard, was a dislocated wrist, and though
it happened eleven months ago, was a simple dislocation, and
immediately aided by the best surgeon in Paris, it is neither well, nor
ever will be, so as to render me much service. The fingers remain
swelled and crooked, the hand withered, and the joint having a very
confined motion. You ask me when I shall return? My commission expires
next spring, and if not renewed, I shall return then. If renewed, I
shall stay somewhat longer; how much, will not depend on me altogether.
So far as it does, I cannot fix the epoch of my return, though I always
flatter myself it is not very distant. My habits are formed to those of
my own country. I am past the time of changing them, and am, therefore,
less happy anywhere else than there.

I shall always be happy to hear from you, being with very sincere
esteem, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO MR. BENJAMIN HAWKINS.

PARIS, August 4, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I have to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of March
the 8th and June the 9th, and to give you many thanks for the trouble
you have taken with the dionasa muscipula. I have not yet heard
anything of them, which makes me fear they have perished by the way. I
believe the most effectual means of conveying them hither, will be by
the seed. I must add my thanks, too, for the vocabularies. This is an
object I mean to pursue, as I am persuaded that the only method of
investigating the filiation of the Indian nations is by that of their
languages.

I look up with you to the federal convention for an amendment of our
federal affairs. Yet I do not view them in so disadvantageous a light
at present, as some do. And above all things, I am astonished at some
people's considering a kingly government as a refuge. Advise such to
read the fable of the frogs who solicited Jupiter for a king. If that
does not put them to rights, send them to Europe, to see something of
the trappings of monarchy, and I will undertake that every man shall go
back thoroughly cured. If all the evils which can arise among us, from
the republican form of government, from this day to the day of
judgment, could be put into a scale against what this country suffers
from its monarchical form in a week, or England in a month, the latter
would preponderate. Consider the contents of the Red book in England,
or the Almanac royale of France, and say what a people gain by
monarchy. No race of kings has ever presented above one man of common
sense in twenty generations. The best they can do is, to leave things
to their ministers; and what are their ministers, but a committee,
badly chosen? If the king ever meddles, it is to do harm. Adieu, my
dear Sir, and be assured of the esteem of your friend and servant.




TO COLONEL MONROE.

PARIS, August 5, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--A journey of between three and four months, into the
southern parts of France and northern of Italy, has prevented my
writing to you. In the meantime, you have changed your ground, and
engaged in different occupations, so that I know not whether the news
of this side the water will even amuse you. However, it is all I have
for you. The storm which seemed to be raised suddenly in Brabant, will
probably blow over. The Emperor, on his return to Vienna, pretended to
revoke all the concessions which had been made by his Governors
General, to his Brabantine subjects; but he, at the same time, called
for deputies from among them to consult with. He will use their agency
to draw himself out of the scrape, and all there, I think, will be
quieted. Hostilities go on occasionally in Holland. France espouses the
cause of the Patriots, as you know, and England and Prussia that of the
Stadtholder. France and England are both unwilling to bring on war, but
a hasty move of the King of Prussia will perplex them. He has thought
the stopping his sister sufficient cause for sacrificing a hundred or
two thousand of his subjects, and as many Hollanders and French. He has
therefore ordered twenty thousand men to march, without consulting
England, or even his own ministers. He may thus drag England into a
war, and of course this country, against their will. But it is certain
they will do everything they can to prevent it; and that in this at
least they agree. Though such a war might be gainful to us, yet it is
much to be deprecated by us at this time. In all probability, France
would be unequal to such a war by sea and by land, and it is not our
interest, or even safe for us, that she should be weakened. The great
improvements in their constitution, effected by the Assemblée des
Notables, you are apprized of. That of partitioning the country into a
number of subordinate governments, under the administration of
Provincial Assemblies, chosen by the people, is a capital one. But to
the delirium of joy which these improvements gave the nation, a strange
reverse of temper has suddenly succeeded. The deficiencies of their
revenue were exposed, and they were frightful. Yet there was an
appearance of intention to economise, and reduce the expenses of
government. But expenses are still very inconsiderately incurred, and
all reformation in that point despaired of. The public credit is
affected; and such a spirit of discontent has arisen, as has never been
seen. The parliament refused to register the edict for a stamp tax, or
any other tax, and call for the States General, who alone, they say,
can impose a new tax, They speak with a boldness unexampled. The King
has called them to Versailles to-morrow, where he will hold a _lit de
justice_, and compel them to register the tax. How the chapter will
finish, we must wait to see. By a vessel lately sailed from Havre to
New York, I have sent you some more livraisons of the Encyclopedie,
down to the 22d inclusive. They were in a box with Dr. Currie's, and
addressed to Mr. Madison, who will forward them to Richmond. I have
heard you are in the Assembly. I will beg the favor of you, therefore,
to give me, at the close of the session, a history of the most
remarkable acts passed, the parties and views of the House, etc. This,
with the small news of my country, crops and prices, will furnish you
abundant matter to treat me, while I have nothing to give you in
return, but the histories of the follies of nations in their dotage.
Present me in respectful and friendly terms to Mrs. Monroe, and be
assured of the sincere sentiments of esteem and attachment with which I
am, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO THE HONORABLE COMMISSIONERS OF THE TREASURY.

PARIS, August 5, 1787.


GENTLEMEN,--In my last of June 17, 1787, I had the honor of
communicating to you the information I had received from Mr. Grand,
that your funds here were out, and he considerably in advance. I took
occasion to mention to him the paragraph in your letter of February 17,
wherein you were so kind as to say your attention should be immediately
turned to the making a remittance. However, I understood soon after
that he had protested a draught of Mr. Carmichael's, as also a smaller
one of five hundred livres. He called upon me, and explaining to me the
extent of his advances, observed that he should not be willing to add
to them, except so far as should be necessary for the private expenses
of myself and secretary, which he wished to be reduced as much below
the ordinary allowance as we could, until remittances should be
received. He will send you by this packet a state of his accounts, by
which he informs me that your account is in arrear about thirty-two
thousand livres, advanced by him, and about fifteen thousand livres
from a fund of the State of Virginia, placed here for the purchase of
arms, making General Washington's statue, etc. In examining his
accounts, I found by the one he had sent you formerly, that you were
debited two articles of ten thousand livres and two thousand seven
hundred and twenty-four livres and sixty-six sous, which belonged to
the account of the State of Virginia. This I must explain to you. That
State had directed me to have the statue of General Washington made,
and given me assurances such as I could rely on, that I should receive
funds immediately. Doctor Franklin was setting out to America, and
Houdon, the statuary, expressed a willingness to go with him. But it
was necessary to advance him a sum of money for that purpose. Rather
than lose the opportunity, I ventured to borrow from the fund of the
United States those two sums for the State of Virginia, which I knew
would be immediately replaced. The funds of the State arrived, (being
nearly two hundred thousand livres,) and enabled me not only to replace
those sums immediately, but to furnish much larger supplies to the
wants of the United States, when their funds failed. Insomuch that the
State of Virginia is now in advance here for the United States about
fifteen thousand livres, as before mentioned. As yet it has not
suffered by any of these advances, but having no money left here but
this balance, I shall be censurable by that State if it be not replaced
in time to answer the demands on them, which will now be made within a
few weeks. Mr. Grand has, by my direction, credited you in the account
he now sends for the two sums of ten thousand livres and two thousand,
seven hundred and twenty-four livres and sixty-six sous, improperly
charged in your former account. He had also debited you in his account
for the whole sums paid by the United States, as well as those paid by
Virginia, as by himself. The purpose of this was to keep the accounts
unmixed, though in fact the funds have been applied occasionally in aid
of each other.

I had proposed to Mr. Barclay the settlement of my account before his
departure for Morocco, but we concluded it would be better to do it on
his return, as that would enable me to bring it down to a later day. It
was not then expected he would be so long detained by that business.
Unfortunately for me, when at L'Orient, on his return to Paris, he
found it more advisable to proceed directly to America, so that I have
lost this opportunity of having my account settled. I shall either do
it with him on his return, if he returns soon, or with such other
person here as you will point out, or I will transmit it with copies of
my vouchers, to be settled by you, or do whatever else with it you
shall please to direct. The articles which, from their minuteness, have
not admitted the taking vouchers, I shall be ready to prove by my own
oath. In this account I have presumed to charge the United States with
an outfit. The necessity of this in the case of a minister, resident,
and of course obliged to establish a house, is obvious on reflection.
There cannot be a surer proof of its necessity than the experience and
consent of all nations, as I believe there is no instance of any nation
sending a minister to reside anywhere without an outfit. A year's
salary is the least I have been able to hear of, and I should be able
to show that the articles of clothes, carriage and horses, and
household furniture, in a very plain style, have cost me more than
that. When I send you my account, either settled here, or to be settled
there, I shall take the liberty of referring this article to the
consideration of Congress. Its reasonableness has appeared to me so
palpable, that I have presumed it would appear so to Congress, and have
therefore kept up the expenses of my house at the current rate of nine
thousand dollars a year. If my expectations should be thought
unreasonable, I shall submit and immediately reduce my establishment,
with such rigor, as to make up this article in the shortest time
possible. I enclose you a letter from Fisseaux & Co. on the subject of
their loan. I wish the loan lately obtained by Mr. Adams, may enable
you to get rid of the debt of the Foreign Officers, principal and
interest. Indeed, if Mr. Adams could be charged with the transfer of
our whole debt from this country to Holland, it would be a most
salutary operation. The confusions of that country might perhaps
facilitate that measure at present, though no regular tax could be
obtained in the moment for payment of the interest. I have the honor to
be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and respect, gentlemen,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, August 6, 1787.


SIR,--The last letter I had the honor of addressing you, was dated June
the 21st. I have now that of enclosing you a letter from the Swedish
Ambassador, praying that inquiry may be made for a vessel of his
nation, piratically carried off, and measures taken relative to the
vessel, cargo and crew. Also a letter from William Russell and others,
citizens of America, concerned in trade to the island of Guadeloupe,
addressed to the Marechal de Castries, and complaining of the shutting
to them the port of Point à Pitre, and receiving them only at
Bessa-tern. This was enclosed to me by the subscribers, to be delivered
to the Marechal de Castries. But the present is not the moment to move
in that business; and moreover, I suppose, that whenever parties are
within the reach of Congress, they should apply to them, and my
instructions come through that channel. Matters arising within the
kingdom of France, to which my commission is limited, and not admitting
time to take the orders of Congress, I suppose I may move in
originally. I also enclose you the copy of a letter from Mr. Barclay,
closing his proceedings in our affairs with Morocco. Before this
reaches you, he will have had the honor of presenting himself to you in
person. After his departure, the parliament of Bordeaux decided that he
was liable to arrest. This was done on a letter from the Minister,
informing them that Mr. Barclay was invested with no character which
privileged him from arrest. His constant character of consul was no
protection, and they did not explain whether his character to Morocco
was not originally diplomatic, or was expired. Mr. Barclay's
proceedings under this commission being now closed, it would be
incumbent on me to declare with respect to them, as well as his
consular transactions, my opinion of the judgment, zeal and
disinterestedness with which he has conducted himself; were it not that
Congress has been so possessed of those transactions from time to time,
as to judge for themselves. I cannot but be uneasy, lest my delay of
entering on the subject of the consular convention, may be disapproved.
My hope was and is, that more practicable terms might be obtained; in
this hope, I do nothing till further orders, observing by an extract
from the journals you were pleased to send me, that Congress have
referred the matter to your consideration, and conscious that we are
not suffering in the meantime, as we have not a single consul in
France, since the departure of Mr. Barclay. I mentioned to you in my
last, the revival of the hopes of the Chevalier de La Luzerne. I
thought it my duty to remind the Count de Montmorin, the other day, of
the long absence of their Minister from Congress. He told me, the
Chevalier de La Luzerne would not be sent back, but that we might rely
that, in the month of October, a person would be sent, with whom we
should be content. He did not name the person, though there is no doubt
that it is the Count de Mourtier. It is an appointment, which,
according to the opinion I have formed of him, bids as fair to give
content, as any one which could be made.

I also mentioned in my last letter, that I had proposed the reducing
the substance of Monsieur de Calonnes' letter into the form of an
_Arret_, with some alterations, which, on consultation with the
merchants at the different ports I visited, I had found to be
necessary. I received, soon after, a letter from the Comptroller
General, informing me, that the letter of Monsieur de Calonnes was in a
course of execution. Of this, I enclose you a copy. I was, in that
moment, enclosing to him my general observations on that letter, a copy
of which are also enclosed. In these, I stated all the alterations I
wished to have made. It became expedient, soon after, to bring on the
article of tobacco; first, to know whether the Farmers had executed the
order of Bernis, and also to prepare some arrangements to succeed the
expiration of this order. So that I am now pursuing the whole subject
of our commerce, 1, to have necessary amendments made in Monsieur de
Calonnes' letter; 2, to put it into a more stable form; 3, to have full
execution of the order of Bernis; 4, to provide arrangements for the
article of tobacco, after that order shall be expired. By the copy of
my letter on the two last points, you will perceive that I again press
the abolition of the Farm of this article. The conferences on that
subject give no hope of effecting that. Some poor palliative is
probably all we shall obtain. The Marquis de La Fayette goes hand in
hand with me in all these transactions, and is an invaluable auxiliary
to me. I hope it will not be imputed either to partiality or
affectation, my naming this gentleman so often in my despatches. Were I
not to do it, it would be a suppression of truth, and the taking to
myself the whole merit where he has the greatest share.

The Emperor, on his return to Vienna, disavowed the concessions of his
Governors General to his subjects of Brabant. He, at the same time,
proposed their sending deputies to him, to consult on their affairs.
They refused in the first moment; but afterwards nominated deputies;
without giving them any power, however, to concede anything. In the
meantime, they are arming and training themselves. Probably the Emperor
will avail himself of the aid of these deputies to tread back his
steps. He will be the more prompt to do this, that he may be in
readiness to act freely, if he finds occasion, in the new scenes
preparing in Holland. What these will be cannot be foreseen. You well
know, that the original party-divisions of that country were, into
Stadtholderians, Aristocrats, and Democrats. There was a subdivision of
the Aristocrats, into violent and moderate, which was important. The
violent Aristocrats would have wished to preserve all the powers of
government in the hands of the Regents, and that these should remain
self-elective; but choosing to receive a modification of these powers
from the Stadtholder, rather than from the people, they threw
themselves into his scale. The moderate Aristocrats would have
consented to a temperate mixture of democracy, and particularly, that
the Regents should be elected by the people. They were the declared
enemies of the Stadtholder, and acted in concert with the Democrats,
forming with them what was called the Patriots. It is the opinion of
dispassionate people on the spot, that their views might have been
effected. But the democratic party aimed at more. They talked of
establishing tribunes of the people, of annual accounts, of depriving
the magistrates at the will of the people, etc.; of enforcing all this
with the arms in the hands of the _corps francs_; and in same places,
as at Heusden, Sprang, etc., began the execution of these projects. The
moderate Aristocrats found it difficult to strain their principles to
this pitch. A schism took place between them and the Democrats, and the
former have for some time, been dropping off from the latter, into the
scale of the Stadtholder. This is the fatal coalition which governs
without obstacle in Zealand, Friesland, and Guelderland, which
constitutes the States of Utrecht, at Amersfort, and, with their aid,
the plurality in the States General. The States of Holland, Groningen
and Overyssel vote, as yet, in the opposition. But the coalition gains
ground in the States of Holland, and has been prevalent in the Council
of Amsterdam. If its progress be not stopped by a little moderation in
the Democrats, it will turn the scale decidedly in favor of the
Stadtholder, in the event of their being left to themselves without
foreign interference. If foreign powers interfere, their prospect does
not brighten. I see no sure friends to the Patriots but France, while
Prussia and England are their assured enemies. Nor is it probable that
characters so greedy, so enterprising, as the Emperor and Empress, will
be idle during such a struggle. Their views have long shown which side
they would take. That France has engaged to interfere, and to support
the Patriots, is beyond doubt. This engagement was entered into during
the life of the late King of Prussia, whose eye was principally
directed on the Emperor, and whose dispositions towards the Prince of
Orange would have permitted him to be clipped a little close. But the
present King comes in with warmer dispositions towards the Princess his
sister. He has shown decidedly, that he will support her, even to the
destruction of the balance of Europe, and the disturbance of its peace.
The King of England has equally decided to support that house, at the
risk of plunging his nation into another war. He supplies the Prince
with money at this moment. A particular remittance of one hundred and
twenty thousand guineas is known of. But his ministry is divided. Pitt
is against the King's opinion, the Duke of Richmond and the rest of the
ministers, for it. Or at least, such is the belief here. Mr. Adams will
have informed you more certainly. This division in the English
ministry, with the ill condition of their finances for war, produces a
disposition, even in the King, to try first every pacific measure; and
that country and this were laboring jointly to stop the course of
hostilities in Holland, to endeavor to effect an accommodation, and
were scarcely executing at all, the armaments ordered in their ports;
when all of a sudden, an inflammatory letter written by the Princess of
Orange to the King of Prussia, induces him, without consulting England,
without consulting even his own Council, to issue orders by himself to
his Generals, to march twenty thousand men, to revenge the insult
supposed to be offered to his sister. With a pride and egotism planted
in the heart of every King, he considers her being stopped in the road,
as a sufficient cause to sacrifice a hundred or two thousand of his own
subjects, and as many of his enemies, and to spread fire, sword and
desolation, over the half of Europe. This hasty measure has embarrassed
England, undesirous of war if it can be avoided, yet unwilling to
separate from the power who is to render its success probable. Still
you may be assured, that that court is going on in concurrence with
this, to prevent extremities, if possible; always understood, that if
the war cannot be prevented, they will enter into it as parties, and in
opposition to one another. This event is, in my opinion, to be
deprecated by the friends of France. She never was equal to such a war
by land, and such a one by sea; and less so now, than in any moment of
the present reign. You remember that the nation was in a delirium of
joy on the convocation of the Notables, and on the various reformations
agreed on between them and the government. The picture of the distress
of their finances was indeed frightful, but the intentions to reduce
them to order seemed serious. The constitutional reformations have gone
on well, but those of expenses make little progress. Some of the most
obviously useless have indeed been lopped off, but the remainder is a
heavy mass, difficult to be reduced. Despair has seized every mind, and
they have passed from an extreme of joy to one of discontent. The
parliament, therefore, oppose the registering any new tax, and insist
on an Assembly of the States General. The object of this is to limit
expenses, and dictate a constitution. The edict for the stamp tax has
been the subject of reiterated orders and refusals to register. At
length, the King has summoned the parliament to Versailles to hold a
bed of justice, in which he will order them, in person, to register the
edict. At the moment of my writing, they are gone to Versailles for
this purpose. There will yet remain to them, to protest against the
register, as forced, and to issue orders against its execution on pain
of death. But as the King would have no peaceable mode of opposition
left, it remains to be seen whether they will push the matter to this
extremity. It is evident, I think, that a spirit of this country is
advancing towards a revolution in their constitution. There are not
wanting persons at the helm, friends to the progress of this spirit.
The Provincial Assemblies will be the most probable instrument of
effecting it.

Since writing thus far, I have received an intimation, that it will be
agreeable, not to press our commercial regulations at this moment, the
ministry being too much occupied with the difficulties surrounding
them, to spare a moment on any subject which will admit of delay. Our
business must, therefore, be suspended for awhile. To press it out of
season would be to defeat it. It would be felt as a vital benefit here,
could we relieve their finances, by paying what we owe. Congress will
judge by Mr. Adams' letters, how far the transferring all our debts in
this country, to Holland, is practicable. On the replenishing their
treasury with our principal and interest, I should not be afraid to ask
concessions in favor of our West India trade. It would produce a great
change of opinion as to us and our affairs. In the Assemblée des
Notables, hard things were said of us. They were induced, however, in
committing us to writing, to smother their ideas a little. In the
notes, now gone to be printed, our debt is described in these words.
"The twenty-first article of the account, formed of the interest of the
claims of his majesty on the United States of America, cannot be drawn
out for the present, except as a document. The recovery of these
claims, as well principal as perhaps even interest, although they
appear to rest on the most solid security, may, nevertheless, be long
delayed, and should not, consequently, be taken into account in
estimating the annual revenue. This article amounts to one million and
six hundred thousand livres." Above all things, it is desirable to hush
the foreign officers by payment. Their wants, the nature of their
services, their access to high characters, and connections with them,
bespeak the reasons for this. I hear also that Mr. Beaumarchais means
to make himself heard, if a memorial which he sends by an agent in the
present packet is not attended to, as he thinks it ought to be. He
called on me with it, and desired me to recommend his case to a
decision, and to note in my despatch, that it was the first time he had
spoken to me on the subject. This is true, it being the first time I
ever saw him; but my recommendations would be as displaced as
unnecessary. I assured him, Congress would do in that business, what
justice should require, and their means enable them. The information
sent me by Mr. Montgomery from Alicant, of the death of the Dey of
Algiers, was not true. I had expressed my doubt of it in my last, when
I communicated it. I send herewith the newspapers to this date, and a
remonstrance of the parliament, to show you in what language the King
can be addressed at this day. I have received no journal of Congress
since the beginning of November last, and will thank you for them if
printed.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.

P. S. August 7. The parliament were received yesterday very harshly by
the King. He obliged them to register the two edicts for the
impot-territorial and stamp tax. When speaking in my letter of the
reiterated orders and refusals to register, which passed between the
King and parliament, I omitted to insert the King's answer to a
deputation of parliament, which attended him at Versailles. It may
serve to show the spirit which exists between them. It was in these
words, and these only: "Je vous ferai savoir mes intentions.
Allez-vous-en. Qu'on ferme la porte."




TO GOVERNOR RUTLEDGE.

PARIS, Aug. 6, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am honored with your letter by your son, and shall be
happy to render him every assistance in my power of whatever nature.
The objects of his stay in this country, and of his visit to London,
are perfectly well judged. So of that to Amsterdam. Perhaps it is
questionable, whether the time you propose he should spend at some of
the German courts might not be better employed at Madrid or Lisbon, and
in Italy. At the former there could be no object for him but politics,
the system of which there is intricate, and can never be connected with
us; nor will our commercial connections be considerable. With Madrid
and Lisbon our connections, both political and commercial, are great
and will be increasing daily. Italy is a field where the inhabitants of
the Southern States may see much to copy in agriculture, and a country
with which we shall carry on considerable trade. Pardon my submitting
these thoughts to you. We shall pursue your own plan unless you notify
a change in it.

The present question in Europe is war or not war? I think there will be
none between the Emperor and his Brabantine subjects. But as to
Holland, it is more doubtful, for we do not as yet consider the little
partisan affairs which are taking place every day. France and England,
conscious that their exhausted means would poorly feed a war, have been
strenuously exerting themselves to procure an accommodation. But the
King of Prussia, in a moment of passion, has taken a measure which may
defeat their wishes. On receiving from the Princess of Orange, a letter
informing him of her having been stopped on the road, without
consulting the court of London, without saying a word to his own
ministers, he issued orders himself to his Generals to march twenty
thousand men to be at her orders. England, unwilling to bring on a war,
may yet fear to separate from him who is to be her main ally. Still,
she is endeavoring, in concurrence with this court, to stop the effects
of this hasty movement, and to bring about a suspension of hostilities
and settlement of difficulties, always meaning if they fail in this, to
take the field in opposition to one another. Blessed effect of a kingly
government, where a pretended insult to the sister of a king, is to
produce the wanton sacrifice of a hundred or two thousand of the people
who have entrusted themselves to his government, and as many of his
enemies! and we think ours a bad government. The only condition on
earth to be compared with ours, in my opinion, is that of the Indian,
where they have still less law than we. The European, are governments
of kites over pigeons. The best schools for republicanism are London,
Versailles, Madrid, Vienna, Berlin, &c. Adieu, my dear Sir, and be
assured of the sincere esteem of your most obedient humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR DE CREVE-COEUR.

PARIS, August 6, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I was not a little disappointed to find on my return that
you had gone punctually in the packet as you had proposed. Great is the
change in the dispositions of this country in the short time since you
left it. A continuation of inconsiderate expense seemed to have raised
the nation to the highest pitch of discontent. The parliament refused
to register the new taxes. After much and warm altercation, a _lit de
justice_ has been held this day at Versailles; it was opened by the
reading a severe remonstrance from the parliament, to which the King
made a hard reply, and finished by ordering the stamp tax, and
impot-territorial to be registered. Your nation is advancing to a
change of constitution; the young desire it, the middle aged are not
averse, the old alone opposed it. They will die, the provincial
assemblies will chalk out the plan, and the nation, ripening fast, will
execute it. All your friends are in the country, so I can give you no
news of them; but no news are always good news. The Duchess Danville is
with some of her friends; the Duke and Duchess de La Rochefoucault gone
to the waters; the Countess d'Houdelot with Madame de La Britu. Your
sons are well, and go on well, and we are laboring here to improve on
M. de Calonne's letter on our commerce. Adieu, my dear Sir, and be
assured of the sentiments of sincere esteem with which I am your friend
and servant.




TO COLONEL RICHARD CLAIBORNE.

PARIS, August 8, 1787.


SIR,--I am of opinion that American tenants for western lands could not
be procured, and if they could, they would be very unsure. The best, as
far as I have been able to judge, are foreigners, who do not speak the
language. Unable to communicate with the people of the country, they
confine themselves to their farms and their families, compare their
present state to what it was in Europe, and find great reason to be
contented. Of all foreigners, I should prefer Germans. They are the
easiest got, the best for their landlords, and do best for themselves.
The deed in which you were interested, having been sent to me the other
day to be authenticated, I took the enclosed note of its particulars
for you. I am, with much esteem, Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO JOHN CHURCHMAN.

PARIS, August 8, 1787.


SIR,--I have duly received your favor of June the 6th, and immediately
communicated its contents to a member of the Academy. He told me that
they had received the other copy of your memorial, which you mention to
have sent through another channel; that your ideas were not conveyed so
explicitly, as to enable them to decide finally on their merit, but
that they had made an entry in their journals, to preserve to you the
claim of the original idea. As far as we can conjecture it here, we
imagine you make a table of variations of the needle, for all the
different meridians whatever. To apply this table to use, in the voyage
between America and Europe, suppose the variation to increase a degree
in every one hundred and sixty miles. Two difficulties occur: 1, a
ready and accurate method of finding the variation of the place; 2, an
instrument so perfect, as that (though the degree on it shall represent
one hundred and sixty miles) it shall give the parts of the degree so
minutely, as to answer the purpose of the navigator. The variation of
the needle at Paris, actually, is 21° west. I make no question you have
provided against the doubts entertained here, and I shall be happy that
our country may have the honor of furnishing the old world what it has
so long sought in vain. I am, with much respect, Sir, your most
obedient humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR L'HOMMANDE.

PARIS, August 9, 1787.


SIR,--At the time you honored me with your letter of May the 31st, I
was not returned from a journey I had taken into Italy. This
circumstance, with the mass of business which had accumulated during my
absence, must apologise for the delay of my answer. Every discovery
which multiplies the subsistence of man, must be a matter of joy to
every friend to humanity. As such, I learn with great satisfaction,
that you have found the means of preserving flour more perfectly than
has been done hitherto. But I am not authorized to avail my country of
it, by making any offer for its communication. Their policy is, to
leave their citizens free, neither restraining nor aiding them in their
pursuits. Though the interposition of government, in matters of
invention, has its use, yet it is in practice so inseparable from
abuse, that they think it better not to meddle with it. We are only to
hope, therefore, that those governments who are in the habit of
directing all the actions of their subjects, by particular law, may be
so far sensible of the duty they are under of cultivating useful
discoveries, as to reward you amply for yours, which is among the most
interesting to humanity. I have the honor to be, with great
consideration and respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO PETER CARR.

PARIS, August 10, 1787.


DEAR PETER,--I have received your two letters of December the 30th and
April the 18th, and am very happy to find by them, as well as by
letters from Mr. Wythe, that you have been so fortunate as to attract
his notice and good will; I am sure you will find this to have been one
of the most fortunate events of your life, as I have ever been sensible
it was of mine. I enclose you a sketch of the sciences to which I would
wish you to apply, in such order as Mr. Wythe shall advise; I mention,
also, the books in them worth your reading, which submit to his
correction. Many of these are among your father's books, which you
should have brought to you. As I do not recollect those of them not in
his library, you must write to me for them, making out a catalogue of
such as you think you shall have occasion for, in eighteen months from
the date of your letter, and consulting Mr. Wythe on the subject. To
this sketch, I will add a few particular observations:

1. Italian. I fear the learning this language will confound your French
and Spanish. Being all of them degenerated dialects of the Latin, they
are apt to mix in conversation. I have never seen a person speaking the
three languages, who did not mix them. It is a delightful language, but
late events having rendered the Spanish more useful, lay it aside to
prosecute that.

2. Spanish. Bestow great attention on this, and endeavor to acquire an
accurate knowledge of it. Our future connections with Spain and Spanish
America, will render that language a valuable acquisition. The ancient
history of that part of America, too, is written in that language. I
send you a dictionary.

3. Moral Philosophy. I think it lost time to attend lectures on this
branch. He who made us would have been a pitiful bungler, if he had
made the rules of our moral conduct a matter of science. For one man of
science, there are thousands who are not. What would have become of
them? Man was destined for society. His morality, therefore, was to be
formed to this object. He was endowed with a sense of right and wrong,
merely relative to this. This sense is as much a part of his nature, as
the sense of hearing, seeing, feeling; it is the true foundation of
morality, and not the [Greek: to kalon], truth, &c., as fanciful
writers have imagined. The moral sense, or conscience, is as much a
part of man as his leg or arm. It is given to all human beings in a
stronger or weaker degree, as force of members is given them in a
greater or less degree. It may be strengthened by exercise, as may any
particular limb of the body. This sense is submitted, indeed, in some
degree, to the guidance of reason; but it is a small stock which is
required for this: even a less one than what we call common sense.
State a moral case to a ploughman and a professor. The former will
decide it as well, and often better than the latter, because he has not
been led astray by artificial rules. In this branch, therefore, read
good books, because they will encourage, as well as direct your
feelings. The writings of Sterne, particularly, form the best course of
morality that ever was written. Besides these, read the books mentioned
in the enclosed paper; and, above all things, lose no occasion of
exercising your dispositions to be grateful, to be generous, to be
charitable, to be humane, to be true, just, firm, orderly, courageous,
&c. Consider every act of this kind, as an exercise which will
strengthen your moral faculties and increase your worth.

4. Religion. Your reason is now mature enough to examine this object.
In the first place, divest yourself of all bias in favor of novelty and
singularity of opinion. Indulge them in any other subject rather than
that of religion. It is too important, and the consequences of error
may be too serious. On the other hand, shake off all the fears and
servile prejudices, under which weak minds are servilely crouched. Fix
reason firmly in her seat, and call to her tribunal every fact, every
opinion. Question with boldness even the existence of a God; because,
if there be one, he must more approve of the homage of reason, than
that of blindfolded fear. You will naturally examine first, the
religion of your own country. Read the Bible, then, as you would read
Livy or Tacitus. The facts which are within the ordinary course of
nature, you will believe on the authority of the writer, as you do
those of the same kind in Livy and Tacitus. The testimony of the writer
weighs in their favor, in one scale, and their not being against the
laws of nature, does not weigh against them. But those facts in the
Bible which contradict the laws of nature, must be examined with more
care, and under a variety of faces. Here you must recur to the
pretensions of the writer to inspiration from God. Examine upon what
evidence his pretensions are founded, and whether that evidence is so
strong, as that its falsehood would be more improbable than a change in
the laws of nature, in the case he relates. For example, in the book of
Joshua, we are told, the sun stood still several hours. Were we to read
that fact in Livy or Tacitus, we should class it with their showers of
blood, speaking of statues, beasts, etc. But it is said, that the
writer of that book was inspired. Examine, therefore, candidly, what
evidence there is of his having been inspired. The pretension is
entitled to your inquiry, because millions believe it. On the other
hand, you are astronomer enough to know how contrary it is to the law
of nature that a body revolving on its axis, as the earth does, should
have stopped, should not, by that sudden stoppage, have prostrated
animals, trees, buildings, and should after a certain time have resumed
its revolution, and that without a second general prostration. Is this
arrest of the earth's motion, or the evidence which affirms it, most
within the law of probabilities? You will next read the New Testament.
It is the history of a personage called Jesus. Keep in your eye the
opposite pretensions: 1, of those who say he was begotten by God, born
of a virgin, suspended and reversed the laws of nature at will, and
ascended bodily into heaven; and 2, of those who say he was a man of
illegitimate birth, of a benevolent heart, enthusiastic mind, who set
out without pretensions to divinity, ended in believing them, and was
punished capitally for sedition, by being gibbeted, according to the
Roman law, which punished the first commission of that offence by
whipping, and the second by exile, or death _in furea_. See this law in
the Digest, Lib. 48. tit. 19. § 28.3. and Lipsius Lib. 2. de cruce.
cap. 2. These questions are examined in the books I have mentioned,
under the head of Religion, and several others. They will assist you in
your inquiries; but keep your reason firmly on the watch in reading
them all. Do not be frightened from this inquiry by any fear of its
consequences. If it ends in a belief that there is no God, you will
find incitements to virtue in the comfort and pleasantness you feel in
its exercise, and the love of others which it will procure you. If you
find reason to believe there is a God, a consciousness that you are
acting under his eye, and that he approves you, will be a vast
additional incitement; if that there be a future state, the hope of a
happy existence in that increases the appetite to deserve it; if that
Jesus was also a God, you will be comforted by a belief of his aid and
love. In fine, I repeat, you must lay aside all prejudice on both
sides, and neither believe nor reject anything, because any other
persons, or description of persons, have rejected or believed it. Your
own reason is the only oracle given you by heaven, and you are
answerable, not for the rightness, but uprightness of the decision. I
forgot to observe, when speaking of the New Testament, that you should
read all the histories of Christ, as well of those whom a council of
ecclesiastics have decided for us, to be Pseudo-evangelists, as those
they named Evangelists. Because these Pseudo-evangelists pretended to
inspiration, as much as the others, and you are to judge their
pretensions by your own reason, and not by the reason of those
ecclesiastics. Most of these are lost. There are some, however, still
extant, collected by Fabricius, which I will endeavor to get and send
you.

5. Travelling. This makes men wiser, but less happy. When men of sober
age travel, they gather knowledge, which they may apply usefully for
their country; but they are subject ever after to recollections mixed
with regret; their affections are weakened by being extended over more
objects; and they learn new habits which cannot be gratified when they
return home. Young men, who travel, are exposed to all these
inconveniences in a higher degree, to others still more serious, and do
not acquire that wisdom for which a previous foundation is requisite,
by repeated and just observations at home. The glare of pomp and
pleasure is analogous to the motion of the blood; it absorbs all their
affection and attention, they are torn from it as from the only good in
this, world, and return to their home as to a place of exile and
condemnation. Their eyes are forever turned back to the object they
have lost, and its recollection poisons the residue of their lives.
Their first and most delicate passions are hackneyed on unworthy
objects here, and they carry home the dregs, insufficient to make
themselves or anybody else happy. Add to this, that a habit of
idleness, an inability to apply themselves to business is acquired, and
renders them useless to themselves and their country. These
observations are founded in experience. There is no place where your
pursuit of knowledge will be so little obstructed by foreign objects,
as in your own country, nor any, wherein the virtues of the heart will
be less exposed to be weakened. Be good, be learned, and be
industrious, and you will not want the aid of travelling, to render you
precious to your country, dear to your friends, happy within yourself.
I repeat my advice, to take a great deal of exercise, and on foot.
Health is the first requisite after morality. Write to me often, and be
assured of the interest I take in your success, as well as the warmth
of those sentiments of attachment with which I am, dear Peter, your
affectionate friend.




TO DR. GEORGE GILMER.

PARIS, August 11, 1787.


DEAR DOCTOR,--Your letter of January the 9th, 1787, came safely to hand
in the month of June last. Unluckily you forgot to sign it, and your
handwriting is so Protean, that one cannot be sure it is yours. To
increase the causes of incertitude, it was dated _Pen-park_, a name
which I only know, as the seat of John Harmer. The handwriting, too,
being somewhat in his style, made me ascribe it hastily to him, indorse
it with his name, and let it lie in my bundle to be answered at
leisure. That moment of leisure arriving, I set down to answer it to
John Harmer, and now, for the first time, discover marks of its being
yours, and particularly those expressions of friendship to myself and
family, which you have ever been so good as to entertain, and which are
to me among the most precious possessions. I wish my sense of this, and
my desires of seeing you rich and happy, may not prevent my seeing any
difficulty in the case you state of George Harmer's wills; which as you
state them, are thus:

1. A will, dated December the 26th, 1779, written in his own hand, and
devising to his brother the estates he had received from him.

2. Another will, dated June the 25th, 1782, written also in his own
hand, devising his estate to trustees, to be conveyed to such of his
relations. I. H. I. L. or H. L. as should become capable of acquiring
property, or, on failure of that, to be sold and the money remitted
them.

3. A third will, dated September the 12th, 1786, devising all his
estate at Marrowbone, and his tracts at Horse-pasture and Poison-field
to you; which will is admitted to record, and of course, has been duly
executed.

You say the learned are divided on these wills. Yet I see no cause of
division, as it requires little learning to decide, that "the first
deed and last will must always prevail." I am afraid, therefore, the
difficulty may arise on the want of words of inheritance in the devise
to you; for you state it as a devise to "George Gilmer" (without adding
"and to his heirs,") of "all the _estate_ called Marrowbone," "the
_tract_ called Horse-pasture," and "the _tract_ called Poison-field."
If the question is on this point, and you have copied the words of the
will exactly, I suppose you take an estate in fee simple in Marrowbone,
and for life only in Horse-pasture and Poison-field; the want of words
of inheritance in the two last cases, being supplied as to the first,
by the word "estate," which has been repeatedly decided to be
descriptive of the quantum of interest devised, as well as of its
locality. I am in hopes, however, you have not copied the words
exactly, that there are words of inheritance to all the devises, as the
testator certainly knew their necessity, and that the conflict only
will be between the different wills, in which case I see nothing which
can be opposed to the last. I shall be very happy to eat at Pen-park,
some of the good mutton and beef of Marrowbone, Horse-pasture and
Poison-field, with yourself and Mrs. Gilmer, and my good old neighbors.
I am as happy nowhere else, and in no other society, and all my wishes
end, where I hope my days will end, at Monticello. Too many scenes of
happiness mingle themselves with all the recollections of my native
woods and fields, to suffer them to be supplanted in my affection by
any other. I consider myself here as a traveller only, and not a
resident. My commission expires next spring, and if not renewed, I
shall, of course, return then. If renewed, I shall remain here some
time longer. How much, I cannot say; yet my wishes shorten the period.
Among the strongest inducements will be, that of your society and Mrs.
Gilmer's, which I am glad to find brought more within reach, by your
return to Pen-park. My daughters are importunate to return also. Patsy
enjoys good health, and is growing to my stature. Maria arrived here
about a month ago, after a favorable voyage, and in perfect health. My
own health has been as good as ever, after the first year's probation.
If you knew how agreeable to me are the details of the small news of my
neighborhood, your charity would induce you to write frequently. Your
letters lodged in the post office at Richmond (to be forwarded to New
York) come with certainty. We are doubtful yet, whether there will be
war or not. Present me with warm affection to Mrs. Gilmer, and be
assured yourself of the unvarying sentiments of esteem and attachment,
with which I am, dear Doctor, your sincere friend and servant.




TO COLONEL T. M. RANDOLPH.

PARIS, August 11, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Mr. Ammonett sent me your favor of May 7, which you expected
he would have brought. He furnished me with the name of the family to
whose property he supposes himself entitled, and the name of the town
where it lies. I have endeavored to have them searched out, but as yet
neither family nor town is discovered. If they can be found, the estate
will then have to be searched for; the laws for limitation of actions
will form the next opposition to him, and probably the laws of
forfeiture against the Protestants, who were the subject of the
revocation of the edict of Nantes, which laws have never been repealed,
nor probably ever will be, even should the future condition of
Protestants here be mitigated. I shall proceed in the enquiry for him,
and let him know the result.

Your son Thomas, at Edinburgh, has done me the favor to open a little
correspondence with me. He has sometimes asked my advice as to the
course of his studies, which I have given to him the more freely as he
informed me he was not tied down to any particular plan by your
instructions. He informed me in his last letter that you proposed he
should come to Paris this fall, stay here the winter, and return to
Virginia in the spring. I understand him as proposing to study the law,
so that probably, on his return, you will place him at Williamsburg for
that purpose. On this view of his destination I venture to propose to
you another plan. The law may be studied as well in one place as
another; because it is a study of books alone, at least till near the
close of it. Books can be read equally well at Williamsburg, at London,
or Paris. The study of the law is an affair of three years, the last of
which should be spent in attending Mr. Wythe's lectures. Upon the plan
he has now in expectation, his residence here six months as a
traveller, must cost him two hundred guineas, and three years' study at
Williamsburg, four hundred and fifty guineas more, making five hundred
and fifty guineas in the whole. My proposition is that he shall pass
his two first years of legal study in some one of the villages within
an hour's walk of Paris, boarded with some good family, wherein he may
learn to speak the language, which is not to be learned in any other
way. By this means he will avoid the loss of time and money which would
be the consequence of a residence in the town, and he will be nigh
enough to come to dine, to make acquaintances, see good company, and
examine the useful details of the city. With very great economy he may
do this on one hundred guineas a year, but at his ease for one hundred
and fifty guineas. At the end of two years I would propose him a
journey through the southern parts of France, thence to Genoa, Leghorn,
Florence, Rome, Naples, Venice, Milan, Turin, Geneva, Lyons and Paris.
This will employ him seven months, and cost him three hundred and
thirty guineas, if he goes alone, or two hundred and thirty guineas if
he finds a companion. Then he should return to Virginia, and pass his
third year of legal study in attending Mr. Wythe's lectures. This whole
plan would take three years and seven months, and cost from seven
hundred to seven hundred and fifty guineas, which would be one month
longer, and one hundred and fifty or two hundred guineas dearer than
the one proposed. The advantages of this would be his learning to speak
French well, his acquiring a better acquaintance here with men and
things, and his having travelled through the most interesting parts of
Europe, advantages which he will forever think cheaply purchased for
one hundred and fifty or two hundred guineas, even were a deduction of
that sum to be made from the establishment you mean to give him. But in
every case, whether you decide that he shall return to study in
Virginia, or remain here for that purpose, I would recommend that he
should not be tied down to quit Edinburgh this fall precisely, but only
when he shall have finished his courses of lectures in those sciences
with which he should not be unacquainted. I have taken the liberty of
noting these to him. I perceive by his letters that he has a good
genius, and everybody bears witness to his application, which is almost
too great. It would be a pity, therefore, he should miss of giving them
full encouragement. I must beg your pardon for thus intruding myself
into a business belonging to yourself alone, and hope you will find its
excuse in the motives from which it proceeds, friendship for yourself,
Mrs. Randolph and your son. I wish to see you gratified, and to be
gratified myself in seeing him act the advantageous part, which will
naturally result from his talents, his merit, and the favorable ground
from which he will start; a fear of seeing this endangered by a too
early return to our own country where the example of his cotemporaries
may soon possibly lead him from the regular pursuits his friends may
chalk out for him, all these considerations have impelled me to take
this liberty, and to rely for pardon on the assurance of the sincere
attachment and respect with which I am, dear Sir, your affectionate
friend and servant.




TO THE REVEREND JAMES MADISON.

PARIS, August 13, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I have been long, very long, without answering your favor of
March 27, 1786, and since that I have received those of December 28,
and by Mrs. Oster. The reason of this has been that the genius of
invention and improvement in Europe seems to be absolutely taking a
nap. We have nothing to communicate to you but of the small kind, such
as making the axletree turn with the wheel, which has been proposed
here, adopted by some, and thought to be proved best by experiment,
though theory has nothing to urge in its favor. A hydrostatic waistcoat
is lately announced, which a person puts on either above or below his
clothes in a minute, and fills with air by blowing with the mouth in
twelve seconds. It is not yet shown, however, so I cannot tell you
either the manner or matter of its construction. It may be useful when
the loss of a vessel is foreseen. Herschell's discovery of two
satellites to his planet, you have heard of ere this. He first saw them
in January last. One revolves round its principal in about a week; the
other in about a fortnight. I think your conjecture that the periodical
variation of light in certain fixed stars proceeds from Maculæ, is more
probable than that of Maupertius, who supposes those bodies may be
flat, and more probable also than that which supposes the star to have
an orbit of revolution so large as to vary sensibly its degree of
light. The latter is rendered more difficult of belief from the
shortness of the period of variation. I thank you for the shells you
sent me. Their identity with marine shells and their vicinity to the
sea, argue an identity of cause. But still the shells found in the
mountains are very imperfectly accounted for. I have lately become
acquainted with a memoire on a petrification mixed with shells by a
Monsieur de La Sauvagere, giving an exact account of what Voltaire had
erroneously stated in his questions Encyclopediques, article Coquilles,
from whence I had transferred it into my notes. Having been lately at
Tours, I had an opportunity of enquiring into de La Sauvagere's
character, and the facts he states. The result was entirely in his and
their favor. This fact is so curious, so circumstantially detailed, and
yet so little like any known operation of nature, that it throws the
mind under absolute suspense. The memoir is out of print. But my
bookseller is now in search of it, and if he can find it I will put a
copy of it into a box of books I shall send by the September packet,
addressed to Mr. Wythe. In the same box I will put for you the
Bibliotheque Physico-economique, for 1786, 1787, the connoissance des
tems, Fourcroy's Chemistry, wherein all the later discoveries are
digested, and a number of my notes on Virginia, of a copy of which you
will be pleased to accept. It is a poor crayon, which yourself and the
gentlemen which issue from your school must fill up. We are doubtful
here whether we are to have peace or war. The movements of Prussia and
England indicate war; the finances of England and France indicate
peace. I think the two last will endeavor to accommodate the Dutch
differences. Be pleased to present me respectfully to Mrs. Madison, and
after repeating the recommendation of my nephew to you, I take the
liberty of assuring you of that esteem with which I am, dear Sir, your
friend and servant.




TO THE HONORABLE J. BLAIR.

PARIS, August 13, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I received the letter with which you were pleased to honor
me, by Mrs. Oster, and immediately waited on her with a tender of my
services. She had, however, so far got her matters arranged as to be no
longer in fear of any disagreeable measure, and is since gone to
establish herself with her friends in Lorraine. I wish she may not
there have alarms of a different nature. We have hitherto been in hopes
that the desperate state of the finances of France and England would
indispose those powers to war, and induce them, by an armed mediation,
to quiet the affairs of Holland. The actual march, however, of the
Prussian troops, the departure of the British squadron somewhere
westwardly, and the preparations for a naval armament at Brest, and a
land one in the neighborhood of the Netherlands, render war at present
more expected than it has been. Still we look to the necessities of the
two principal powers as promising efficacy to the negotiations not yet
broken off. Though we shall be neutrals, and as such shall derive
considerable pecuniary advantages, yet I think we shall lose in
happiness and morals by being launched again into the ocean of
speculation, led to overtrade ourselves, tempted to become sea-robbers
under French colors, and to quit the pursuits of agriculture, the
surest road to affluence and best preservative of morals. Perhaps, too,
it may divert the attention of the States from those great political
improvements, which the honorable body, of which you are a member,
will, I hope, propose to them. What these may be, I know not, but I am
sure they will be what they should be. My idea is that we should be
made one nation in every case concerning foreign affairs, and separate
ones in whatever is merely domestic; that the Federal government should
be organized into Legislative, Executive and Judiciary, as are the
State governments, and some peaceable means of enforcement devised for
the Federal head over the States. But of all these things you are a
better judge. I have delivered your message to Mr. Mazzei, who is still
here. Be so good as to present me respectfully to Mrs. Blair, and to be
assured yourself of the sentiments of esteem and respect with which I
have the honor to be, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO JOSEPH JONES.

PARIS, August 14, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I have never yet thanked you, but with the heart, for the
act of Assembly confirming the agreement with Maryland, the pamphlet
and papers I received from you a twelve month ago. Very soon after
their receipt, I got my right wrist dislocated, which prevented me long
from writing, and as soon as that was able to bear it, I took a long
journey, from which I am but lately returned. I am anxious to hear what
our federal convention recommends, and what the States will do in
consequence of their recommendation. * * * * With all the defects of
our constitution, whether general or particular, the comparison of our
governments with those of Europe, is like a comparison of heaven and
hell. England, like the earth, may be allowed to take the intermediate
station. And yet, I hear there are people among you, who think the
experience of our governments has already proved, that republican
governments will not answer. Send those gentry here, to count the
blessings of monarchy. A king's sister, for instance, stopped on the
road, and on a hostile journey, is sufficient cause for him to march
immediately twenty thousand men to revenge this insult, when he had
shown himself little moved by the matter of right then in question.



From all these broils we are happily free, and that God may keep us
long so, and yourself in health and happiness, is the prayer of, dear
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO GENERAL WASHINGTON.

PARIS, August 14, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am happy to find, by the letter of August the 1st, 1786,
which you did me the honor to write to me, that the modern dress for
your statue would meet your approbation. I found it strongly the
sentiment of West, Copley, Trumbull, and Brown, in London; after which,
it would be ridiculous to add, that it was my own. I think a modern in
an antique dress as just an object of ridicule as a Hercules or Marius
with a periwig and a chapeau bras.

I remember having written to you, while Congress sat at Annapolis, on
the water communication between ours and the western country, and to
have mentioned particularly the information I had received of the plain
face of the country between the sources of Big Beaver and Cayohoga,
which made me hope that a canal of no great expense might unite the
navigation of Lake Erie and the Ohio. You must since have had occasion
of getting better information on this subject, and if you have, you
would oblige me by a communication of it. I consider this canal, if
practicable, as a very important work.

I remain in hopes of great and good effects from the decision of the
Assembly over which you are presiding. To make our States one as to all
foreign concerns, preserve them several as to all merely domestic, to
give to the federal head some peaceable mode of enforcing its just
authority, to organize that head into legislative, executive, and
judiciary apartments, are great desiderata in our federal constitution.
Yet with all its defects, and with all those of our particular
governments, the inconveniences resulting from them, are so light in
comparison with those existing in every other government on earth, that
our citizens may certainly be considered as in the happiest political
situation which exists.

The Assemblée des Notables has been productive of much good in this
country. The reformation of some of the most oppressive laws has taken
place, and is taking place. The allotment of the State into subordinate
governments, the administration of which is committed to persons chosen
by the people, will work in time a very beneficial change in their
constitution. The expense of the trappings of monarchy, too, is
lightening. Many of the useless officers, high and low, of the King,
Queen, and Princes, are struck off. Notwithstanding all this, the
discovery of the abominable abuses of public money by the late
Comptroller General, some new expenses of the court, not of a piece
with the projects of reformation, and the imposition of new taxes,
have, in the course of a few weeks, raised a spirit of discontent in
this nation, so great and so general, as to threaten serious
consequences. The parliaments in general, and particularly that of
Paris, put themselves at the head of this effervescence, and direct its
object to the calling the States General, who have not been assembled
since 1614. The object is to fix a constitution, and to limit expenses.
The King has been obliged to hold a bed of justice, to enforce the
registering the new taxes; the parliament, on their side, propose to
issue a prohibition against their execution. Very possibly this may
bring on their exile. The mild and patriotic character of the new
ministry, is the principal dependence against this extremity.

The turn which the affairs of Europe will take, is not yet decided.



A war, wherein France, Holland, and England should be parties, seems,
_prima facie_, to promise much advantage to us. But in the first place,
no war can be safe for us which threatens France with an unfavorable
issue; and in the next, it will probably embark us again into the ocean
of speculation, engage us to over-trade ourselves, convert us into
sea-rovers, under French and Dutch colors, divert us from agriculture,
which is our wisest pursuit, because it will in the end contribute most
to real wealth, good morals, and happiness. The wealth acquired by
speculation and plunder, is fugacious in its nature, and fills society
with the spirit of gambling. The moderate and sure income of husbandry
begets permanent improvement, quiet life, and orderly conduct, both
public and private. We have no occasion for more commerce than to take
off our superfluous produce, and the people complain that some
restrictions prevent this; yet the price of articles with us, in
general, shows the contrary. Tobacco, indeed, is low, not because we
cannot carry it where we please, but because we make more than the
consumption requires. Upon the whole I think peace advantageous to us,
necessary for Europe, and desirable for humanity. A few days will
decide, probably, whether all these considerations are to give way to
the bad passions of Kings, and those who would be Kings.

I have the honor to be, with very sincere esteem and respect, dear Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.

P. S. August 15. The parliament is exiled to Troyes this morning.




TO COLONEL HUMPHREYS.

PARIS, August 14, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I remember when you left us, it was with a promise to supply
all the defects of correspondence with our friends, of which we
complained, and which you had felt in common with us. Yet I have
received but one letter from you, which was dated June the 5th, 1786,
and I answered it, August the 14th, 1786. Dropping that, however, and
beginning a new account, I will observe to you, that wonderful
improvements are making here in various lines. In architecture, the
wall of circumvallation round Paris, and the palaces by which we are to
be let out and in, are nearly completed; four hospitals are to be built
instead of the old Hotel-Dieu; one of the old bridges has all its
houses demolished, and a second nearly so; a new bridge is begun at the
Place Louis XV.; the Palais Royale is gutted, a considerable part in
the centre of the garden being dug out, and a subterranean circus
begun, wherein will be equestrian exhibitions, &c. In society, the
habit habillé is almost banished, and they begin to go even to great
suppers in frock: the court and diplomatic corps, however, must always
be excepted. They are too high to be reached by any improvement. They
are the last refuge from which etiquette, formality, and folly will be
driven. Take away these, and they would be on a level with other
people.



[After describing the unsettled state of Europe, as in some of the
preceding letters, the writer proceeds:]

So much for the blessings of having Kings, and magistrates who would be
Kings. From these events, our young Republic may learn useful lessons,
never to call on foreign powers to settle their differences, to guard
against hereditary magistrates, to prevent their citizens from becoming
so established in wealth and power, as to be thought worthy of alliance
by marriage with the nieces, sisters, &c., of Kings, and, in short, to
besiege the throne of heaven with eternal prayers, to extirpate from
creation this class of human lions, tigers, and mammoths called Kings;
from whom, let him perish who does not say, "good Lord deliver us;" and
that so we may say, one and all, or perish, is the fervent prayer of
him who has the honor to mix with it, sincere wishes for your health
and happiness, and to be, with real attachment and respect, dear Sir,
your affectionate friend and humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, August 15, 1787.


SIR,--An American gentleman leaving Paris this afternoon to go by the
way of L'Orient to Boston, furnishes me the rare occasion of a
conveyance, other than the packet, sure and quick. My letter by the
packet informed you of the bed of justice, for enregistering the stamp
tax and land tax. The parliament, on their return, came to an _Arretee_
(a resolution) which, besides protesting against the enregistering, as
done by force, laid the foundation for an _Arret de defence_ (an act)
against the execution of the two new laws. The question on the final
_Arret_ was adjourned to the day before yesterday. It is believed they
did not conclude on this _Arret_, as it has not appeared. However,
there was a concourse of about ten thousand people at the parliament
house, who, on their adjournment, received them with acclamations of
joy, loosened the horses of the most eminent speakers against the tax
from their carriages, and drew them home. This morning, the parliament
is exiled to Troyes. It is believed to proceed, principally, from the
fear of a popular commotion here.

The officer, charged by this court to watch the English squadron, which
was under sailing orders, returned about a week ago, with information
that it had sailed, having shaped its course westwardly. This is
another step towards war. It is the more suspicious, as their minister
here denies the fact. Count Adhemar is here from London, by leave from
his court. The Duke of Dorset, the British ambassador here, has lately
gone to London on leave. Neither of these ambassadors has the
confidence of his court, on the point of abilities. The latter merits
it for his honesty. The minister of the British court, resident here,
remains; but Mr. Eden, their ambassador to Spain, under pretence of
taking this in his route, is in truth their _factotum_ in the present
emergency. Nothing worth noting has occurred since my last, either in
the Dutch or Austrian Netherlands.

I have the honor to be, with the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO THE HONORABLE JAMES MADISON.

PARIS, August 15, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--A gentleman going from hence by L'Orient to Boston,
furnishes me an opportunity of recommending to your care the enclosed
letters, which I could not get ready for the last packet. Pray inform
me in your next whether letters directed to your foreign ministers, or
franked by them, are free of postage; that they ought to be so is
acknowledged substantially by the resolution of Congress, allowing us
to charge postages. I have sometimes suspected that my letters stagnate
in the post-offices. My letters by the last packet brought down the
domestic news of this country to the day in which the bed of justice
was held. The day before yesterday the parliament house was surrounded
by ten thousand people, who received them on their adjournment with
acclamations of joy, took out the horses of the principal speakers and
drew their chariots themselves to their hotels. The parliament not
having taken the desperate step (as far as is yet known) of forbidding
the execution of the new tax laws by an _Arret de defence sur peine de
mort_, we presume it is the fear of a popular commotion which has
occasioned the King to exile them to Troyes. This is known only this
morning. The ministry here have certain information that the English
squadron has sailed and took its course westwardly. This is another
move towards war. No other important fact has taken place since my
letter by the packet. Adieu. Yours affectionately.




TO THE COUNT DEL VERMI.

PARIS, August 15, 1787.


SIR,--In consequence of the permission you were so kind as to give me,
when I had the honor of seeing you at Milan, I shall sometimes take the
liberty of troubling you with a line. I cannot begin with an act of
greater justice than that of expressing to you all my gratitude for
your attentions and services while in your capital, and to which I am
indebted for the best informations I received there. I then mentioned
some late publications on the subject of America, of which I would do
myself the honor of sending you one, because it was my own, and two
others because worth reading. Mine are some notes only on the State of
Virginia. The others are Ramsay's history of the war and Soulé's
history. The first is very authentic, there being no fact in it which
may not be relied on; but it is confined to the war in the southern
States. The last is a general history, of which we can only say it is
the best of those written in Europe. There is a history of the same
period now printing in London, though written in America by an English
clergyman of the name of Gordon. He had access to some collections of
papers not known to any other writer. But I am unable to say as yet
what may be the merit of his work. You must have observed when in
America, that time and trial had discovered defects in our federal
constitution. A new essay, made in the midst of the flames of war,
could not be perfect. The States have appointed deputies, who are now
sitting at Philadelphia, to consider what are the defects, and to
propose new articles to be added to the instrument of confederation for
amending them. The articles to be proposed by them will have to be
confirmed by Congress and by the Legislature of every State before they
will be in force. As yet their proceedings are not known. Probably they
go to the following points: 1. To invest Congress with the exclusive
sovereignty in every matter relative to foreign nations and the general
mass of our Union, retaining to the States their individual sovereignty
in matters merely domestic. 2. To devise some peaceable mode whereby
Congress may enforce their decisions. 3. To organize Congress into
three branches, Legislative, Executive and Judiciary. I had the honor
of informing you of the commotions which had taken place in
Massachusetts, the only ones which had ever taken place since the
declaration of Independence. I have now that of informing you that
those commotions have been entirely quieted. General Washington is
well, and is president of the federal convention sitting at
Philadelphia, as before mentioned. Dr. Franklin and others, the
greatest characters of America, are members of it. I do not give you
European news; you have that from other quarters; after adding
therefore, that the books before mentioned, are delivered to Messieurs
Cathalan, of Marseilles, who will send them to their correspondent at
Genoa, with instructions to forward them to you at Milan. I shall only
repeat very sincere assurances of the esteem and respect with which I
have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, August 30, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Since your favor of July the 10th, mine have been of July
the 17th, 23d and 28th. The last enclosed a bill of exchange from Mr.
Grand, on Tessier for £46, 17s. 10d. sterling, to answer General
Sullivan's bill for that sum. I hope it got safe to hand, though I have
been anxious about it, as it went by post, and my letters through that
channel sometimes miscarry.

From the separation of the Notables to the present moment, has been
perhaps the most interesting interval ever known in this country. The
propositions of the government, approved by the Notables, were precious
to the nation, and have been in an honest course of execution, some of
them being carried into effect, and others preparing. Above all, the
establishment of the Provincial Assemblies, some of which have begun
their sessions, bid fair to be the instrument for circumscribing the
power of the crown, and raising the people into consideration. The
election given to them, is what will do this. Though the minister, who
proposed these improvements, seems to have meant them as the price of
the new supplies, the game has been so played, as to secure the
improvements to the nation, without securing the price. The Notables
spoke softly on the subject of the additional supplies. But the
parliament took them up roundly, refused to register the edicts for the
new taxes, till compelled in a bed of justice, and suffered themselves
to be transferred to Troyes, rather than withdraw their opposition. It
is urged principally against the King, that his revenue is one hundred
and thirty millions more than that of his predecessor was, and yet he
demands one hundred and twenty millions further. You will see this well
explained in the "Conference entre un ministre d'état et un Conseiller
au parliment," which I send you, with some small pamphlets. In the
meantime, all tongues in Paris (and in France as it is said) have been
let loose, and never was a license of speaking against the government
exercised in London more freely or more universally. Caricatures,
placards, bons mots, have been indulged in by all ranks of people, and
I know of no well-attested instance of a single punishment. For some
time mobs of ten, twenty and thirty thousand people collected daily,
surrounded the parliament house, huzzaed the members, even entered the
doors and examined into their conduct, took the horses out of the
carriages of those who did well, and drew them home. The government
thought it prudent to prevent these, drew some regiments into the
neighborhood, multiplied the guards, had the streets constantly
patrolled by strong parties, suspended privileged places, forbade all
clubs, etc. The mobs have ceased; perhaps this may be partly owing to
the absence of parliament. The Count d'Artois, sent to hold a bed of
justice in the Cour des Aides, was hissed and hooted without reserve,
by the populace; the carriage of Madame de (I forget the name) in the
Queen's livery was stopped by the populace, under a belief that it was
Madame de Polignac, whom they would have insulted; the Queen, going to
the theatre at Versailles with Madame de Polignac, was received with a
general hiss. The King, long in the habit of drowning his cares in
wine, plunges deeper and deeper. The Queen cries, but sins on. The
Count d'Artois is detested, and Monsieur, the general favorite. The
Archbishop of Thoulouse is made minister principal, a virtuous,
patriotic, and able character. The Marechal de Castries retired
yesterday, notwithstanding strong solicitations to remain in office.
The Marechal de Segur retired at the same time, prompted to it by the
court. Their successors are not yet known. Monsieur de St. Priest goes
ambassador to Holland, in the room of Verac, transferred to
Switzerland, and the Count de Moustier goes to America, in the room of
the Chevalier de La Luzerne, who has a promise of the first vacancy.
These nominations are not yet made formally, but they are decided on,
and the parties are ordered to prepare for their destination.

As it has been long since I have had a confidential conveyance to you,
I have brought together the principal facts from the adjournment of the
Notables to the present moment, which, as you will perceive from their
nature, required a confidential conveyance. I have done it the rather,
because, though you will have heard many of them, and seen them in the
public papers, yet, floating in the mass of lies which constitute the
atmosphere of London and Paris, you may not have been sure of their
truth; and I have mentioned every truth of any consequence, to enable
you to stamp as false, the facts pretermitted. I think that in the
course of three months, the royal authority has lost, and the rights of
the nation gained, as much ground by a revolution of public opinion
only, as England gained in all her civil wars under the Stuarts. I
rather believe, too, they will retain the ground gained, because it is
defended by the young and the middle aged, in opposition to the old
only. The first party increases, and the latter diminishes daily, from
the course of nature. You may suppose, that in this situation, war
would be unwelcome to France. She will surely avoid it, if not forced
into it by the courts of London and Berlin. If forced, it is probable
she will change the system of Europe totally, by an alliance with the
two empires, to whom nothing would be more desirable. In the event of
such a coalition, not only Prussia, but the whole European world must
receive from them their laws. But France will probably endeavor to
preserve the present system, if it can be done, by sacrificing to a
certain degree, the pretensions of the Patriotic party in Holland. But
of all these matters, you can judge, in your position, where less
secrecy is observed, better than I can.

I have news from America as late as July the 19th. Nothing had
transpired from the federal convention. I am sorry they began their
deliberations by so abominable a precedent as that of tying up the
tongues of their members. Nothing can justify this example but the
innocence of their intentions, and ignorance of the value of public
discussions. I have no doubt that all their other measures will be good
and wise. It is really an assembly of demigods. General Washington was
of opinion, that they should not separate till October.

I have the honor to be, with every sentiment of friendship and respect,
dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR LE COMTE DE MONTMORIN.

PARIS, September 8, 1787.


SIR,--I had the honor of addressing your Excellency on the 3d of July,
some observations on the letter of Monsieur de Calonnes, of October
22d, 1786, relative to the commerce of France with the United States of
America; of proposing to it some small amendments, and of expressing a
wish that it might be put into such a form as would secure its
execution. Monsieur de Villedeuil, then Comptroller General was pleased
to inform me that the Farmers General had received orders on the first
of April, 1787, to conform themselves to the decisions notified in that
letter, and that on the 5th of the same month they had given orders not
to levy "sur les _huiles_ et autres produits de la _peche Americane_
que les droits mentionnes dans la lettre." This expression, restrained
to the produce of the _fisheries_, with recent information received
from the American agent at Havre, make me apprehensive that the ancient
duties are still demanded on all other objects, and induce me to repeat
to your Excellency my request that the letter of M. de Calonnes may be
put into such form as will insure its execution and stability. In my
letter of July 25th, I took the liberty of proposing that timely
measures might be adopted for encouraging the direct importation of the
tobacco of the United States into this Kingdom when the order of Bernis
should be expired, and that in the meantime that order might be
strictly executed. A great accumulation of tobaccos in the seaports of
France, and a refusal of the Farmers General to purchase any more, on
the pretence that they have purchased the whole quantity required by
government, excites discontent among the merchants. It is their opinion
that the Farms have not complied with the order of Bernis. As the
government was pleased to desire the publication of that order to
induce the merchants to bring tobaccos here, it would be very
satisfactory to make known also the execution of that order. If the
Farms can verify that they have strictly executed it, all discontent
will cease and the merchants become sensible that the present glut is
occasioned by their importing too much. On the other hand, if it shall
appear, from the list of purchases made by the Farms, or from other
evidence, that they have not purchased the whole quantity on the
conditions prescribed by government, they will doubtless be instructed
to do it, and that too without delay, as the duration of the contract
with Mr. Morris, and of the order of Bernis, formed on that, will soon
expire.

A parcel of gazettes and magazines sent to me from America, for my own
use, and detained in the syndic chamber, obliges me to trouble your
Excellency for an order for their delivery.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, your Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR LIMOSIN.

PARIS, Sept. 9, 1787.


SIR,--Immediately on the receipt of your favor of the 31st of August, I
waited on the person who is charged with the superintendence of the
conduct of the Farms, and informed him that the customhouse officers
had required the ancient duties on a cargo of pearlash, arrived at
Havre. He observed to me that the duties promised to be abolished by
the King were only those due to himself or the Farms; but that there
were _droits loceaux_, which he could not abolish; that the officers of
the customs might have demanded the droits loceaux, but that it was
impossible they should have demanded any other duties. If they have
done so, I will beg the favor of you to send me such evidence of the
demand as will enable me to press for a proper notice of the Farms, if
they have failed to give orders, or a punishment of the officer, if he
has failed to obey them.

No further changes in the government since my last. The office of
Directeur du tresor royal was offered to M. de La Borde and refused by
him. Had no accident intervened, I think the affairs of the Dutch would
have been arranged without producing any war immediately. They are even
at this moment in a train of negotiation. But, in the meantime, a war
has broke out between the Russians and Turks. We have no news yet of
any action, but the Turks have imprisoned the Russian Ambassador at
Constantinople, and no hope is entertained of preventing hostilities.
Considering the situation of things in Europe, it seems inevitable that
this fire must spread over the whole of it. The utmost that can be
hoped, in my opinion, is that the season is so far advanced as that the
other powers of Europe may not be drawn into the vortex of hostilities
till the ensuing spring. The desire of government to prevent a war,
might make it disagreeable to them to see this opinion published. I
will pray you, therefore, to make use of it only for your own
government, and that of the Americans concerned in commerce with your
port. I shall make the same communication to our agents at Nantes and
Bordeaux. I have the honor to be, with much esteem, Sir, your most
obedient and most humble servant.




TO MR. T. BLAKE.

PARIS, Sept. 9, 1787.


SIR,--Congress do not grant their sea-letters for the East Indies, but
to ships belonging to citizens of the United States, and navigated by
officers and seamen of the United States. Even the cargo must also
belong to their own citizens. Nor can these letters be obtained but on
an application to Congress themselves, whereupon they appoint a
committee of their own body to enquire into the circumstances relative
to the vessel, cargo and crew, and on their report of the fact, they
grant or refuse the passport.

I am, with much respect, Sir, your most obedient humble servant.




TO MR. BONDFIELD.

PARIS, September 9, 1787.


SIR,--The affairs of Holland, though at one moment they had threatened
a war, had got into a hopeful train of accommodation, when all of a
sudden a war is kindled between the Russians and Turks. The latter have
imprisoned the Russian Ambassador resident with them, which you know is
their manner of declaring war; and though no news of actual hostilities
is yet arrived, every body considers them as inevitable. In the present
state of Europe, a spark dropped anywhere must kindle the whole. The
only thing to be hoped is that the advance of the season may prevent
the other powers from being drawn into the vortex of hostilities, till
the next spring. But this cannot be depended on. Government here would
still wish for peace, and may see disagreeably the publication of any
opinion unfriendly to their wish. I will beg of you, therefore, to make
use of this for your own information only, and that of the persons
concerned in our commerce from your port. My duty leads me to care of
them, and my desire to give no offence makes me wish to give no further
alarm. I make the same communication to the ports of Nantes, L'Orient,
and Havre. I am, with much esteem, Sir, your most obedient humble
servant.




TO MONSIEUR DUMAS.

PARIS, September 10, 1787.


SIR,--I am honored with your favor of the 5th instant, and will forward
the letter to Mr. Jay by the packet-boat which sails the 25th of this
month. I am sorry for the situation in which Mr. Grand's refusal to
make further advances has placed you. I know its pain, because I
participate of it. The aspect of your affairs has also been
discouraging. Perhaps the war kindled between Russia and Turkey may
engage your friends, of necessity in measures they wished to avoid, and
may ultimately relieve you. Our Federal Convention is likely to sit
till October; there is a general disposition through the States to
adopt what they shall propose, and we may be assured their propositions
will be wise, as a more able assembly never sat in America. Happily for
us, that when we find our constitutions defective and insufficient to
secure the happiness of our people, we can assemble with all the
coolness of philosophers, and set it to rights, while every other
nation on earth must have recourse to arms to amend or to restore their
constitutions. The sale of our western lands begins this month. I hope
from this measure a very speedy reduction of our national debt. It can
only be applied to pay off the principal, being irrevocably made a
sinking fund for that purpose. I have the honor to be, with much esteem
and respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO DON FRANCISCO CHIAPPI.

PARIS, September 15, 1787.


SIR,--I have lately received from Mr. Jay, Secretary for foreign
affairs to the United States of America, the enclosed letter from
Congress to his Majesty the Emperor (whom God preserve), and their
ratification of the treaty between his Majesty (whom God preserve) and
the United States, together with an instruction to forward them to you,
to be delivered into the hands of his Majesty (whom God preserve). I am
at the same time to ask the favor of you to deliver the inclosed letter
to Taher Ben Abdelkack Fennish.

Mr. Jay also informs me that Congress had confirmed Mr. Barclay's
appointment of yourself to be their agent at Morocco, of Don Joseph
Chiappi to be their agent at Mogador, and Don Girolamo Chiappi to be
their agent at Tangier, with which agents it was their desire that
their ministers at Versailles and London should regularly correspond;
that want of time prevented his having and sending to me the certified
copies of these acts by that opportunity, but that he would do it by
the next. It will be with singular pleasure that I shall be
instrumental in forwarding to you these testimonies of the sense which
Congress entertains of your personal merit, and of your dispositions to
be useful to the citizens of America.

In the meantime, I shall be very happy to receive from you such
communications, from time to time, as may be interesting to either
nation, and will avail myself of every occasion of making
communications of the same nature to you, and of assuring you of those
sentiments of esteem and respect with which I have the honor to be,
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. GEORGE WYTHE.

PARIS, Sept. 16, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of Dec.
the 13th and 22d, 1786, and of Jan., 1787. These should not have been
so long unanswered, but that they arrived during my absence on a
journey of between three and four months through the southern parts of
France, and northern of Italy. In the latter country, my time allowed
me to go no farther than Turin, Milan, and Genoa: consequently, I
scarcely got into classical ground. I took with me some of the
writings, in which endeavors have been made to investigate the passage
of Annibal over the Alps, and was just able to satisfy myself, from a
view of the country, that the descriptions given of his march are not
sufficiently particular to enable us, at this day, even to guess at his
track across the Alps. In architecture, painting, sculpture, I found
much amusement; but more than all, in their agriculture, many objects
of which might be adopted with us to great advantage. I am persuaded,
there are many parts of our lower country where the olive tree might be
raised, which is assuredly the richest gift of heaven. I can scarcely
except bread. I see this tree supporting thousands among the Alps,
where there is not soil enough to make bread for a single family. The
caper too, might be cultivated with us. The fig we do raise. I do not
speak of the vine, because it is the parent of misery. Those who
cultivate it are always poor, and he who would employ himself with us
in the culture of corn, cotton, &c., can procure, in exchange for them,
much more wine, and better than he could raise by its direct culture.

I sent you formerly copies of the documents on the Tagliaferro family,
which I had received from Mr. Febroni. I now send the originals. I have
procured for you a copy of Polybius, the best edition; but the best
edition of Vitruvius, which is with the commentaries of Ticinus, is not
to be got here. I have sent to Holland for it. In the meantime, the
Polybius comes in a box containing books for Peter Carr, and for some
of my friends in Williamsburg and its vicinities. I have taken the
liberty of addressing the box to you. It goes to New York in the packet
boat which carries this letter, and will be forwarded to you by water,
by Mr. Madison. Its freight to New York is paid here. The
transportation from thence to Williamsburg will be demanded of you, and
shall stand as the equivalent to the cost of Polybius and Vitruvius, if
you please. The difference either way will not be worth the trouble of
raising and transmitting accounts. I send you herewith, a state of the
contents of the box, and for whom each article is. Among these are
some, as you will perceive, of which I ask your acceptance. It is a
great comfort to me, that while here, I am able to furnish some
amusement to my friends, by sending them such productions of genius,
ancient and modern, as might otherwise escape them; and I hope they
will permit me to avail myself of the occasion while it lasts.

This world is going all to war. I hope ours will remain clear of it. It
is already declared between the Turks and Russians, and considering the
present situation of Holland, it cannot fail to spread itself all over
Europe. Perhaps it may not be till next spring, that the other powers
will be engaged in it: nor is it as yet clear how they will arrange
themselves. I think it not impossible that France and the two empires
may join against all the rest. The Patriotic party in Holland will be
saved by this, and the Turks sacrificed. The only thing which can
prevent the union of France and the two empires, is the difficulty of
agreeing about the partition of the spoils. Constantinople is the key
of Asia. Who shall have it? is the question. I cannot help looking
forward to the re-establishment of the Greeks as a people, and the
language of Homer becoming again a living language, as among possible
events. You have now with you Mr. Paradise, who can tell you how easily
the modern may be improved into the ancient Greek.

You ask me in your letter, what ameliorations I think necessary in our
federal constitution. It is now too late to answer the question, and it
would always have been presumption in me to have done it. Your own
ideas, and those of the great characters who were to be concerned with
you in these discussions, will give the law, as they ought to do, to us
all. My own general idea was, that the States should severally preserve
their sovereignty in whatever concerns themselves alone, and that
whatever may concern another State, or any foreign nation, should be
made a part of the federal sovereignty; that the exercise of the
federal sovereignty should be divided among three several bodies,
legislative, executive, and judiciary, as the State sovereignties are;
and that some peaceable means should be contrived, for the federal head
to force compliance on the part of the States. I have reflected on your
idea of wooden, or ivory diagrams, for the geometrical demonstrations.
I should think wood as good as ivory; and that in this case, it might
add to the improvement of the young gentlemen, that they should make
the figures themselves. Being furnished by a workman with a piece of
veneer, no other tool than a penknife and a wooden rule, would be
necessary. Perhaps pasteboards, or common cards, might be still more
convenient. The difficulty is, how to reconcile figures which must have
a very sensible breadth to our ideas of a mathematical line, which, as
it has neither breadth nor thickness, will revolt more at these than at
simple lines drawn on paper or slate. If, after reflecting on this
proposition, you would prefer having them made here, lay your commands
on me, and they shall be executed.

I return you a thousand thanks for your goodness to my nephew. After my
debt to you for whatever I am myself, it is increasing it too much to
interest yourself for his future fortune. But I know, that to you, a
consciousness of doing good is a luxury ineffable. You have enjoyed it
already, beyond all human measure, and that you may long live to enjoy
it, and to bless your country and friends, is the sincere prayer of him
who is, with every possible sentiment of esteem and respect, dear Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. DAVID RITTENHOUSE.

PARIS, September 18, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of April
the 14th, and June the 26th, as also of the second volume of the
transactions you were so kind as to send me. It would have been a
grateful present indeed, could you have accompanied them with a copy of
your observations on our western country. Besides the interest I feel
in that country in common with others, I have a particular one, as
having ventured so many crudities on that subject. A copy of these,
with some late corrections, I have put into a box of books sent to Mr.
Madison, and another for Mr. Hopkinson. I hope he will forward them to
you from New York. I have also put into the same box for you a
dissertation, by De la Sauvagere, on the spontaneous growth of shells.
When I was at Tours this summer, I inquired into the character of De la
Sauvagere, from a gentleman who had known him well. He told me he was a
person of talents, but of a heated imagination; however, that he might
be depended on for any facts advanced on his own knowledge. This
gentleman added, that he had seen such proofs of this growth of shells
in many parts of the country round Tours, as to convince him of the
truth of the fact; and that he has never seen any person, even the most
incredulous, quit those Falunieres but under the same conviction. After
all, I cannot say I give faith to it. It is so unlike the processes of
nature, to produce the same effect in two different ways, that I can
only bring myself to agree it is not impossible. I have added for you
the Connoissance des Temps for '88 and '89, and a copy of Fourcroi's
Chemistry, which is the best and most complete publication in that
line, which we have had for some time past. I shall be happy to receive
an account of your improvement in timepieces, as well as the third
volume of the transactions, when published. There are abundance of good
things in the second volume. But I must say there are several which
have not merit enough to be placed in such company. I think we should
be a little rigid in our admission of papers. It is the peculiar
privilege derived from our not being obliged to publish a volume in any
fixed period of time. A person here pretends to have discovered the
method of rendering sea-water potable, and has some respectable
certificates of its success. He has contrived a varnish, also, for
lining biscuit barrels, which preserves the biscuit good, and keeps it
free from insects. He asks money for his secrets, so we are not to know
them soon.

The affairs of Holland had got so far entangled as to leave little hope
that war could be avoided. In this situation, the Turks have declared
war against the Russians. This, I think, renders a general war
inevitable. Perhaps the European powers may take this winter to
determine which side each shall take. There is a possibility that an
alliance between France and the two empires may induce England and
Prussia to tread back their steps. In that case, the Patriotic party in
Holland will be peaceably placed at the head of their government. The
Turks will be driven out of Europe, their continental possessions
divided between Russia and the Emperor, and perhaps their islands and
Egypt allotted to France. These events seem possible at present. * * * *




TO THE HONORABLE THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE TREASURY.

PARIS, September 18, 1787.


GENTLEMEN,--Congress having thought proper, by their vote of July the
18th, to entrust me to take measures for the redemption of our captives
at Algiers, and to desire you to furnish the money necessary, it is
proper to state to you some data whereby you may judge what sum is
necessary. The French prisoners, last redeemed by the order of
Mathurins, cost somewhat less than four hundred dollars: but the
General of the order told me, that they had always been made to pay
more for foreign prisoners than their own. The smallest sum then, at
which we can expect ours, including redemption, clothing, feeding, and
transportation, will be five hundred dollars each. There are twenty of
them. Of course, ten thousand dollars is the smallest sum which can be
requisite. I think a larger sum should be set apart, as so much of it
as shall not be wanting for the prisoners, will remain for other uses.
As soon as you shall have notified me that the money is ready, I will
proceed to execute the order of Congress. I must add the injunctions of
the General of the Mathurins, that it be not made known that the public
interest themselves in the redemption of these prisoners, as that would
induce the Algerians to demand the most extravagant price. I have the
honor to be, with sentiments of the most profound respect, Gentlemen,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, September 19, 1787.


SIR,--My last letters to you were of the 6th and 15th of August; since
which, I have been honored with yours of July the 24th, acknowledging
the receipt of mine of the 14th and 23d of February. I am anxious to
hear you have received that also of May the 4th, written from
Marseilles. According to the desires of Congress, expressed in their
vote confirming the appointments of Francisco, Giuseppa and Girolamo
Chiappi, their agents in Morocco, I have written letters to these
gentlemen, to begin a correspondence with them. To the first, I have
inclosed the ratification of the treaty with the Emperor of Morocco,
and shall send it either by our agent at Marseilles, who is now here,
or by the Count Daranda, who sets out for Madrid in a few days, having
relinquished his embassy here. I shall proceed on the redemption of our
captives at Algiers, as soon as the commissioners of the treasury shall
enable me, by placing the money necessary, under my orders. The
prisoners redeemed by the religious order of Mathurins, cost about four
hundred dollars each, and the General of the order told me, that they
had never been able to redeem foreigners on so good terms as their own
countrymen. Supposing that their redemption, clothing, feeding and
transportation, should amount to five hundred dollars each, there must
be, at least, a sum of ten thousand dollars set apart for this purpose.
Till this is done, I shall take no other step than the preparatory one,
of destroying at Algiers all idea of our intending to redeem the
prisoners. This, the General of the Mathurins told me, was
indispensably necessary, and that it must not, on any account,
transpire, that the public would interest themselves for their
redemption. This was rendered the more necessary, by the declaration of
the Dey to the Spanish consul, that he should hold him responsible, at
the Spanish price, for our prisoners, even for such as should die.
Three of them have died of the plague. By authorizing me to redeem at
the prices _usually_ paid by the European nations, Congress, I suppose,
could not mean the Spanish price, which is not only unusual, but
unprecedented, and would make our vessels the first object with those
pirates. I shall pay no attention, therefore, to the Spanish price,
unless further instructed. Hard as it may seem, I should think it
necessary not to let it be known even to the relations of the captives,
that we mean to redeem them.

I have the honor to enclose you a paper from the admiralty of
Guadaloupe, sent to me as a matter of form, and to be lodged, I
suppose, with our marine records. I enclose, also, a copy of a letter
from the Count de Florida Blanca to Mr. Carmichael, by which you will
perceive, they have referred the settlement of the claim of South
Carolina for the use of their frigate, to Mr. Gardoqui, and to the
Delegates of South Carolina in Congress.

I had the honor to inform you, in my last letter, of the parliament's
being transferred to Troyes. To put an end to the tumults in Paris,
some regiments were brought nearer, the patroles were strengthened and
multiplied, some mutineers punished by imprisonment: it produced the
desired effect. It is confidently believed, however, that the
parliament will be immediately recalled, the stamp tax and land tax
repealed, and other means devised of accommodating their receipts and
expenditures. Those supposed to be in contemplation, are a rigorous
levy of the old tax of the _deux vingtièmes_, on the rich, who had, in
a great measure, withdrawn their property from it, as well as on the
poor, on whom it had principally fallen. This will greatly increase the
receipts; while they are proceeding on the other hand, to reform their
expenses far beyond what they had promised. It is said these
reformations will amount to eighty millions. Circumstances render these
measures more and more pressing. I mentioned to you in my last letter,
that the officer charged by the ministry to watch the motion of the
British squadron, had returned with information that it had sailed
westwardly. The fact was not true. He had formed his conclusion too
hastily, and thus led the ministry into error. The King of Prussia,
urged on by England, has pressed more and more the affairs of Holland,
and lately has given to the States General of Holland, four days only
to comply with his demand. This measure would, of itself, have rendered
it impossible for France to proceed longer in the line of accommodation
with Prussia. In the same moment, an event takes place, which seems to
render all attempt at accommodation idle. The Turks have declared war
against the Russians, and that under circumstances which exclude all
prospect of preventing its taking place. The King of Prussia having
deserted his ancient friends, there remains only France and Turkey,
perhaps Spain also, to oppose the two empires, Russia and England. By
such a piece of Quixotism, France might plunge herself into ruin with
the Turks and Dutch, but would save neither. But there is certainly a
confederacy secretly in contemplation, of which the public have not yet
the smallest suspicion; that is, between France and the two empires. I
think it sure that Russia has desired this, and that the Emperor, after
some hesitation, has acceded. It rests on this country to close. Her
indignation against the King of Prussia will be some spur. She will
thereby save her party in Holland, and only abandon the Turks to that
fate she cannot ward off, and which their precipitation has brought on
themselves, by the instigations of the English ambassador at the Porte,
and against the remonstrances of the French ambassador. Perhaps this
formidable combination, should it take place, may prevent the war of
the western powers, as it would seem that neither England nor Prussia
would carry their false calculations so far, as, with the aid of the
Turks only, to oppose themselves to such a force. In that case, the
Patriots of Holland would be peaceably established in the powers of
their government, and the war go on against the Turks only, who would
probably be driven from Europe. This new arrangement would be a total
change of the European system, and a favorable one for our friends. The
probability of a general war, in which this country will be engaged on
one side, and England on the other, has appeared to me sufficient to
justify my writing to our agents in the different ports of France, to
put our merchants on their guard, against risking their property in
French or English bottoms. The Emperor, instead of tracing back his
steps in Brabant, as was expected, has pursued the less honorable plan
of decoying his subjects thence by false pretences, to let themselves
be invested by his troops, and this done, he dictates to them his own
terms. Yet it is not certain the matter will end with that.

The Count de Moustier is nominated Minister Plenipotentiary to America;
and a frigate is ordered to Cherbourg, to carry him over. He will
endeavor to sail by the middle of the next month, but if any delay
should make him pass over the whole of October, he will defer his
voyage to the spring, being unwilling to take a winter passage.
Monsieur de St. Priest is sent Ambassador to Holland, in the room of
Monsieur de Verac, appointed to Switzerland. The Chevalier de Luzerne
might, I believe, have gone to Holland, but he preferred a general
promise of promotion, and the possibility that it might be to the court
of London. His prospects are very fair. His brother, the Count de la
Luzerne, (now Governor in the West Indies,) is appointed minister of
the marine, in the place of Monsieur de Castries, who has resigned. The
Archbishop of Thoulouse is appointed _ministre principale_, and his
brother, Monsieur de Brienne, minister of war, in the place of Monsieur
de Segur. The department of the Comptroller has had a very rapid
succession of tenants. From Monsieur de Calonnes it passed to Monsieur
de Forqueux, from him to Villedeuil, and from him to Lambert, who holds
it at present, but divided with a Monsieur Cabarrus, (whom I believe
you knew in Spain,) who is named _Directeur du trésor_ _royal_, the
office into which M. Neckar came at first. I had the honor to inform
you, that before the departure of the Count de Luzerne to his
government in the West Indies, I had pressed on him the patronage of
our trade with the French islands; that he appeared well disposed, and
assured me he would favor us as much as his instructions, and the laws
of the colonies, would permit. I am in hopes these dispositions will be
strengthened by his residence in the islands, and that his acquaintance
among the people there, will be an additional motive to favor them.
Probably they will take advantage of his appointment, to press
indulgences in commerce with us. The ministry is of a liberal
complexion, and well disposed to us. The war may add to the motives for
opening their islands to other resources for their subsistence, and for
doing what may be agreeable to us. It seems to me, at present, then,
that the moment of the arrival of the Count de La Luzerne, will be the
moment for trying to obtain a freer access to their islands. It would
be very material to do this, if possible, in a permanent way, that is
to say, by treaty. But I know of nothing we have to offer in
equivalent. Perhaps the payment of our debt to them might be made use
of as some inducement, while they are so distressed for money. Yet the
borrowing the money in Holland will be rendered more difficult by the
same event, in proportion as it will increase the demand for money by
other powers.

The gazettes of Leyden and France to this date are enclosed, together
with some pamphlets on the internal affairs of this country.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO CHARLES THOMPSON.

PARIS, Sept. 20, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--Your favor of April the 28th did not come to my hands till
the first instant. Unfortunately, the box of plants, which were a day
too late to come by the April packet, missed the packet of June the
10th also, and only came by that of July the 25th. They are not yet
arrived at Paris, but I expect them daily. I am sensible of your kind
attention to them, and that as you were leaving New York, you took the
course which bade fair to be the best. That they were forgotten in the
hands in which you placed them, was probably owing to too much
business, and more important. I have desired Mr. Madison to refund to
you the money you were so kind as to advance for me. The delay of your
letter will apologize for this delay of the repayment. I thank you also
for the extract of the letter you were so kind as to communicate to me,
on the antiquities found in the western country. I wish that the
persons who go thither would make very exact descriptions of what they
see of that kind, without forming any theories. The moment a person
forms a theory, his imagination sees, in every object, only the traits
which favor that theory. But it is too early to form theories on those
antiquities. We must wait with patience till more facts are collected.
I wish your Philosophical Society would collect exact descriptions of
the several monuments as yet known, and insert them naked in their
Transactions, and continue their attention to those hereafter to be
discovered. Patience and observation may enable us in time, to solve
the problem, whether those who formed the scattering monuments in our
western country, were colonies sent off from Mexico, or the founders of
Mexico itself? Whether both were the descendants or the progenitors of
the Asiatic red men? The Mexican tradition, mentioned by Dr. Robertson,
is an evidence, but a feeble one, in favor of the one opinion. The
number of languages radically different, is a strong evidence in favor
of the contrary one. There is an American by the name of Ledyard, he
who was with Captain Cook on his last voyage, and wrote an account of
that voyage, who has gone to St. Petersburg; from thence he was to go
to Kamschatka; to cross over thence to the northwest coast of America,
and to penetrate through the main continent, to our side of it. He is a
person of ingenuity and information. Unfortunately, he has too much
imagination. However, if he escapes safety, he will give us new,
curious and useful information. I had a letter from him, dated last
March, when he was about to leave St. Petersburg on his way to
Kamschatka.

With respect to the inclination of the strata of rocks, I had observed
them between the Blue Ridge and North Mountains in Virginia, to be
parallel with the pole of the earth. I observed the same thing in most
instances in the Alps, between Cette and Turin; but in returning along
the precipices of the Apennines, where they hang over the
Mediterranean, their direction was totally different and various; and
you mention that in our western country they are horizontal. This
variety proves they have not been formed by subsidence, as some writers
of theories of the earth have pretended; for then they should always
have been in circular strata, and concentric. It proves, too, that they
have not been formed by the rotation of the earth on its axis, as might
have been suspected, had all these strata been parallel with that axis.
They may, indeed, have been thrown up by explosions, as Whitehurst
supposes, or have been the effect of convulsions. But there can be no
proof of the explosion, nor is it probable that convulsions have
deformed every spot of the earth. It is now generally agreed that rock
grows, and it seems that it grows in layers in every direction, as the
branches of trees grow in all directions. Why seek further the solution
of this phenomenon? Everything in nature decays. If it were not
reproduced then by growth, there would be a chasm.

I remember you asked me, in a former letter, whether the steam mill in
London was turned by the steam immediately, or by the intermediate
agency of water raised by the steam. When I was in London, Boulton made
a secret of his mill. Therefore, I was permitted to see it only
superficially. I saw no water wheels, and, therefore, supposed none. I
answered you, accordingly, that there were none. But when I was at
Nismes, I went to see the steam mill there, and they showed it to me in
all the parts. I saw that their steam raised water, and that this water
turned a wheel. I expressed my doubts of the necessity of the
inter-agency of water, and that the London mill was without it. But
they supposed me mistaken; perhaps I was so; I have had no opportunity
since of clearing up the doubt.



I had a letter from Mr. Churchman, but not developing his plan of
knowing the longitude, fully. I wrote him what was doubted about it, so
far as we could conjecture what it was.

I am, with very great and sincere esteem, dear Sir, your friend and
servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, Sept. 22, 1787.


SIR,--The letters of which the enclosed are copies, are this moment
received, and as there is a possibility that they may reach Havre
before the packet sails, I have the honor of enclosing them to you.
They contain a promise of reducing the duties on tar, pitch and
turpentine, and that the government will interest itself with the city
of Rouen, to reduce the local duty on potash. By this you will perceive
that we are getting on a little in this business, though under their
present embarrassments, it is difficult to procure the attention of the
ministers to it. The parliament has enregistered the edict of a
rigorous levy of the _deux vingtièmes_. As this was proposed by the
King in lieu of the impost territorial, there is no doubt now that the
latter, with the stamp tax, will be immediately repealed. There can be
no better proof of the revolution in the public opinion, as to the
powers of the monarch, and of the force, too, of that opinion. Six
weeks ago, we saw the King displaying the plentitude of his
omnipotence, as hitherto conceived, to enforce these two acts. At this
day, he is forced to retract them by the public voice; for as to the
opposition of the parliament, that body is too little esteemed to
produce this effect in any case where the public do not throw
themselves into the same scale.

I have the honor to be, with the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, Sept. 22, 1787.


SIR,--When I had the honor of addressing you this morning, intelligence
was handing about, which I did not think well enough authenticated to
communicate to you. As it is now ascertained, I avail myself of the
chance that another post may yet reach Havre before the departure of
the packet. This will depend on the wind, which has for some days been
unfavorable. I must premise, that this court, about ten days ago,
declared, by their Chargé des Affaires in Holland, that if the Prussian
troops continued to menace Holland with an invasion, his Majesty was
determined, in quality of ally, to succor that province. An _official_
letter from the Hague, of the 18th instant, assures that the Prussian
army entered the territory of Holland on the 15th, that most of the
principal towns had submitted, some after firing a gun or two, others
without resistance; that the Rhingrave de Salm had evacuated Utretcht,
with part of the troops under his command, leaving behind him one
hundred and forty-four pieces of cannon, with great warlike stores;
that the standard of Orange was hoisted everywhere; that no other
cockade could be worn at the Hague; that the States General were to
assemble that night for reinstating the Stadtholder in all his rights.
The letter concludes, "we have this moment intelligence that Woerden
has capitulated; so that Amsterdam remains without defence." So far the
letter. We know, otherwise, that Monsieur de St. Priest, who had set
out on his embassy to the Hague, has stopped at Antwerp, not choosing
to proceed further till new orders. This court has been completely
deceived, first by its own great desire to avoid a war, and secondly by
calculating that the King of Prussia would have acted on principles of
common sense, which would surely have dictated, that a power, lying
between the jaws of Russia and Austria, should not separate itself from
France, unless, indeed, he had assurances of dispositions in those two
powers, which are not supposed to exist. On the contrary, I am
persuaded that they ask the alliance of France, whom we suppose to be
under hesitations between her reluctance to abandon the Turks, her
jealousy of increasing by their spoils, the power of the two empires,
and the inability to oppose them. If they cannot obtain her alliance,
they will surely join themselves to England and Prussia.

Official advices are received, that the first division of the Russian
army has passed the Borysthenes into the Polish Ukraine, and is
marching towards the frontiers of Turkey. Thus, we may consider the
flames of war as completely kindled in two distinct parts of this
quarter of the globe, and that though France and England have not yet
engaged themselves in it, the probabilities are, that they will do it.

I have the honor to be, with the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. CARNES.

PARIS, September 22, 1787.


SIR,--I am honored by your favor of the 17th instant. A war between
France and England does not necessarily engage America in it; and I
think she will be disposed rather to avail herself of the advantages of
a neutral power. By the former usage of nations, the goods of a friend
were safe, though taken in an enemy bottom, and those of an enemy were
lawful prize, though found in a free bottom. But in our treaties with
France, etc., we have established the simpler rule, that a free bottom
makes free goods, and an enemy bottom, enemy goods. The same rule has
been adopted by the treaty of armed neutrality between Russia, Sweden,
Denmark, Holland and Portugal, and assented to by France and Spain.
Contraband goods, however, are always excepted, so that they may still
be seized; but the same powers have established that naval stores are
not contraband; and this may be considered now as the law of nations.
Though England acquiesced under this during the late war, rather than
draw on herself the neutral powers, yet she never acceded to the new
principle, and her obstinacy on this point, is what has prevented the
late renewal of her treaty with Russia. On the commencement of a new
war, this principle will probably be insisted on by the neutral powers,
whom we may suppose to be Sweden, Denmark, Portugal, America, and
perhaps Spain. Quere; if England will again acquiesce. Supposing these
details might be useful to you, I have taken the liberty of giving
them, and of assuring you of the esteem with which I am, Sir, your very
humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR LIMOZIN.

PARIS, September 22, 1787.


SIR,--I must trouble you with another letter to Mr. Jay, to be
delivered to Monsieur Bourgoin on board the packet, which I hope will
not be sailed before it gets to your hands, as the letter is of extreme
importance. It is to inform Congress that official advice is just
received here that the Prussian troops entered the territory of Holland
on the 15th instant; that most of the principal towns had submitted,
that Utrecht was evacuated by the Rhingrave de Salm, and Woerden
capitulated, so that Amsterdam remained without defence. M. de St.
Priest had stopped at Antwerp and waited further orders. We know also,
that the first division of the Russian army has passed the Borysthenes
into the Polish Ukraine, and is marching towards the frontiers of
Turkey. War then is well kindled in those two quarters. Monsieur
Cabarus is arrived at Paris, but will not accept the appointment
offered him unless they will adopt his plans. On this there is
hesitation; so that it is not certain he will come in.

I have received your favor of the 20th, and shall make proper use of
its contents. Should the packet be sailed, I will pray you to send my
letter by the first of the vessels which you mention bound for
Philadelphia. I am, with great esteem, Sir, your most obedient humble
servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, September 24, 1787.


SIR,--The times are now so critical, that every day brings something
new and important, not known the day before. Observing the wind still
unfavorable, I am in hopes the packet may not sail to-morrow, and that
this letter may be at Havre in time for that conveyance. Mr. Eden has
waited on Count Montmorin to inform him, officially, that England must
consider its convention with France, relative to the giving notice of
its naval armament, as at an end, and that they are arming generally.
This is considered here as a declaration of war. The Dutch ambassador
told me yesterday, that he supposed the Prussian troops probably in
possession of the Hague. I asked him if it would interrupt the course
of business, commercial or banking, in Amsterdam; and particularly,
whether our depot of money there was safe. He said, the people of
Amsterdam would be surely so wise as to submit, when they should see
that they could not oppose the Stadtholder; therefore he supposed our
depot safe, and that there would be no interruption of business. It is
the hour of the departure of the post; so I have only time to add
assurances of the respect and esteem with which I have the honor to be,
Sir, your most obedient humble servant.




TO JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, September 28, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I received your favor by Mr. Cutting, and thank you
sincerely for the copy of your book. The departure of a packet boat,
which always gives me full employment for some time before, has only
permitted me to look into it a little. I judge of it from the first
volume, which I thought formed to do a great deal of good. The first
principle of a good government, is certainly, a distribution of its
powers into executive, judiciary and legislative, and a subdivision of
the latter into two or three branches. It is a good step gained, when
it is proved that the English constitution, acknowledged to be better
than all which have preceded it, is only better in proportion as it has
approached nearer to this distribution of powers. From this, the last
step is easy, to show by a comparison of our constitutions with that of
England, how much more perfect they are. The article of Confederations
is certainly worthy of your pen. It would form a most interesting
addition, to show, what have been the nature of the Confederations
which have existed hitherto, what were their excellences, and what
their defects. A comparison of ours with them would be to the advantage
of ours, and would increase the veneration of our countrymen for it. It
is a misfortune that they do not sufficiently know the value of their
constitutions, and how much happier they are rendered by them, than any
other people on earth, by the governments under which they live.

You know all that has happened in the United Netherlands. You know also
that our friends, Van Staphorsts, will be among the most likely to
become objects of severity, if any severities should be exercised. Is
the money in their hands entirely safe? If it is not, I am sure you
have already thought of it. Are we to suppose the game already up, and
that the Stadtholder is to be re-established, perhaps erected into a
monarch, without the country lifting a finger in opposition to it. If
so, it is a lesson the more for us. In fact, what a crowd of lessons do
the present miseries of Holland teach us? Never to have an hereditary
officer of any sort: never to let a citizen ally himself with kings:
never to call in foreign nations to settle domestic differences: never
to suppose that any nation will expose itself to war for us, etc. Still
I am not without hopes that a good rod is in soak for Prussia, and that
England will feel the end of it. It is known to some, that Russia made
propositions to the Emperor and France, for acting in concert; that the
Emperor consents, and has disposed four camps of one hundred and eighty
thousand men, from the limits of Turkey to those of Prussia. This court
hesitates, or rather its Premier hesitates; for the Queen, Montmorin
and Breteuil, are for the measure. Should it take place, all may yet
come to rights, except for the Turks, who must retire from Europe, and
this they must do, were France Quixotic enough to undertake to support
them. We, I hope, shall be left free to avail ourselves of the
advantages of neutrality; and yet, much I fear, the English, or rather
their stupid King, will force us out of it. For thus I reason. By
forcing us into the war against them, they will be engaged in an
expensive land war, as well as a sea war. Common sense dictates,
therefore, that they should let us remain neuter: _ergo_ they will not
let us remain neuter. I never yet found any other general rule for
foretelling what they will do, but that of examining what they ought
not to do.



I have the honor to be, with my best respects to Mrs. Adams, and
sentiments of perfect esteem and regard to yourself, Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO COLONEL SMITH.

PARIS, September 28, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I have duly received your favor by Mr. Cutting. I had before
had a transient acquaintance with him, and knew him to be sensible.
Your recommendation is always a new merit. I really think, and had
taken the liberty some time ago of hinting to Congress, that they would
do well to have a diplomatic character at Lisbon. There is no country
whose commerce is more interesting to us. I wish Congress would
correspond to the wishes of that court, in sending a person there, and
to mine, in sending yourself. For I confess, I had rather see you there
than at London, because I doubt whether it be honorable for us to keep
anybody at London, unless they keep some person at New York. Of all
nations on earth, they require to be treated with the most hauteur.
They require to be kicked into common good manners. You ask, if you
shall say anything to Sullivan about the bill. No. Only that it is
paid. I have within these two or three days, received letters from him
explaining the matter. It was really for the skin and bones of the
moose, as I had conjectured. It was my fault, that I had not given him
a rough idea of the expense I would be willing to incur for them. He
had made the acquisition an object of a regular campaign, and that too
of a winter one. The troops he employed sallied forth, as he writes me,
in the month of March--much snow--a herd attacked--one killed--in the
wilderness--a road to cut twenty miles--to be drawn by hand from the
frontiers to his house--bones to be cleaned, etc., etc., etc. In fine,
he puts himself to an infinitude of trouble, more than I meant: he did
it cheerfully, and I feel myself really under obligations to him. That
the tragedy might not want a proper catastrophe, the box, bones, and
all, are lost; so that this chapter of Natural History will still
remain a blank. But I have written to him not to send me another. I
will leave it for my successor to fill up, whenever I shall make my bow
here. The purchase for Mrs. Adams shall be made, and sent by Mr.
Cutting. I shall always be happy to receive her commands. Petit shall
be made happy by her praises of his last purchase for her. I must refer
you to Mr. Adams for the news. Those respecting the Dutch you know as
well as I. Nor should they be written but with the pen of Jeremiah.
Adieu mon ami! Yours affectionately.




TO MONSIEUR LE COMTE DE BUFFON.

PARIS, October 3, 1787.


SIR,--I had-the honor of informing you, some time ago, that I had
written to some of my friends in America, desiring they would send me
such of the spoils of the moose, caribou, elk and deer, as might throw
light on that class of animals; but more particularly, to send me the
complete skeleton, skin and horns of the moose, in such condition as
that the skin might be sewed up and stuffed, on its arrival here. I am
happy to be able to present to you at this moment, the bones and skin
of a moose, the horns of another individual of the same species, the
horns of the caribou, the elk, the deer, the spiked horned buck, and
the roebuck of America. They all come from New Hampshire and
Massachusetts and were received by me yesterday. I give you their
popular names, as it rests with yourself to decide their real names.
The skin of the moose was dressed with the hair on, but a great deal of
it has come off, and the rest is ready to drop off. The horns of the
elk are remarkably small. I have certainly seen some of them which
would have weighed five or six times as much. This is the animal which
we call elk in the southern parts of America, and of which I have given
some description in the Notes on Virginia, of which I had the honor of
presenting you a copy. I really doubt whether the flat-horned elk
exists in America; and I think this may be properly classed with the
elk, the principal difference being in the horns. I have seen the daim,
the cerf, the chevreuil of Europe. But the animal we call elk, and
which may be distinguished as the round-horned elk, is very different
from them. I have never seen the brand-hirtz or cerf d'Ardennes, nor
the European elk. Could I get a sight of them, I think I should be able
to say which of them the American elk resembles most, as I am tolerably
well acquainted with that animal. I must observe also, that the horns
of the deer, which accompany these spoils, are not of the fifth or
sixth part of the weight of some that I have seen. This individual has
been of three years of age, according to our method of judging. I have
taken measures, particularly, to be furnished with large horns of our
elk and our deer, and therefore beg of you not to consider those now
sent, as furnishing a specimen of their ordinary size. I really suspect
you will find that the moose, the round-horned elk, and the American
deer, are species not existing in Europe. The moose is, perhaps, of a
new class. I wish these spoils, Sir, may have the merit of adding
anything new to the treasures of nature, which have so fortunately come
under your observation, and of which she seems to have given you the
key: they will in that case be some gratification to you, which it will
always be pleasing to me to have procured; having the honor to be, with
sentiments of the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. C. W. F. DUMAS.

PARIS, October 4, 1787.


SIR,--I received your favor of the 23d of September, two days ago. That
of the 28th and 29th, was put in my hands this morning. I immediately
waited on the ambassadors, ordinary and extraordinary, of the United
Netherlands, and also on the envoy of Prussia, and asked their good
offices to have an efficacious protection extended to your person, your
family, and your effects, observing that the United States know no
party, but are the friends and allies of the United Netherlands as a
nation, and would expect from their friendship, that the person who is
charged with their affairs until the arrival of a Minister, should be
covered from all insult and injury which might be offered him by a
lawless mob; well assured that their Minister residing with Congress,
would, on all occasions, receive the same. They have been so good as to
promise me, each, that he will in his first despatches press this
matter on the proper power, and give me reason to hope that it will be
efficacious for your safety. I will transmit your letter to Mr. Jay by
the Count de Moustier, who sets out within a week for New York, as
Minister Plenipotentiary for France, in that country. I sincerely
sympathize in your sufferings, and wish that what I have done may
effect an end to them, being with much respect and esteem, Sir, your
most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY PRESIDENT SULLIVAN.

PARIS, October 5, 1787.


SIR,--I have now before me your several favors of April the 16th, 26th,
and 30th, and of May the 9th and 29th, and received also a few days ago
the box containing the skin, bones, and horns of the moose, and other
animals, which your Excellency has been so kind as to take so much
trouble to obtain and forward. They were all in good enough condition,
except that a good deal of the hair of the moose had fallen off.
However, there remained still enough to give a good idea of the animal,
and I am in hopes Monsieur de Buffon will be able to have him stuffed,
and placed on his legs in the King's Cabinet. He was in the country
when I sent the box to the Cabinet, so that I have as yet no answer
from him. I am persuaded he will find the moose to be a different
animal from any he had described in his work. I am equally persuaded
that our elk and deer are animals of a different species from any
existing in Europe. Unluckily, the horns of them now received are
remarkably small. However, I have taken measures to procure some from
Virginia. The moose is really a valuable acquisition; but the skeletons
of the other animals would not be worth the expense they would occasion
to me, and still less the trouble to you. Of this, you have been
already so kind as to take a great deal more than I intended to have
given you, and I beg you to accept my sincere thanks. Should a pair of
large horns of the elk or deer fall into your way by accident, I would
thank you to keep them till some vessel should be coming directly from
your nearest port to Havre. So also of very large horns of the moose,
for I understand they are sometimes enormously large indeed. But I
would ask these things only on condition they should occasion you no
trouble, and me little expense.

You will have known that war is commenced between the Turks and
Russians, and that the Prussian troops have entered Holland, and
reinstated the Stadtholder. It is said that even Amsterdam has
capitulated. Yet is it possible, and rather probable, this country will
engage in a war to restore the Patriots. If they do, it will be the
most general one long known in Europe. We, I hope, shall enjoy the
blessings of a neutrality, and probably see England once more humbled.
I am, with great esteem and respect, your Excellency's most obedient,
and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, October 8, 1787.


SIR,--I had the honor of writing you on the 19th of September, twice on
the 22d, and again on the 24th. The two first went by the packet, the
third by a vessel bound to Philadelphia. I have not yet learned by what
occasion the last went. In these several letters, I communicated to you
the occurrences of Europe, as far as they were then known.
Notwithstanding the advantage which the Emperor seemed to have gained
over his subjects of Brabant, by the military arrangements he had been
permitted to make under false pretexts, he has not obtained his ends.
He certainly wished to enforce his new regulations; but he wished more
to be cleared of all domestic difficulties, that he might be free to
act in the great scenes which are preparing for the theatre of Europe.
He seems, therefore to have instructed his Governor General of the
Netherlands to insist on compliance as far as could be insisted,
without producing resistance by arms; but, at the same time, to have
furnished him with a sufficiently complete recantation, to prevent the
effects of insurrection. The Governor pressed; the people were firm; a
small act of force was then attempted, which produced a decided
resistance, in which the people killed several of the military: the
last resource was then used, which was the act of recantation; this
produced immediate tranquillity, and everything there is now finally
settled, by the Emperor's relinquishment of his plans.

My letter of the evening of September the 22d, informed you that the
Prussian troops had entered Holland, and that of the 24th that England
had announced to this court that she was arming generally. These two
events being simultaneous, proved that the two sovereigns acted in
concert. Immediately after, the court of London announced to the other
courts of Europe, that if France entered Holland with armed force, she
would consider it as an act of hostility, and declare war against her;
sending Mr. Granville here at the same, to make what she called a
conciliatory proposition. This proposition was received as a new
insult, Mr. Granville very coolly treated, and he has now gone back. It
is said, he has carried the ultimatum of France. What it is,
particularly, has not transpired; it is only supposed, in general, to
be very firm. You will see in one of the Leyden gazettes, one of the
letters written by the ministers of England to the courts of their
respective residence, communicating the declaration before mentioned.
In the meantime, Holland has been sooner reduced by the Prussian troops
than could have been expected. The abandonment of Utrecht by the
Rhingrave of Salm, seems to have thrown the people under a general
panic, during which every place submitted, except Amsterdam. That had
opened conferences with the Duke of Brunswick; but as late as the
second instant, no capitulation was yet concluded. The King of Prussia,
on his first move, demanded categorically of the King of Poland, what
part he intended to act in the event of war. The latter answered, he
should act as events should dictate; and is, in consequence of this
species of menace from Prussia, arming himself. He can bring into the
field almost seventy thousand good cavalry. In the meantime, though
nothing transpires publicly of the confederation between France and the
two empires, mentioned in my letter of September the 19th, it is not
the less sure that it is on the carpet, and will take place. To the
circumstances before mentioned may be added, as further indications of
war, the naming as Generalissimo of their marine on the Atlantic,
Monsieur de Suffrein, on the Mediterranean, Monsieur Albert de Rioms,
the recalling Monsieur de St. Priest, their Ambassador, from Antwerp,
before he had reached the Hague, and the activity of their armies by
sea. On the other hand, the little movement by land would make one
suppose they expected to put the King of Prussia into other hands.
They, too, like the Emperor, are arranging matters at home. The
rigorous levy of the _deux vingtièmes_ is enregistered, the stamp act
and impost territorial are revoked, the parliament recalled, the nation
soothed by these acts, and inspired by the insults of the British
court. The part of the Council still leaning towards peace, are become
unpopular, and perhaps may feel the effects of it. No change in the
administration has taken place since my last, unless we may consider as
such, Monsieur Cabarrus's refusal to stand in the lines. Thinking he
should be forced to follow, too seriously, plans formed by others, he
has declined serving.

Should this war take place, as is quite probable, and should it be as
general as it threatens to be, our neutrality must be attended with
great advantages. Whether of a nature to improve our morals or our
happiness, is another question. But is it sure, that Great Britain, by
her searches, her seizures, and other measures for harassing us, will
permit us to preserve our neutrality? I know it may be argued, that the
land war which she would superadd to her sea war, by provoking us to
join her enemies, should rationally hold her to her good behavior with
us. But since the accession of the present monarch, has it not been
passion, and not reason which, nine times out of ten, has dictated her
measures? Has there been a better rule of prognosticating what he would
do, than to examine what he ought not to do? When I review his
dispositions, and review his conduct, I have little hope of his
permitting our neutrality. He will find subjects of provocation in
various articles of our treaty with France, which will now come into
view, in all their consequences, and in consequences very advantageous
to the one, and injurious to the other country. I suggest these doubts,
on a supposition that our magazines are not prepared for war, and in
the opinion that provisions for that event should be thought of.

The enclosed letter from Mr. Dumas came to me open, though directed to
you. I immediately waited on the ambassadors, ordinary and
extraordinary, of Holland, and the envoy of Prussia, and prayed them to
interest themselves to have his person, his family and his goods
protected. They promised me readily to do it, and have written
accordingly; I trust it will be with effect. I could not avoid
enclosing you the letter from Monsieur Bouebé, though I have satisfied
him he is to expect nothing from Congress for his inventions. These are
better certified than most of those things are; but if time stamps
their worth, time will give them to us. He expects no further answer.
The gazettes of Leyden and France to this date accompany this, which
will be delivered you by the Count de Moustier, Plenipotentiary from
this country.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JAMES MADISON.

PARIS, October 8, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--The bearer hereof, the Count de Moustier, successor to
Monsieur de La Luzerne, would, from his office, need no letter of
introduction to you or to anybody. Yet I take the liberty of
recommending him to you, to shorten those formal approaches, which the
same office would otherwise expose him to, in making your acquaintance.
He is a great enemy to formality, etiquette, ostentation and luxury. He
goes with the best dispositions to cultivate society, without poisoning
it by ill example. He is sensible, disposed to view things favorably,
and being well acquainted with the constitution of England, her manners
and language, is the better prepared for his station with us. But I
should have performed only the lesser, and least pleasing half of my
task, were I not to add my recommendations of Madame de Brehan. She is
goodness itself. You must be well acquainted with her. You will find
her well disposed to meet your acquaintance, and well worthy of it. The
way to please her, is to receive her as an acquaintance of a thousand
years standing. She speaks little English. You must teach her more, and
learn French from her. She hopes, by accompanying Monsieur de Moustier,
to improve her health, which is very feeble, and still more, to improve
her son in his education, and to remove him to a distance from the
seductions of this country. You will wonder to be told, that there are
no schools in this country to be compared to ours, in the sciences. The
husband of Madame de Brehan is an officer, and obliged by the times to
remain with the army. Monsieur de Moustier brings your watch. I have
worn it two months, and really find it a most incomparable one. It will
not want the little redressing which new watches generally do, after
going about a year. It costs six hundred livres. To open it in all its
parts, press the little pin on the edge, with the point of your nail;
that opens the crystal; then open the dial-plate in the usual way; then
press the stem, at the end within the loop, and it opens the back for
winding up or regulating.

De Moustier is remarkably communicative. With adroitness he may be
pumped of anything. His openness is from character, not from
affectation. An intimacy with him may, on this account, be politically
valuable. I am, dear Sir, your affectionate friend and servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

(Private.) PARIS, October 8, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--The Count de Moustier, Minister Plenipotentiary from the
Court of Versailles to the United States, will have the honor of
delivering you this. The connection of your offices will necessarily
connect you in acquaintance; but I beg leave to present him to you, on
account of his personal as well as his public character. You will find
him open, communicative, candid, simple in his manners, and a declared
enemy to ostentation and luxury. He goes with a resolution to add no
aliment to it by his example, unless he finds that the dispositions of
our countrymen require it indispensably. Permit me, at the same time,
to solicit your friendly notice, and through you, that also of Mrs.
Jay, to Madame la Marquise de Brehan, sister-in-law to Monsieur de
Moustier. She accompanies him, in hopes that a change of climate may
assist her feeble health, and also, that she may procure a more
valuable education for her son, and safer from seduction, in America
than in France. I think it impossible to find a better woman, more
amiable, more modest, more simple in her manners, dress, and way of
thinking. She will deserve the friendship of Mrs. Jay, and the way to
obtain hers, is to receive her and treat her without the shadow of
etiquette.

The Count d'Aranda leaves us in a day or two. He desired me to recall
him to your recollection, and to assure you of his friendship. In a
letter which I mean as a private one, I may venture details too minute
for a public one, yet not unamusing, or unsatisfactory. I may venture
names, too, without the danger of their getting into a newspaper. There
has long been a division in the Council here, on the question of war
and peace. Monsieur de Montmorin and Monsieur de Breteuil have been
constantly for war. They are supported in this by the Queen. The King
goes for nothing. He hunts one half the day, is drunk the other, and
signs whatever he is bid. The Archbishop of Thoulouse desires peace.
Though brought in by the Queen, he is opposed to her in this capital
object, which would produce an alliance with her brother. Whether the
Archbishop will yield or not, I know not. But an intrigue is already
begun for ousting him from his place, and it is rather probable it will
succeed. He is a good and patriotic minister for peace, and very
capable in the department of finance. At least, he is so in theory. I
have heard his talents for execution censured. Can I be useful here to
Mrs. Jay or yourself, in executing any commissions, great or small? I
offer you my services with great cordiality. You know whether any of
the wines in this country may attract your wishes. In my tour, last
spring, I visited the best vineyards of Burgundy, Cote-rotie,
Hermitage, Lunelle, Frontignan, and white and red Bordeaux, got
acquainted with the proprietors, and can procure for you the best crops
from the vigneron himself. Mrs. Jay knows if there is anything else
here, in which I could be useful to her. Command me without ceremony,
as it will give me real pleasure to serve you, and be assured of the
sincere attachment and friendship, with which I am, dear Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR LE COMTE DE MOUSTIER.

PARIS, October 9, 1787.


Mr. Jefferson has the honor of presenting his respects to Monsieur le
Comte de Moustier, and of taking leave of him by letter, which he is
prevented doing in person, by an unexpected visit to Versailles to-day.
He will hope to have the pleasure of sometimes hearing from him, and
will take the liberty occasionally, of troubling him with a letter. He
considers the Count de Moustier as forming, with himself, the two end
links of that chain which holds the two nations together, and is happy
to have observed in him dispositions to strengthen rather than to
weaken it. It is a station of importance, as on the cherishing good
dispositions and quieting bad ones, will depend, in some degree, the
happiness and prosperity of the two countries. The Count de Moustier
will find the affections of the Americans with France, but their habits
with England. Chained to that country by circumstances, embracing what
they loathe, they realize the fable of the living and the dead bound
together. Mr. Jefferson troubles the Count de Moustier with two
letters, to gentlemen whom he wishes to recommend to his particular
acquaintance, and to that of Madame de Brehan. He bids Monsieur de
Moustier a most friendly adieu, and wishes him everything which may
render agreeable his passage across the water, and his residence beyond
it.




TO MADAME DE BREHAN.

PARIS, October 9, 1787.


Persuaded, Madam, that visits at this moment must be troublesome, I beg
you to accept my adieus in this form. Be assured, that no one mingles
with them more regret at separating from you. I will ask your
permission to enquire of you by letter sometimes, how our country
agrees with your health and your expectations, and will hope to hear it
from yourself. The imitation of European manners, which you will find
in our towns, will, I fear, be little pleasing. I beseech you to
practice still your own, which will furnish them a model of what is
perfect. Should you be singular, it will be by excellence, and after
awhile you will see the effect of your example.

Heaven bless you, Madam, and guard you under all circumstances; give
you smooth waters, gentle breezes, and clear skies, hushing all its
elements into peace, and leading with its own hand the favored bark,
till it shall have safely landed its precious charge on the shores of
our new world.




TO MONSIEUR LIMOZIN.

PARIS, October 9, 1787.


SIR,--I have duly received your favor with my account balance 160_l._
7_s._, which shall be paid to your order. I observe it is supposed with
you that the differences between the courts of London and St. Cloud are
nearly settled. But be assured on the contrary, that no accommodation
is expected, and that war is as certain as it can be, without being
actually commenced or declared. There remains, indeed, a possibility of
preventing it, but it is very feeble. This court would be disposed to
do it, but they believe that of London decided on war. We cannot
foresee the moment it will commence, but it is not distant, according
to present appearances. M. de Suffrein is appointed to command on the
Ocean, and M. Albert de Rion on the Mediterranean.

I have the honor to be, with much respect, Sir, your most obedient
humble servant.




TO MR. C. W. F. DUMAS.

PARIS, October 14, 1787.


SIR,--I have duly received your favors of October the 23d and 26th.
With respect to the mission you suggest in the former, no powers are
lodged in the hands of Mr. Adams and myself. Congress commissioned Mr.
Adams, Dr. Franklin and myself, to treat with the Emperor on the
subject of amity and commerce; at the same time, they gave us the
commission to Prussia, with which you are acquainted. We proposed
treating through the Imperial Ambassador here. It was declined on their
part, and our powers expired, having been given but for two years.
Afterwards, the same Ambassador here was instructed to offer to treat
with us. I informed him our powers were expired, but that I would write
to Congress on the subject. I did so, but have never yet received an
answer. Whether this proceeds from a change of opinion in them, or from
the multiplicity of their occupations, I am unable to say; but this
state of facts will enable you to see that we have no powers in this
instance, to take the measures you had thought of. I sincerely
sympathise with you in your sufferings. Though forbidden by my
character, to meddle in the internal affairs of an allied State, it is
the wish of my heart that their troubles may have such an issue, as
will secure the greatest degree of happiness to the body of the people;
for it is with the mass of the nation we are allied, and not merely
with their governors. To inform the minds of the people, and to follow
their will, is the chief duty of those placed at their head. What party
in your late struggles was most likely to do this, you are more
competent to judge than I am. Under every event, that you may be safe
and happy, is the sincere wish of him, who has the honor to be, with
sentiments of great esteem, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO MADAME DE CORNY.

PARIS, October 18, 1787.


I now have the honor, Madam, to send you the Memoire of M. de Calonnes.
Do not injure yourself by hurrying its perusal. Only, when you shall
have read it at your ease, be so good as to send it back, that it may
be returned to the Duke of Dorset. You will read it with pleasure. It
has carried comfort to my heart, because it must do the same to the
King and the nation. Though it does not prove M. de Calonnes to be more
innocent than his predecessors, it shows him not to have been that
exaggerated scoundrel, which the calculations and the clamors of the
public have supposed. It shows that the public treasures have not been
so inconceivably squandered, as the parliaments of Grenoble, Thoulouse,
etc., had affirmed. In fine, it shows him less wicked, and France less
badly governed, than I had feared. In examining my little collection of
books, to see what it could furnish you on the subject of Poland; I
find a small piece which may serve as a supplement to the history I had
sent you. It contains a mixture of history and politics, which I think
you will like.

How do you do this morning? I have feared you exerted and exposed
yourself too much yesterday. I ask you the question, though I shall not
await its answer. The sky is clearing, and I shall away to my
hermitage. God bless you, my dear Madam, now and always. Adieu.




TO THE COUNT DE MONTMORIN.

PARIS, October 23, 1787.


SIR,--I take the liberty of troubling your Excellency on the subject of
the _Arret_ which has lately appeared, for prohibiting the importation
of whale oils and spermaceti, the produce of foreign fisheries. This
prohibition being expressed in general terms, seems to exclude the
whale oils of the United States of America, as well as of the nations
of Europe. The uniform disposition, however, which his Majesty and his
ministers have shown to promote the commerce between France and the
United States, by encouraging our productions to come hither, and
particularly those of our fisheries, induces me to hope, that these
were not within their view, at the passing of this _Arret_. I am led
the more into this opinion, when I recollect the assiduity exercised
for several months, in the year 1785, by the committee appointed by
government to investigate the objects of commerce of the two countries,
and to report the encouragements of which it was susceptible; the
result of that investigation, which his Majesty's Comptroller General
did me the honor to communicate, in a letter of the 22d of October,
1786, stating therein the principles which should be established for
the future regulations of that commerce, and particularly
distinguishing the articles of whale oils by an abatement of the duties
of them for the present, and a promise of further abatement after the
year 1790; the thorough re-investigation with which Monsieur de Lambert
honored this subject, when the letter of 1786 was to be put into the
form of an _Arret_; that _Arret_ itself, bearing date the 29th of
December last, which ultimately confirmed the abatements of duty
present and future, and declared that his Majesty reserved to himself
to grant other favors to that production, if on further information, he
should find it for the interest of the two nations; and finally, the
letter in which Monsieur de Lambert did me the honor to enclose the
_Arret_, and to assure me, that the duties which had been levied on our
whale oils, contrary to the intention of the letter of 1786, should be
restored. On a review, then, of all these circumstances, I cannot but
presume, that it has not been intended to reverse, in a moment, views
so maturely digested, and uniformly pursued; and that the general
expressions of the _Arret_ of September the 28th had within their
contemplation the nations of Europe only. This presumption is further
strengthened by having observed, that in the treaties of commerce, made
since the epoch of our independence, the _jura gentis amicissimæ_
conceded to other nations, are expressly restrained to those of the
"most favored _European_ nation;" his Majesty wisely foreseeing, that
it would be expedient to regulate the commerce of a nation, which
brings nothing but raw materials to employ the industry of his
subjects, very differently from that of the European nations, who bring
mostly what has already passed through all the stages of manufacture.

On these circumstances, I take the liberty of asking information from
your Excellency, as to the extent of the late _Arret_; and if I have
not been mistaken in supposing it did not mean to abridge that of
December the 29th, I would solicit an explanatory _Arret_, to prevent
the misconstructions of it, which will otherwise take place. It is much
to be desired, too, that this explanation could be given as soon as
possible, in order that it may be handed out with the _Arret_ of
September the 28th. Great alarm may otherwise spread among the
merchants and adventurers in the fisheries, who, confiding in the
stability of regulations, which his Majesty's wisdom had so long and
well matured, have embarked their fortunes in speculations in this
branch of business.

The importance of the subject to one of the principal members of our
Union induces me to attend with great anxiety, the re-assurance from
your Excellency, that no change has taken place in his Majesty's views
on this subject; and that his dispositions to multiply, rather than
diminish the combinations of interest between the two people, continue
unaltered.

Commerce is slow in changing its channel. That between this country and
the United States, is as yet but beginning; and this beginning has
received some checks. The _Arret_ in question would be a considerable
one, without the explanation I have the honor to ask. I am persuaded,
that a continuation of the dispositions which have been hitherto
manifested towards us, will insure effects, political and commercial,
of value to both nations.

I have had too many proofs of the friendly interest your Excellency is
pleased to take, in whatever may strengthen the bands and connect the
views of the two countries, to doubt your patronage of the present
application; or to pretermit any occasion of repeating assurances of
those sentiments of high respect and esteem with which I have the honor
to be, your Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR L'ABBÉ DE MORELLET.

PARIS, Oct. 24, 1787


SIR,--I wish it were in my power to announce to the Count de Cambrai
that the Treasury Board of the United States had enabled their banker
here to answer the demands of the foreign officers. But it is not. As
soon as I knew that there was a deficiency of money to pay the interest
of this demand I informed the Treasury Board of it. They answered me
they would supply the necessary fund as soon as it should be in their
power; and I am persuaded they have not failed in inclination to do it.
Of this I had the honor to notify the Count de Cambrai the last year.
It is not unknown to you that the pursuit of our new machine of
government which works the worst, is that which respects the raising
money; and it is that which has occasioned the late attempts to amend
our confederation. Foreseeing that our Treasury Board might not be able
to remit money from America, I suggested to Congress the expediency of
borrowing money in Holland to pay off the foreign officers. And in the
month of July last, being assured they could command the money in
Holland, I pressed a more particular proposition to this purpose. As I
do not foresee any possible objection to the proposition I made them, I
think myself sure of their acceding to it, and that I may receive news
of it in the month of December. I may be disappointed as to the time of
receiving their answer, because the course of their business is slow;
but I do not apprehend it will be much retarded, and still less that
they will refuse it altogether. The moment I receive an answer, the
Count de Cambrai may be assured it shall be communicated to him. In
doing this I shall gratify not only my personal friendship for him, but
also those sentiments of particular esteem and attachment with which I
have the honor to be, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO THE HONORABLE JOHN JAY.

PARIS, Oct. 27, 1787.


SIR,--When I had the honor of addressing you on the 8th instant, the
appearances of war were such, that no one would have been surprised to
hear that hostilities were actually commenced at sea. The preparations
were pushed with such vivacity on the part of England, that it was
believed she had other objects in view than those she spoke out.
However, having protected by her countenance the establishment of the
Stadtholder by the Prussian troops, and completely detached the Court
of Berlin from that of Versailles, she made a proposition to the latter
to disarm, which was agreed to. Mutual declarations for this purpose
were signed last night at Versailles, of which I have now the honor to
enclose you copies.

Commissaries are to be appointed on each side to see that the disarming
takes place. The Count de Moustier having been detained at Brest a
fortnight by contrary wind, and this continuing obstinately in the same
point, admits a possibility that this letter may yet reach Brest before
his departure. It passes through the post office and will be opened and
read of course. I shall have the honor of addressing you more fully a
week hence by a private hand. I have now that of assuring you of the
sincerity of that esteem and respect with which I have the honor to be,
Sir, your most obedient and most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, November 3, 1787.


SIR,--My last letters to you were of the 8th and 27th of October. In
the former, I mentioned to you the declaration of this country, that
they would interpose with force, if the Prussian troops entered
Holland; the entry of those troops into Holland; the declaration of
England, that if France did oppose force, they would consider it as an
act of war; the naval armaments on both sides; the nomination of the
Bailli de Suffrein as Generalissimo on the ocean; and the cold
reception of Mr. Granville here, with his conciliatory propositions, as
so many symptoms which seemed to indicate a certain and immediate
rupture. It was indeed universally and hourly expected. But the King of
Prussia, a little before these last events, got wind of the alliance on
the carpet between France and the two empires; he awaked to the
situation in which that would place him; he made some applications to
the court of St. Petersburg, to divert the Empress from the proposed
alliance, and supplicated the court of London not to abandon him. That
court had also received a hint of the same project; both seemed to
suspect, for the first time, that it would be possible for France to
abandon the Turks, and that they were likely to get more than they had
played for at Constantinople, for they had meant nothing more there,
than to divert the Empress and Emperor from the affairs of the west, by
employing them in the east, and at the same time, to embroil them with
France as the patroness of the Turks. The court of London engaged not
to abandon Prussia: but both of them relaxed a little the tone of their
proceedings. The King of Prussia sent a Mr. Alvensleben here expressly
to explain and soothe: the King of England, notwithstanding the cold
reception of his propositions by Granville, renewed conferences here
through Eden and the Duke of Dorset. The Minister, in the affection of
his heart for peace, readily joined in conference, and a declaration
and counter-declaration were cooked up at Versailles, and sent to
London for approbation. They were approved, arrived here at one o'clock
the 27th, were signed that night at Versailles, and on the next day, I
had the honor of enclosing them to you, under cover to the Count de
Moustier, whom I supposed still at Brest, dating my letter as of the
27th, by mistake for the 28th. Lest, however, these papers should not
have got to Brest before the departure of the Count de Moustier, I now
enclose you other copies. The English declaration states a notification
of this court, in September, by Barthelemy, their Minister at London,
"that they would send succours into Holland," as the first cause of
England's arming; desires an explanation of the intentions of this
court, as to the affairs of Holland, and proposes to disarm; on
condition, however, that the King of France shall not retain any
hostile views in any quarter, for what has been done in Holland. This
last phrase was to secure Prussia, according to promise. The King of
France acknowledges the notification by his Minister at London,
promises he will do nothing in consequence of it, declares he has no
intention to intermeddle with force in the affairs of Holland, and that
he will entertain hostile views in no quarter, for what has been done
there. He disavows having ever had any intention to interpose with
force in the affairs of that republic. This disavowal begins the
sentence, which acknowledges he had notified the contrary to the court
of London, and it includes no apology to soothe the feelings which may
be excited in the breasts of the Patriots of Holland, at hearing the
King declare he never did intend to aid them with force, when promises
to do this were the basis of those very attempts to better their
constitution, which have ended in its ruin, as well as their own.

I have analyzed these declarations, because, being somewhat wrapped up
in their expressions, their full import might escape, on a transient
reading; and it is necessary it should not escape. It conveys to us the
important lesson, that no circumstances of morality, honor, interest,
or engagement, are sufficient to authorize a secure reliance on any
nation, at all times, and in all positions. A moment of difficulty, or
a moment of error, may render forever useless the most friendly
dispositions in the King, in the major part of his ministers, and the
whole of his nation. The present pacification is considered by most as
only a short truce. They calculate on the spirit of the nation, and not
on the agued hand which guides its movements. It is certain, that from
this moment the whole system of Europe changes. Instead of counting
together England, Austria, and Russia, as heretofore, against France,
Spain, Holland, Prussia, and Turkey, the division will probably be,
England, Holland, and Prussia, against France, Austria, Russia, and
perhaps Spain. This last power is not sure, because the dispositions of
its heir apparent are not sure. But whether the present be truce or
peace, it will allow time to mature the conditions of the alliance
between France and the two empires, always supposed to be on the
carpet. It is thought to be obstructed by the avidity of the Emperor,
who would swallow a good part of Turkey, Silesia, Bavaria, and the
rights of the Germanic body. To the two or three first articles, France
might consent, receiving in gratification a well-rounded portion of the
Austrian Netherlands, with the islands of Candia, Cyprus, Rhodes, and
perhaps lower Egypt. But all this is in embryo, uncertainty known, and
counterworked by the machinations of the courts of London and Berlin.

The following solution of the British armaments is supposed in a letter
of the 25th ultimo, from Colonel Blachden of Connecticut, now at
Dunkirk, to the Marquis de La Fayette. I will cite it in his own
words:--"A gentleman who left London two days ago, and came to this
place to-day, informs me that it is now generally supposed that Mr.
Pitt's great secret, which has puzzled the whole nation so long, and to
accomplish which design the whole force of the nation is armed, is to
make a vigorous effort for the recovery of America. When I recollect
the delay they have made in delivering the forts in America, and that
little more than a year ago, one of the British ministry wrote to the
King a letter, in which were these remarkable words, 'if your Majesty
pleases, America may yet be yours;' add to this, if it were possible
for the present ministry in England to effect such a matter, they would
secure their places and their power for a long time, and should they
fail in the end, they would be certain of holding them during the
attempt, which it is in their power to prolong as much as they please,
and, at all events, they would boast of having endeavored the recovery
of what a former ministry had abandoned--it is possible." A similar
surmise has come in a letter from a person in Rotterdam to one at this
place. I am satisfied that the King of England believes the mass of our
people to be tired of their independence, and desirous of returning
under his government; and that the same opinion prevails in the
ministry and nation. They have hired their news writers to repeat this
lie in their gazettes so long, that they have become the dupes of it
themselves. But there is no occasion to recur to this, in order to
account for their arming. A more rational purpose avowed, that purpose
executed, and when executed, a solemn agreement to disarm, seem to
leave no doubt that the re-establishment of the Stadtholder was their
object. Yet it is possible, that having found that this court will not
make war in this moment for any ally, new views may arise, and they may
think the moment favorable for executing any purposes they may have, in
our quarter. Add to this, that reason is of no aid in calculating their
movements. We are, therefore, never safe till our magazines are filled
with arms. The present season of truce or peace, should, in my opinion,
be improved without a moment's respite, to effect this essential
object, and no means be omitted, by which money may be obtained for the
purpose. I say this, however, with due deference to the opinion of
Congress, who are better judges of the necessity and practicability of
the measure.

I mentioned to you, in a former letter, the application I had made to
the Dutch ambassadors and Prussian envoy, for the protection of Mr.
Dumas. The latter soon after received an assurance, that he was put
under the protection of the States of Holland; and the Dutch Ambassador
called on me a few days ago, to inform me, by instruction from his
constituents, "that the States General had received a written
application from Mr. Adams, praying their protection of Dumas; that
they had instructed their _greffier_, Fagel, to assure Mr. Adams, by
letter, that he was under the protection of the States of Holland; but
to inform him, at the same time, that Mr. Dumas' conduct, out of the
line of his office, had been so extraordinary, that they would expect
_de l'honnêteté_ de Mr. Adams, that he would charge some other person
with the affairs of the United States, during his absence."

Your letter of September the 8th, has been duly received. I shall pay
due attention to the instructions relative to the medals, and give any
aid I can in the case of Boss' vessel. As yet, however, my endeavors to
find Monsieur Pauly, _avocat au conseil d'état, rue Coquilliere_, have
been ineffectual. There is no such person living in that street. I
found a Monsieur Pauly, _avocat au parlement_, in another part of the
town; he opened the letter, but said it could not mean him. I shall
advertise in the public papers. If that fails, there will be no other
chance of finding him. Mr. Warnum will do well, therefore, to send some
other description by which the person may be found. Indeed, some friend
of the party interested should be engaged to follow up this business,
as it will require constant attention, and probably a much larger sum
of money than that named in the bill enclosed in Mr. Warnum's letter.

I have the honor to enclose you a letter from O'Bryan to me, containing
information from Algiers, and one from Mr. Montgomery, at Alicant. The
purpose of sending you this last, is to show you how much the
difficulties of ransom are increased since the Spanish negotiations.
The Russian captives have cost about eight thousand livres apiece, on
an average. I certainly have no idea that we should give any such sum;
and, therefore, if it should be the sense of Congress to give such a
price, I would be glad to know it by instruction. My idea is, that we
should not ransom, but on the footing of the nation which pays least,
that it may be as little worth their while to go in pursuit of us, as
any nation. This is cruelty to the individuals now in captivity, but
kindness to the hundreds that would soon be so, were we to make it
worth the while of those pirates to go cut of the Straits in quest of
us. As soon as money is provided, I shall put this business into train.
I have taken measures to damp at Algiers all expectations of our
proposing to ransom, at any price. I feel the distress which this must
occasion to our countrymen there, and their connections; but the object
of it is their ultimate good, by bringing down their holders to such a
price as we ought to pay, instead of letting them remain in such
expectations as cannot be gratified. The gazettes of France and Leyden
accompany this.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient humble servant.

[_The annexed are translations of the declaration and
counter-declaration, referred to in the preceding letter._]

DECLARATION.

The events which have taken place in the republic of the United
provinces, appearing no longer to leave any subject of discussion, and
still less of dispute, between the two courts, the undersigned are
authorized to ask, if it be the intention of his most Christian Majesty
to act in pursuance of the notification given, on the 16th of last
month, by the Minister Plenipotentiary of his most Christian Majesty,
which announcing his purpose of aiding Holland, has occasioned maritime
armaments on the part of his Majesty, which armaments have become
reciprocal.

If the court of Versailles is disposed to explain itself on this
subject, and on the conduct adopted towards the republic, in a manner
conformably to the desire evinced by each party, to preserve a good
understanding between the two courts, it being also understood, at the
same time, that no hostile view is entertained in any quarter, in
consequence of the past; his Majesty, always eager to manifest his
concurrence in the friendly sentiments of his most Christian Majesty,
agrees forthwith that the armaments, and, in general, all preparations
for war, shall be mutually discontinued, and that the marines of the
two nations shall be placed on the footing of a peace establishment,
such as existed on the first of January of the present year.

Signed. { DORSET.
        { WM. EDEN.

At Versailles, the 27th of October, 1787.


COUNTER-DECLARATION.

It neither being, nor ever having been, the intention of his Majesty to
interpose by force in the affairs of the republic of the United
provinces, the communication made to the court of London by M.
Barthelemy, having had no other object than to announce to that court
an intention, the motives of which no longer exist, _especially since
the King of Prussia has made known his resolution_, his Majesty makes
no difficulty in declaring, that he has no wish to act in pursuance of
the communication aforesaid, and that he entertains no hostile view in
any quarter, relative to what has passed in Holland.

Consequently, his Majesty, desiring to concur in the sentiments of his
Britannic Majesty, for the preservation of a good understanding between
the two courts, consents with pleasure to the proposition of his
Britannic Majesty, that the armaments, and, in general, all
preparations for war, shall be mutually discontinued, and that the
marines of the two nations shall be replaced upon the footing of the
peace establishment, as it existed on the first day of January of the
present year.

Signed. MONTMORIN.

At Versailles, the 27th of October, 1787.




TO JOHN JAY.

(Private.) PARIS, November 3, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I shall take the liberty of confiding sometimes to a private
letter such details of the small history of the court or cabinet, as
may be worthy of being known, and yet not proper to be publicly
communicated. I doubt whether the administration is yet in a permanent
form. The Count de Montmorin and Baron de Breteuil are, I believe, firm
enough in their places. It was doubted whether they would wait for the
Count de La Luzerne, if the war had taken place; but at present, I
suppose they will. I wish it also, because M. de Hector, his only
competitor, has on some occasions shown little value for the connection
with us. Lambert, the Comptroller General, is thought to be very
insecure. I should be sorry also to lose him. I have worked several
days with him, the Marquis de La Fayette, and Monsieur du Pont, (father
of the young gentleman gone to America with the Count de Moustier) to
reduce into one _Arret_, whatever concerned our commerce. I have found
him a man of great judgment and application, possessing good general
principles on subjects of commerce, and friendly dispositions towards
us. He passed the _Arret_ in a very favorable form, but it has been
opposed in the Council, and will, I fear, suffer some alteration in the
article of whale oil. That of tobacco, which was put into a separate
instrument, experiences difficulties also, which do not come from him.
M. du Pont has rendered us essential service on these occasions. I wish
his son could be so well noticed, as to make a favorable report to his
father; he would, I think, be gratified by it, and his good
dispositions be strengthened, and rendered further useful to us.
Whether I shall be able to send you these regulations by the present
packet, will depend on their getting through the Council in time. The
Archbishop continues well with his patroness. Her object is, a close
connection with her brother. I suppose he convinces her, that peace
will furnish the best occasion of cementing that connection.

It may not be uninstructive, to give you the origin and nature of his
influence with the Queen. When the Duke de Choiseul proposed the
marriage of the Dauphin with this lady, he thought it proper to send a
person to Vienna, to perfect her in the language. He asked his friend,
the Archbishop of Thoulouse, to recommend to him a proper person. He
recommended a certain Abbé. The Abbé, from his first arrival at Vienna,
either tutored by his patron, or prompted by gratitude, impressed on
the Queen's mind, the exalted talents and merit of the Archbishop, and
continually represented him as the only man fit to be placed at the
helm of affairs. On his return to Paris, being retained near the person
of the Queen, he kept him constantly in her view. The Archbishop was
named of the Assembly des Notables, had occasion enough there to prove
his talents, and Count de Vergennes, his great enemy, dying
opportunely, the Queen got him into place. He uses the Abbé even yet,
for instilling all his notions into her mind. That he has imposing
talents and patriotic dispositions, I think is certain. Good judges
think him a theorist only, little acquainted with the details of
business, and spoiling all his plans by a bungled execution. He may
perhaps undergo a severe trial. His best actions are exciting against
him a host of enemies, particularly the reduction of the pensions, and
reforms in other branches of economy. Some think the other ministers
are willing he should stay in, till he has effected this odious, yet
necessary work, and that they will then make him the scape-goat of the
transaction. The declarations too, which I send you in my public
letter, if they should become public, will probably raise an universal
cry. It will all fall on him, because Montmorin and Breteuil say,
without reserve, that the sacrifice of the Dutch has been against their
advice. He will, perhaps, not permit these declarations to appear in
this country. They are absolutely unknown; they were communicated to me
by the Duke of Dorset, and I believe no other copy has been given here.
They Till be published doubtless in England, as a proof of their
triumph, and may thence make their way into this country. If the
Premier can stem a few months, he may remain long in office, and will
never make war if he can help it. If he should be removed, the peace
will probably be short. He is solely chargeable with the loss of
Holland. True, they could not have raised money by taxes, to supply the
necessities of war; but could they do it were their finances ever so
well arranged? No nation makes war now-a-days, but by the aid of loans;
and it is probable, that in a war for the liberties of Holland, all the
treasures of that country would have been at their service. They have
now lost the cow which furnishes the milk of war. She will be on the
side of their enemies, whenever a rupture shall take place; and no
arrangement of their finances can countervail this circumstance.

I have no doubt, you permit access to the letters of your foreign
ministers, by persons only of the most perfect trust. It is in the
European system, to bribe the clerks high, in order to obtain copies of
interesting papers. I am sure you are equally attentive to the
conveyance of your letters to us, as you know that all are opened that
pass through any post-office of Europe. Your letters which come by the
packet, if put into the mail at New York, or into the post-office at
Havre, wear proofs that they have been opened. The passenger to whom
they are confided, should be cautioned always to keep them in his own
hands, till he can deliver them personally in Paris.

I have the honor to be, with very sincere esteem and respect, dear Sir,
your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO THE COUNT DE MONTMORIN.

PARIS, November 6, 1787.


SIR,--I take the liberty of asking your Excellency's perusal of the
enclosed case of an American hostage, confined in the prisons of
Dunkirk. His continuance seems to be useless, and yet endless. Not
knowing how far the government can interfere for his relief, as it is a
case wherein private property is concerned, I do not presume to ask his
liberation absolutely; but I will solicit from your Excellency such
measures in his behalf, as the laws and usages of the country may
permit.

The Comptroller General having been so good as to explain to me in a
conversation that he wished to know what duties were levied in England
on American whale oil, I have had the honor of informing him by letter,
that the ancient duties on that article are seventeen pounds, six
shillings and six pence sterling, the ton, and that some late
additional duties make them amount to about eighteen pounds sterling.
That the common whale oil sells there but for about twenty pounds
sterling, the ton, and of course the duty amounts to a prohibition.
This duty was originally laid on all foreign fish oil, with a view to
favor the British and American fisheries. When we became independent,
and, of course, foreign to great Britain, we became subject to the
foreign duty. No duty, therefore, which France may think proper to lay
on this article, can drive it to the English market. It could only
oblige the inhabitants of Nantucket to abandon their fishery. But the
poverty of their soil offering them no other resource, they must quit
their country, and either establish themselves in Nova Scotia, where,
as British fishermen, they may participate of the British premium, in
addition to the ordinary price of their whale oil, or they must accept
the conditions which this government offers, for the establishment they
have proposed at Dunkirk. Your Excellency will judge, what conditions
may counterbalance, in their minds, the circumstances of the vicinity
of Nova Scotia, sameness of language, laws, religion, customs and
kindred. Remaining in their native country, to which they are most
singularly attached, excluded from commerce with England, taught to
look to France as the only country from which they can derive
sustenance, they will, in case of war, become useful rovers against its
enemies. Their position, their poverty, their courage, their address
and their hatred, will render them formidable scourges on the British
commerce. It is to be considered then, on the one hand, that the duty
which M. de Calonnes had proposed to retain on their oil, may endanger
the shifting this useful body of seamen out of our joint scale into
that of the British; and also may suppress a considerable subject of
exchange for the productions of France: on the other hand, that it may
produce an addition to his Majesty's revenue. What I have thus far
said, is on the supposition, that the duty may operate a diminution of
the price received by the fishermen. If it act in the contrary
direction, and produce an augmentation of price to the consumer, it
immediately brings into competition a variety of other oils, vegetable
and animal, a good part of which France receives from abroad, and the
fisherman thus losing his market, is compelled equally to change either
his calling or country. When M. de Calonnes first agreed to reduce the
duties to what he has declared, I had great hopes the commodity could
bear them, and that it would become a medium of commerce between France
and the United States. I must confess, however, that my expectations
have not been fulfilled, and that but little has come here as yet. This
induces me to fear, that it is so poor an article, that any duty
whatever will suppress it. Should this take place, and the spirit of
emigration once seize those people, perhaps an abolition of all duty
might then come too late to stop, what it would now easily prevent. I
fear there is danger in the experiment; and it remains for the wisdom
of his Majesty and his ministers to decide, whether the prospect of
gain to the revenue, or establishing a national fishery, may compensate
this danger. If the Government should decide to retain the duty, I
shall acquiesce in it cheerfully, and do everything in my power to
encourage my countrymen still to continue their occupation.

The actual session of our several legislatures would render it
interesting to forward immediately the regulations proposed on our
commerce; and the expiration of the order of Bernis, at the close of
this month, endangers a suspension and derangement in the commerce of
tobacco, very embarrassing to the merchants of the two countries.
Pardon me, therefore, Sir, if I appear solicitous to obtain the
ultimate decision of his Majesty's Council on these subjects and to ask
as early a communication of that decision, as shall be convenient.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most profound esteem and
respect, your Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.


[Illustration: John Jay
 Photogravure from the Original Painting by Stuart and Trumbull]




TO THE HON. JOHN JAY.

PARIS, November 7, 1787.


SIR,--By a letter of the 2d instant, from the Count de Moustier, I
perceive he is still at Brest. The wind has been now near a month in
the south-western quarter, and if it remains there a few days longer,
my despatches by the packet may reach you as soon as those by Monsieur
de Moustier. This being the last post which can reach the packet,
should she sail on the 10th, I avail myself of it to inform you of the
only circumstance, since the date of my letters delivered to Mr.
Stuart, worth your knowledge; that is the appointment of the Chevalier
de La Luzerne, Ambassador to the Court of London. This fortunate issue
of those expectations which made him unwilling to return to America,
together with the character of his successor, will, I hope, render it
pleasing to Congress that his return was not too much pressed. He would
have gone back with dispositions toward us very different from those he
will carry for us to the Court of London. He has been constantly
sensible that we wished his return, and that we could have procured it,
but that we did not wish to stand in the way of his promotion. He will
view this as in some measure the effect of our indulgence, and I think
we may count on his patronage and assistance wherever they may be
useful to us. I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most
perfect esteem and respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, November 13, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--This will be delivered you by young Mr. Rutledge. Your
knowledge of his father will introduce him to your notice. He merits it
moreover, on his own account.

I am now to acknowledge your favors of Oct. the 8th and 26th. That of
Aug. 25th was duly received, nor can I recollect by what accident I was
prevented from acknowledging it in mine of Sept. the 28th. It has been
the source of my subsistence hitherto, and must continue to be so, till
I receive letters on the affairs of money from America. Van Staphorsts
and Willinks have answered my drafts. Your books for the Marquis de La
Fayette are received here. I will notify it to him, who is at present
with his Provincial Assembly in Auvergne.

Little is said lately of the progress of the negotiations between the
courts of Petersburg, Vienna and Versailles. The distance of the
former, and the cautious, unassuming character of its minister here, is
one cause of delays: a greater one is, the greediness and unstable
character of the Emperor. Nor do I think that the Principal here will
be easily induced to lend himself to any connection, which shall
threaten a war within a considerable number of years. His own reign
will be that of peace only, in all probability; and were any accident
to tumble him down, this country would immediately gird on its sword
and buckler, and trust to occurrences for supplies of money. The wound
their honor has sustained festers in their hearts; and it may be said
with truth, that the Archbishop, and a few priests determined to
support his measures, because, proud to see their order come again into
power, are the only advocates for the line of conduct which has been
pursued. It is said and believed through Paris literally, that the
Count de Montmorin, "_pleuroit comme un enfant_," when obliged to sign
the counter-declaration. Considering the phrase as figurative, I
believe it expresses the distress of his heart. Indeed, he has made no
secret of his individual opinion. In the meantime, the Principal goes
on with a firm and patriotic spirit, in reforming the cruel abuses of
the government, and preparing a new constitution, which will give to
this people as much liberty as they are capable of managing. This, I
think, will be the glory of his administration, because, though a good
theorist in finance, he is thought to execute badly. They are about to
open a loan of one hundred millions, to supply present wants, and it is
said, the preface of the _Arret_ will contain a promise of the
convocation of the States General, during the ensuing year. Twelve or
fifteen Provincial Assemblies are already in action, and are going on
well; and I think, that though the nation suffers in reputation, it
will gain infinitely in happiness, under the present administration. I
enclose to Mr. Jay, a pamphlet which I will beg of you to forward. I
leave it open for your perusal. When you shall have read it, be so good
as to stick a wafer in it. It is not yet published, nor will be for
some days. This copy has been ceded to me as a favor.

How do you like our new constitution? I confess there are things in it
which stagger all my dispositions to subscribe to what such an Assembly
has proposed. The house of federal representatives will not be adequate
to the management of affairs, either foreign or federal. Their
President seems a bad edition of a Polish King. He may be elected from
four years to four years, for life. Reason and experience prove to us,
that a chief magistrate, so continuable, is an office for life. When
one or two generations shall have proved that this is an office for
life, it becomes, on every occasion, worthy of intrigue, of bribery, of
force, and even of foreign interference. It will be of great
consequence to France and England, to have America governed by a
Galloman or Angloman. Once in office, and possessing the military force
of the Union, without the aid or check of a council, he would not be
easily dethroned, even if the people could be induced to withdraw their
votes from him. I wish that at the end of the four years, they had made
him forever ineligible a second time. Indeed, I think all the good of
this new constitution might have been couched in three or four new
articles, to be added to the good, old and venerable fabric, which
should have been preserved even as a religious relique. Present me and
my daughters affectionately to Mrs. Adams. The younger one continues to
speak of her warmly. Accept yourself, assurances of the sincere esteem
and respect with which I have the honor to be, dear Sir, your friend
and servant.

P. S. I am in negotiation with de La Blancharie. You shall hear from me
when arranged.




TO COLONEL SMITH.

PARIS, November 13, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of
October the 4th, 8th, and 26th. In the last, you apologize for your
letters of introduction to Americans coming here. It is so far from
needing apology on your part, that it calls for thanks on mine. I
endeavor to show civilities to all the Americans who come here, and who
will give me opportunities of doing it; and it is a matter of comfort
to know, from a good quarter, what they are, and how far I may go in my
attentions to them.

Can you send me Woodmason's bills for the two copying presses for the
Marquis de La Fayette and the Marquis de Chastellux? The latter makes
one article in a considerable account, of old standing, and which I
cannot present for want of this article. I do not know whether it is to
yourself or Mr. Adams, I am to give my thanks for the copy of the new
constitution. I beg leave through you to place them where due. It will
yet be three weeks before I shall receive them from America. There are
very good articles in it, and very bad. I do not know which
preponderate. What we have lately read, in the history of Holland, in
the chapter on the Stadtholder, would have sufficed to set me against a
chief magistrate, eligible for a long duration, if I had ever been
disposed towards one; and what we have always read of the elections of
Polish Kings should have forever excluded the idea of one continuable
for life. Wonderful is the effect of impudent and persevering lying.
The British ministry have so long hired their gazetteers to repeat, and
model into every form, lies about our being in anarchy, that the world
has at length believed them, the English nation has believed them, the
ministers themselves have come to believe them, and what is more
wonderful, we have believed them ourselves. Yet where does this anarchy
exist? Where did it ever exist, except in the single instance of
Massachusetts? And can history produce an instance of rebellion so
honorably conducted? I say nothing of its motives. They were founded in
ignorance, not wickedness. God forbid we should ever be twenty years
without such a rebellion. The people cannot be all, and always, well
informed. The part which is wrong will be discontented, in proportion
to the importance of the facts they misconceive. If they remain quiet
under such misconceptions, it is a lethargy, the forerunner of death to
the public liberty. We have had thirteen States independent for eleven
years. There has been one rebellion. That comes to one rebellion in a
century and a half, for each State. What country before, ever existed a
century and a half without a rebellion? And what country can preserve
its liberties, if its rulers are not warned from time to time, that
this people preserve the spirit of resistance? Let them take arms. The
remedy is to set them right as to facts, pardon and pacify them. What
signify a few lives lost in a century or two? The tree of liberty must
be refreshed from time to time, with the blood of patriots and tyrants.
It is its natural manure. Our convention has been too much impressed by
the insurrection of Massachusetts; and on the spur of the moment, they
are setting up a kite to keep the hen yard in order. I hope in God,
this article will be rectified before the new constitution is accepted.
You ask me if anything transpires here on the subject of South America?
Not a word. I know that there are combustible materials there, and that
they wait the torch only. But this country probably will join the
extinguishers. The want of facts worth communicating to you, has
occasioned me to give a little loose to dissertation. We must be
contented to amuse, when we cannot inform.

Present my respects to Mrs. Smith, and be assured of the sincere esteem
of, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO MR. JAMES MAURY.

PARIS, November 13, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I received your favor of October 25, the day before
yesterday only. It would be needless for me, therefore, to add to what
you already know on the subject of peace and war. The principal
minister here is so intent on domestic improvements, and on peace, as
necessary to give leisure for them, that it will not be his fault, if
it be disturbed again. It will be equally unnecessary for me to give
you a formal attestation of your being a citizen of the United States.
Should any occasion for it arise hereafter, I shall be always ready to
certify it. With respect to tobacco, the contract with Mr. Morris and
the order of Berni cease with this year. I am obtaining an arrangement
for the five years which yet remain of the present lease to the Farmers
General, by which they will be obliged to take all the tobacco for
which they shall have occasion from America, except about one-fifth
northern, which they represent as necessary. They will be obliged to
take only such as comes directly from America, without having touched
at any European port in _French_ or _American_ bottoms, and to make the
purchase in _France_. It will be particularly watched that they
purchase not a single hogshead in England. By this I hope to have
completely effected the diverting so much of the tobacco trade as
amounts to their own consumption from England to France. I am glad to
find, also, by your letter, that this operation will have the effect to
raise the price of this commodity at the English market. 24,000
hogsheads of tobacco a year, less at that market than heretofore, must
produce some change, and it could not be for the worse. The order to
the farmers will name only 14,000 hogsheads a year, but it is certain
they must extend it themselves nearly or quite to 24,000, as their
consumption is near 30,000. I am endeavoring to bring hither also,
directly, the rice of America, consumed in this country. At present
they buy it from London. I am of opinion they could consume the whole
of what is made in America, especially if the rice States will
introduce the culture of the Piedmont and Egyptian rices also, both of
which qualities are demanded here in concurrence with that of Carolina.
I have procured for them the seed from Egypt and Piedmont. The
indulgences given to American whale oil will ensure its coming here
directly. In general, I am in hopes to ensure here the transportation
of all our commodities which come to this country in American and
French bottoms exclusively, which will countervail the effect of the
British navigation act on our carrying business. The returns in French
instead of English manufactures, will take place by degrees. Supposing
that these details cannot but be agreeable to you as a merchant and as
an American, I trouble you with them; being with much sincerity, and on
all occasions, dear Sir, your friend and servant.




TO MONSIEUR DUMAS.

PARIS, December 9, 1787.


SIR,--Your letter of November 27, showing that mine of November 14, had
not then got to hand, had given me alarm for its fate, and I had sat
down to write you a second acknowledgment of the receipt of your two
favors of October 23 and 26, and to add the receipt, also, of those of
November 14, 22 and 27. A copy of my answer of November 14 was prepared
to be enclosed to you, but in that moment came your favors of November
30, December 2d and 4th, by which I perceived that the original had at
length got safe to hand. By that you have seen all that interference,
direct or indirect, on the part of Mr. Adams and myself in the business
you had done me the honor to suggest, would be improper. Your
despatches for Mr. Jay shall go with mine in the packet of this month.
These will bring the matter into the view of Congress. In the meantime
I think it would be well to avoid exciting at Brussels or anywhere else
the least expectation thereon, because it is impossible for us to know
what that body may, in its wisdom and with all circumstances under its
eye, decide should be done. They had, in the year 1784, made up their
minds as to the system of commercial principles they wished to pursue.
These were very free. They proposed them to all the powers of Europe.
All declined except Prussia. To this general opposition they may now
find it necessary to present a very different general system to which
their treaties will form cases of exception, and they may wish to
lessen rather than multiply those cases of exception. Add to this, that
it is in contemplation to change the organization of the federal
government, and they may think it better to leave the system of foreign
connection to be formed by those who are to pursue it. I only mention
these as possible considerations, without pretending to know the
sentiments of that honorable body, or any one of its members on the
subject; and to show that no expectations should be raised which might
embarrass them or embroil ourselves. The proposed change of government
seems to be the proper topic to urge as the reason why Congress may not
at this moment choose to be forming new treaties. Should they choose
it, on the other hand, the reserve of those who act for them, while
uninstructed, cannot do injury.

I find the expectation very general that the present peace will be of
short duration. There are circumstances in favor of this opinion, there
are others against it. Certain it is that this country is in a state so
unprepared as to excite astonishment. After the last war, she seems to
have reposed on her laurels, in confidence that no power would venture
to disturb that repose.

It is presumable her present ministry will prepare to vindicate their
nation and their friends. The late events have kindled a fire, which,
though smothered of necessity for the present moment, will probably
never be quenched but by signal revenge. Individuals will, in the
meantime, have incurred sufferings which that may not repair. That
yours may be lessened for the present, and relieved in future, is the
sincere wish of him who has the honor to be, with sentiments of great
esteem and regard, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO WILLIAM CARMICHAEL.

PARIS, December 11, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I am later in acknowledging the receipt of your favors of
October the 15th, and November the 5th and 15th, because we have been
long expecting a packet, which I hoped would bring communications worth
detailing to you; and she arrived only a few days ago, after a very
long passage indeed. I am very sorry you have not been able to make out
the cypher of my letter of September the 25th, because it contained
things which I wished you to know at that time. They have lost now a
part of their merit; but still, I wish you could decipher them, as
there remains a part, which it might yet be agreeable to you to
understand. I have examined the cypher from which it was written. It is
precisely a copy of those given to Messrs. Barclay and Lambe. In order
that you may examine whether yours corresponds, I will now translate
into cypher the three first lines of my letter of June the 14th.

[_Here follow three lines of cypher numbers._]

This will serve to show whether your cypher corresponds with mine, as
well as my manner of using it. But I shall not use it in future, till I
know from you the result of your re-examination of it. I have the honor
now, to return you the letter you had been so good as to enclose to me.
About the same time of Liston's conversation with you, similar ones
were held with me by Mr. Eden. He particularly questioned me on the
effect of our treaty with France, in the case of a war, and what might
be our dispositions. I told him without hesitation, that our treaty
obliged us to receive the armed vessels of France, with their prizes,
into our ports, and to refuse the admission of prizes made on her by
her enemies; that there was a clause by which we guaranteed to France
her American possessions, and which might, perhaps, force us into the
war, if these were attacked. "Then it will be war," said he, "for they
will assuredly be attacked." I added, that our dispositions would be to
be neutral, and that I thought it the interest of both those powers
that we should be so, because it would relieve both from all anxiety as
to the feeding their West India islands, and England would, moreover,
avoid a heavy land war on our continent, which would cripple all her
proceedings elsewhere. He expected these sentiments from me personally,
and he knew them to be analogous to those of our country. We had often
before had occasions of knowing each other: his peculiar bitterness
towards us had sufficiently appeared, and I had never concealed from
him, that I considered the British as our natural enemies, and as the
only nation on earth who wished us ill from the bottom of their souls.
And I am satisfied, that were our continent to be swallowed up by the
ocean, Great Britain would be in a bonfire from one end to the other.
Mr. Adams, as you know, has asked his recall. This has been granted,
and Colonel Smith is to return too; Congress having determined to put
an end to their commission at that court. I suspect and hope they will
make no new appointment.

Our new Constitution is powerfully attacked in the American newspapers.
The objections are, that its effect would be to form the thirteen
States into one; that, proposing to melt all down into one general
government, they have fenced the people by no declaration of rights;
they have not renounced the power of keeping a standing army; they have
not secured the liberty of the press; they have reserved the power of
abolishing trials by jury in civil cases; they have proposed that the
laws of the federal legislatures shall be paramount to the laws and
constitutions of the States; they have abandoned rotation in office;
and particularly, their President may be re-elected from four years to
four years, for life, so as to render him a King for life, like a King
of Poland; and they have not given him either the check or aid of a
council. To these they add calculations of expense, etc., etc., to
frighten the people. You will perceive that these objections are
serious, and some of them not without foundation. The Constitution,
however, has been received with a very general enthusiasm, and as far
as can be judged from external demonstrations, the bulk of the people
are eager to adopt it. In the eastern States the printers will print
nothing against it, unless the writer subscribes his name.
Massachusetts and Connecticut have called conventions in January, to
consider of it. In New York, there is a division. The Governor
(Clinton) is known to be hostile to it. Jersey, it is thought, will
certainly accept it. Pennsylvania is divided; and all the bitterness of
her factions has been kindled anew on it. But the party in favor of it
is strongest, both in and out of the legislature. This is the party
anciently of Morris, Wilson, etc. Delaware will do what Pennsylvania
shall do. Maryland is thought favorable to it; yet it is supposed Chase
and Paca will oppose it. As to Virginia, two of her Delegates, in the
first place, refused to sign it. These were Randolph, the Governor and
George Mason. Besides these, Henry, Harrison, Nelson, and the Lees, are
against it. General Washington will be for it, but it is not in his
character to exert himself much in the case. Madison will be its main
pillar; but though an immensely powerful one, it is questionable
whether he can bear the weight of such a host. So that the presumption
is, that Virginia will reject it. We know nothing of the dispositions
of the States south of this. Should it fall through, as is possible,
notwithstanding the enthusiasm with which it was received in the first
moment, it is probable that Congress will propose, that the objections
which the people shall make to it being once known, another convention
shall be assembled, to adopt the improvements generally acceptable, and
omit those found disagreeable. In this way, union may be produced under
a happy constitution, and one which shall not be too energetic, as are
the constitutions of Europe. I give you these details, because,
possibly, you may not have received them all. The sale of our western
lands is immensely successful. Five millions of acres have been sold at
private sale, for a dollar an acre, in certificates, and at the public
sales, some of them had sold as high as two dollars and forty cents the
acre. The sales had not been begun two months. By these means, taxes,
etc., our domestic debt, originally twenty-eight millions of dollars,
was reduced, by the 1st day of last October, to twelve millions, and
they were then in treaty for two millions of acres more, at a dollar,
private sale. Our domestic debt will thus be soon paid off, and that
done, the sales will go on for money, at a cheaper rate, no doubt, for
the payment of our foreign debt. The _petite guerre_ always waged by
the Indians, seems not to abate the ardor of purchase or emigration.
Kentucky is now counted at sixty thousand. Frankland is also growing
fast.

I have been told, that the cutting through the Isthmus of Panama, which
the world has so often wished, and supposed practicable, has at times
been thought of by the government of Spain, and that they once
proceeded so far, as to have a survey and examination made of the
ground; but that the result was, either impracticability or too great
difficulty. Probably the Count de Campomanes, or Don Ulloa, can give
you information on this head. I should be exceedingly pleased to get as
minute details as possible on it, and even copies of the survey,
report, etc., if they could be obtained at a moderate expense. I take
the liberty of asking your assistance in this.

I have the honor to be, with very great respect and esteem, Sir, your
most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, December 12, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--In the month of July, I received from Fiseaux & Co. of
Amsterdam, a letter notifying me that the principal of their loan to
the United States would become due the first day of January. I answered
them, that I had neither powers nor information on the subject, but
would transmit their letter to the board of treasury. I did so, by the
packet which sailed from Havre, August the 10th. The earliest answer
possible, would have been by the packet which arrived at Havre three or
four days ago. But by her I do not receive the scrip of a pen from
anybody. This makes me suppose, that my letters are committed to Paul
Jones, who was to sail a week after the departure of the packet; and
that possibly, he may be the bearer of orders from the treasury, to
repay Fiseaux's loan with the money you borrowed But it is also
possible, he may bring no order on the subject. The slowness with which
measures are adopted on our side the water, does not permit us to count
on punctual answers; but, on the contrary, renders it necessary for us
to suppose, in the present case, that no orders will arrive in time,
and to consider whether anything, and what, should be done? As it may
be found expedient to transfer all our foreign debts to Holland, by
borrowing there, and as it may always be prudent to preserve a good
credit in that country, because we may be forced into wars, whether we
will or not, I should suppose it very imprudent to suffer our credit to
be annihilated, for so small a sum as fifty-one thousand guilders. The
injury will be greater, too, in proportion to the smallness of the sum;
for they will ask, "How can a people be trusted for large sums, who
break their faith for such small ones?" You know best what effect it
will have on the minds of the money lenders of that country, should we
fail in this payment. You know best, also, whether it is practicable
and prudent for us, to have this debt paid without orders. I refer the
matter, therefore, wholly to your consideration, willing to participate
with you in any risk and any responsibility which may arise. I think it
one of those cases, where it is a duty to risk one's self. You will
perceive, by the enclosed, the necessity of an immediate answer, and
that, if you think anything can and should be done, all the necessary
authorities from you should accompany your letter. In the meantime,
should I receive any orders from the treasury by Paul Jones, I will
pursue them, and consider whatever you shall have proposed or done, as
_non avenue_.

I am, with much affection, dear sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO JAMES MADISON.

PARIS, December 20, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--My last to you was of October the 8th, by the Count de
Moustier. Yours of July the 18th, September the 6th and October the
24th, were successively received, yesterday, the day before, and three
or four days before that. I have only had time to read the letters; the
printed papers communicated with them, however interesting, being
obliged to lie over till I finish my despatches for the packet, which
despatches must go from hence the day after to-morrow. I have much to
thank you for; first and most for the cyphered paragraph respecting
myself. These little informations are very material towards forming my
own decisions. I would be glad even to know, when any individual member
thinks I have gone wrong in any instance. If I know myself, it would
not excite ill blood in me, while it would assist to guide my conduct,
perhaps to justify it, and to keep me to my duty, alert. I must thank
you, too, for the information in Thomas Burke's case; though you will
have found by a subsequent letter, that I have asked of you a further
investigation of that matter. It is to gratify the lady who is at the
head of the convent wherein my daughters are, and who, by her
attachment and attention to them, lays me under great obligations. I
shall hope, therefore, still to receive from you the result of all the
further inquiries my second letter had asked. The parcel of rice which
you informed me had miscarried, accompanied my letter to the Delegates
of South Carolina. Mr. Bourgoin was to be the bearer of both, and both
were delivered together into the hands of his relation here, who
introduced him to me, and who, at a subsequent moment, undertook to
convey them to Mr. Bourgoin. This person was an engraver, particularly
recommended to Dr. Franklin and Mr. Hopkinson. Perhaps he may have
mislaid the little parcel of rice among his baggage. I am much pleased
that the sale of western lands is so successful. I hope they will
absorb all the certificates of our domestic debt speedily, in the first
place, and that then, offered for cash, they will do the same by our
foreign ones.

The season admitting only of operations in the cabinet, and these being
in a great measure secret, I have little to fill a letter. I will,
therefore, make up the deficiency, by adding a few words on the
Constitution proposed by our convention.

I like much the general idea of framing a government, which should go
on of itself, peaceably, without needing continual recurrence to the
State legislatures. I like the organization of the government into
legislative, judiciary and executive. I like the power given the
legislature to levy taxes, and for that reason solely, I approve of the
greater House being chosen by the people directly. For though I think a
House so chosen, will be very far inferior to the present Congress,
will be very illy qualified to legislate for the Union, for foreign
nations, etc., yet this evil does not weigh against the good, of
preserving inviolate the fundamental principle, that the people are not
to be taxed but by representatives chosen immediately by themselves. I
am captivated by the compromise of the opposite claims of the great and
little States, of the latter to equal, and the former to proportional
influence. I am much pleased, too, with the substitution of the method
of voting by person, instead of that of voting by States; and I like
the negative given to the Executive, conjointly with a third of either
House; though I should have liked it better, had the judiciary been
associated for that purpose, or invested separately with a similar
power. There are other good things of less moment. I will now tell you
what I do not like. First, the omission of a bill of rights, providing
clearly, and without the aid of sophism, for freedom of religion,
freedom of the press, protection against standing armies, restriction
of monopolies, the eternal and unremitting force of the habeas corpus
laws, and trials by jury in all matters of fact triable by the laws of
the land, and not by the laws of nations. To say, as Mr. Wilson does,
that a bill of rights was not necessary, because all is reserved in the
case of the general government which is not given, while in the
particular ones, all is given which is not reserved, might do for the
audience to which it was addressed; but it is surely a _gratis dictum_,
the reverse of which might just as well be said; and it is opposed by
strong inferences from the body of the instrument, as well as from the
omission of the cause of our present Confederation, which had made the
reservation in express terms. It was hard to conclude, because there
has been a want of uniformity among the States as to the cases triable
by jury, because some have been so incautious as to dispense with this
mode of trial in certain cases, therefore, the more prudent States
shall be reduced to the same level of calamity. It would have been much
more just and wise to have concluded the other way, that as most of the
States had preserved with jealousy this sacred palladium of liberty,
those who had wandered, should be brought back to it; and to have
established general right rather than general wrong. For I consider all
the ill as established, which may be established. I have a right to
nothing, which another has a right to take away; and Congress will have
a right to take away trials by jury in all civil cases. Let me add,
that a bill of rights is what the people are entitled to against every
government on earth, general or particular; and what no just government
should refuse, or rest on inference.

The second feature I dislike, and strongly dislike, is the abandonment,
in every instance, of the principle of rotation in office, and most
particularly in the case of the President. Reason and experience tell
us, that the first magistrate will always be reelected if he may be
re-elected. He is then an officer for life. This once observed, it
becomes of so much consequence to certain nations, to have a friend or
a foe at the head of our affairs, that they will interfere with money
and with arms. A Galloman, or an Angloman, will be supported by the
nation he befriends. If once elected, and at a second or third election
outvoted by one or two votes, he will pretend false votes, foul play,
hold possession of the reins of government, be supported by the States
voting for him, especially if they be the central ones, lying in a
compact body themselves, and separating their opponents; and they will
be aided by one nation in Europe, while the majority are aided by
another. The election of a President of America, some years hence, will
be much more interesting to certain nations of Europe, than ever the
election of a King of Poland was. Reflect on all the instances in
history, ancient and modern, of elective monarchies, and say if they do
not give foundation for my fears; the Roman Emperors, the Popes while
they were of any importance, the German Emperors till they became
hereditary in practice, the Kings of Poland, the Deys of the Ottoman
dependencies. It may be said, that if elections are to be attended with
these disorders, the less frequently they are repeated the better. But
experience says, that to free them from disorder, they must be rendered
less interesting by a necessity of change. No foreign power, nor
domestic party, will waste their blood and money to elect a person, who
must go out at the end of a short period. The power of removing every
fourth year by the vote of the people, is a power which they will not
exercise, and if they were disposed to exercise it, they would not be
permitted. The King of Poland is removable every day by the diet. But
they never remove him. Nor would Russia, the Emperor, etc., permit them
to do it. Smaller objections are, the appeals on matters of fact as
well as laws; and the binding all persons, legislative, executive, and
judiciary by oath, to maintain that constitution. I do not pretend to
decide, what would be the best method of procuring the establishment of
the manifold good things in this constitution, and of getting rid of
the bad. Whether by adopting it, in hopes of future amendment; or after
it shall have been duly weighed and canvassed by the people, after
seeing the parts they generally dislike, and those they generally
approve, to say to them, "We see now what you wish. You are willing to
give to your federal government such and such powers; but you wish, at
the same time, to have such and such fundamental rights secured to you,
and certain sources of convulsion taken away. Be it so. Send together
deputies again. Let them establish your fundamental rights by a
sacrosanct declaration, and let them pass the parts of the Constitution
you have approved. These will give powers to your federal government
sufficient for your happiness."

This is what might be said, and would probably produce a speedy, more
perfect and more permanent form of government. At all events, I hope
you will not be discouraged from making other trials, if the present
one should fail. We are never permitted to despair of the commonwealth.
I have thus told you freely what I like, and what I dislike, merely as
a matter of curiosity; for I know it is not in my power to offer matter
of information to your judgment, which has been formed after hearing
and weighing everything which the wisdom of man could offer on these
subjects. I own, I am not a friend to a very energetic government. It
is always oppressive. It places the governors indeed more at their
ease, at the expense of the people. The late rebellion in Massachusetts
has given more alarm, than I think it should have done. Calculate that
one rebellion in thirteen States in the course of eleven years, is but
one for each State in a century and a half. No country should be so
long without one. Nor will any degree of power in the hands of
government, prevent insurrections. In England, where the hand of power
is heavier than with us, there are seldom half a dozen years without an
insurrection. In France, where it is still heavier, but less despotic,
as Montesquieu supposes, than in some other countries, and where there
are always two or three hundred thousand men ready to crush
insurrections, there have been three in the course of the three years I
have been here, in every one of which greater numbers were engaged than
in Massachusetts, and a great deal more blood was spilt. In Turkey,
where the sole nod of the despot is death, insurrections are the events
of every day. Compare again the ferocious depredations of their
insurgents, with the order, the moderation and the almost
self-extinguishment of ours. And say, finally, whether peace is best
preserved by giving energy to the government, or information to the
people. This last is the most certain, and the most legitimate engine
of government. Educate and inform the whole mass of the people. Enable
them to see that it is their interest to preserve peace and order, and
they will preserve them. And it requires no very high degree of
education to convince them of this. They are the only sure reliance for
the preservation of our liberty. After all, it is my principle that the
will of the majority should prevail. If they approve the proposed
constitution in all its parts, I shall concur in it cheerfully, in
hopes they will amend it, whenever they shall find it works wrong. This
reliance cannot deceive us, as long as we remain virtuous; and I think
we shall be so, as long as agriculture is our principal object, which
will be the case, while there remains vacant lands in any part of
America. When we get piled upon one another in large cities, as in
Europe, we shall become corrupt as in Europe, and go to eating one
another as they do there. I have tired you by this time with
disquisitions which you have already heard repeated by others a
thousand and a thousand times; and therefore, shall only add assurances
of the esteem and attachment with which I have the honor to be, dear
Sir, your affectionate friend and servant.

P. S. The instability of our laws is really an immense evil. I think it
would be well to provide in our constitutions, that there shall always
be a twelvemonth between the engrossing a bill and passing it; that it
should then be offered to its passage without changing a word; and that
if circumstances should be thought to require a speedier passage, it
should take two-thirds of both Houses, instead of a bare majority.




TO E. CARRINGTON.

PARIS, Dec. 21, 1787.


DEAR SIR,--I have just received your two favors of October the 23d and
November the 10th. I am much obliged to you for your hints in the
Danish business. They are the only information I have on that subject,
except the resolution of Congress, and warn me of a rock on which I
should most certainly have split. The vote plainly points out an agent,
only leaving it to my discretion to substitute another. My judgment
concurs with that of Congress as to his fitness. But I shall inquire
for the surest banker at Copenhagen to receive the money, not because I
should have had any doubts, but because I am informed others have them.
Against the failure of a banker, were such an accident, or any similar
one to happen, I cannot be held accountable in a case where I act
without particular interest. My principal idea in proposing the
transfer of the French debt, was, to obtain on the new loans a much
longer day for the reimbursement of the principal, hoping that the
resources of the United States could have been equal to the article of
interest alone. But I shall endeavor to quiet, as well as I can, those
interested. A part of them will probably sell out at any rate; and one
great claimant may be expected to make a bitter attack on our honor. I
am very much pleased to hear, that our western lands sell so
successfully. I turn to this precious resource, as that which will, in
every event, liberate us from our domestic debt, and perhaps too, from
our foreign one; and this, much sooner than I had expected. I do not
think any thing could have been done with them in Europe. Individual
speculators and sharpers had duped so many with their unlocated
land-warrants, that every offer would have been suspected.

As to the new Constitution, I find myself nearly a neutral. There is a
great mass of good in it, in a very desirable form; but there is also,
to me, a bitter pill or two. I have written somewhat lengthily to Mr.
Madison on this subject, and will take the liberty to refer you to that
part of my letter to him. I will add one question to what I have said
there. Would it not have been better to assign to Congress exclusively
the article of imposts for federal purposes, and to have left direct
taxation exclusively to the States? I should suppose the former fund
sufficient for all probable events, aided by the land office.

The form which the affairs of Europe may assume, is not yet
decipherable by those out of the cabinet. The Emperor gives himself, at
present, the air of a mediator. This is necessary to justify a breach
with the Porte. He has his eye at the same time on Germany, and
particularly on Bavaria, the Elector of which has, for a long time,
been hanging over the grave. Probably, France would now consent to the
exchange of the Austrian Netherlands, to be created into a kingdom for
the Duke de Deuxports, against the electorate of Bavaria. This will
require a war. The Empress longs for Turkey, and viewing France as her
principal obstacle, would gladly negotiate her acquiescence. To spur on
this, she is coquetting it with England. The King of Prussia, too, is
playing a double game between France and England. But I suppose the
former incapable of forgiving him, or of ever reposing confidence in
him. Perhaps the spring may unfold to us the final arrangement which
will take place among the powers of this continent.

I often doubt whether I should trouble Congress or my friends with
these details of European politics. I know they do not excite that
interest in America, of which it is impossible for one to divest
himself here. I know, too, that it is a maxim with us, and I think it a
wise one, not to entangle ourselves with the affairs of Europe. Still,
I think, we should know them. The Turks have practiced the same maxim
of not meddling in the complicated wrangles of this continent. But they
have unwisely chosen to be ignorant of them also, and it is this total
ignorance of Europe, its combinations and its movements, which exposes
them to that annihilation possibly about taking place. While there are
powers in Europe which fear our views, or have views on us, we should
keep an eye on them, their connections and oppositions, that in a
moment of need, we may avail ourselves of their weakness with respect
to others as well as ourselves, and calculate their designs and
movements, on all the circumstances under which they exist. Though I am
persuaded, therefore, that these details are read by many with great
indifference, yet I think it my duty to enter into them, and to run the
risk of giving too much, rather than too little information. I have the
honor to be, with perfect esteem and respect, dear Sir, your most
obedient and most humble servant.

P. S. The resolution of Congress, relative to the prize money received
here, speaks of that money as paid to me. I hope this matter is
properly understood. The treasury board desired me to receive it, and
apply it to such and such federal purposes; and they would pay the
dividends of the claimants in America. This would save the expense of
remittance. I declined, however, receiving the money, and ordered it
into the hands of their banker, who paid it away for the purposes to
which they had destined it. I should be sorry, an idea should get
abroad, that I had received the money of these poor fellows, and
applied it to other purposes. I shall, in like manner, order the Danish
and Barbary money into the hands of bankers, carefully avoiding ever to
touch a sou of it, or having any other account to make out than what
the banker will furnish.




TO THE HON. JOHN JAY.

PARIS, Dec. 21, 1787.


SIR,--The last letters I had the honor of addressing you were of the 3d
and 7th of November. Your several favors, to wit, two of July 27, two
of Oct. 24, and one of Nov. 3, have all been delivered within the
course of a week past; and I embrace the earliest occasion of returning
to Congress my sincere thanks for the new proofs I receive therein of
their confidence in me, and of assuring them of my best endeavors to
merit it. The several matters on which I receive instruction shall all
be duly attended to. The Commissioners of the Treasury inform me they
will settle the balance appropriated to the Barbary business, apprise
me of it, and place it under my power. The moment this is done, I will
take the measures necessary to effect the instructions of Congress. The
letter to you from the Governor of Rhode Island desires my attention to
the application of the claimants of the brig Apollonia, which shall
surely be complied with. I trust that an application will be made by
the claimants. It will be the more important, as the letter in this
case, as in that of the sloop Sally, formerly recommended to me, is
directed to an advocate whom all my endeavors have not enabled me to
find. I fear, therefore, that the papers in both cases must remain in
my hands till called for by the person whom the parties shall employ
for the ordinary solicitation and management of their appeals. I
suppose they will engage some person to answer from time to time the
pecuniary demands of lawyers, clerks, and other officers of the courts,
to wait upon the judges and explain their cases to them, which is the
usage here, to instruct their lawyers and confer with them whenever
necessary, and in general to give all those attentions which the
solicitation of private causes constantly require here. Their
management, indeed, is very much a matter of intrigue and of money.

The public affairs of Europe are quiet at present, except as between
the Turks and Russians; and, even these, some people suppose may be
quieted. It is thought that Russia would accommodate easily. The peace
between France and England is very generally considered as insecure. It
is said the latter is not honestly disarming; she is certainly
augmenting her land forces, and the speech of the King, and debates of
the court members, prove their diffidence in the late accommodation.
Yet it is believed their premier is a friend to peace, and there can be
no doubt of the same dispositions in the chief minister here. The
divisions continue between the King and his parliament. A promise has
been obtained for convoking the States General, as early as 1791, at
farthest. The embarrassments in the department of finance are not yet
so cleared up as that the public can see their way through them. The
arrival of the Count de La Luzerne, just now announced, will probably
put their marine operations into new activity.

I have the honor to enclose you three letters from Mr. Dumas. By one of
the 23d of October, he proposed to me that Mr. Adams and myself should
authorize him to go to Brussels on the subject he explains to you. I
wrote him the answer of Nov. 14th, by which I expected he would see
that nothing could be done, and think no more of it. His subsequent
letters, however, giving me reason to apprehend that, making too sure
of the expediency of the treaty he proposed, he might excite
expectations from that government, I wrote him the letter of Dec. 9 to
suggest to him that this proposition might not be so certainly eligible
as he seemed to expect, and to advise him to avoid doing anything which
might commit or embarrass Congress. The uneasiness of his present
situation, and the desire of a refuge from it, had probably suggested
to him this idea, and occasioned him to view it with partiality.

This will be accompanied with the gazettes of France and Leyden. There
being no passenger to go by the packet, within my knowledge, this
letter will go through the post-office. I shall, therefore, only add
assurances of the esteem and respect with which I have the honor to be,
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR LIMOZIN.

PARIS, December 22, 1787.


SIR,--I have the honor now, to acknowledge the receipt of your favors
of the 18th and 19th of November, and two of the 18th of the present
month. I did not write to you immediately on the receipt of the two
first, because the observations they contained were to be acted on
here. I was much obliged to you for them, as I have been frequently
before for others, and you will find that I have profited by them in
the _Arret_ which is to come out for the regulation of our commerce,
wherein most of the things are provided for, which you have from time
to time recommended. With respect to the article of yellow wax, I think
there is a general clause in the _Arret_, which will take it in; but I
am not sure of it. If there be not, it is now too late to get any
alteration made. You shall receive the _Arret_ the moment it is
communicated to me.

I have examined the case of Captain Thomas, with all the dispositions
possible to interpose for him. But on mature reflection, I find it is
one of those cases wherein my solicitation would be ill received. The
government of France, to secure to its subjects the carrying trade
between her colonies and the mother country, have made a law,
forbidding any foreign vessels to undertake to carry between them.
Notwithstanding this, an American vessel has undertaken, and has
brought a cargo. For me to ask that this vessel shall be received,
would be to ask a repeal of the law, because there is no more reason
for receiving her, than there will be for receiving the second, third,
etc., which shall act against the same law, nor for receiving an
American vessel, more than the vessels of any other nations. Captain
Thomas has probably engaged in this business, not knowing the law; but
ignorance of the law is no excuse, in any country. If it were, the laws
would lose their effect, because it can be always pretended. Were I to
make this application to the Comptroller General, he might possibly ask
me, whether, in a like case, of a French vessel in America acting
through ignorance, against law, we would suspend the law as to her? I
should be obliged honestly to answer, that with us, there is no power
which can suspend the law for a moment; and Captain Thomas knows that
this answer would be the truth. The Senegal company seems to be as much
engaged in it as he is. I should suppose his most probable means of
extrication would be with their assistance, and availing himself of
their privileges, and the apparent authority he has received from the
officers of government there. I am sorry his case is such a one as I
cannot present to the minister. A jealousy of our taking away their
carrying trade, is the principal reason which obstructs our admission
into their West India islands. It would not be right for me to
strengthen that jealousy.

I have the honor to be, with much esteem, Sir, your most obedient
humble servant.




TO THE BOARD OF TREASURY.

PARIS, Dec. 30, 1787.


GENTLEMEN,--In my letter of Aug. 5, I had the honor of enclosing to you
a letter written me by Messrs. Fiseaux & Co., reminding us that the
principal of the loan of 51,000 florins obtained by them, would become
due on the first day of the ensuing year. A few days ago, I received
another from them calling for the money. At first I was disposed to
answer them that I was in nowise authorized to do anything in it, and
that it rested with you altogether. But, on consulting with some
persons better acquainted with the delicacy of credit in Holland, I
found there was reason to fear that a failure to pay that money might
not only do essential injury to our credit in general, but even hinder
the progress of the loan going on in the hands of Willincks and Van
Staphorsts; and that it would be for the interest of that loan itself,
to pay this demand out of it, if possible. I wrote, therefore, to Mr.
Adams, to consult him about it, and to know, if he was of the same
opinion, whether he would venture to join me in directing such an
application of the money. I wrote at the same to Willincks and Van
Staphorsts, to know whether they could have as much in their hands to
spare, and whether they would venture to pay it on our order. Mr. Adams
approved of the proposition, and was willing to join in ordering the
payment. Willincks and Van Staphorsts answered that they had in their
hands money enough to pay the February interest of the former loan, and
to answer, for some time yet, Mr. Adams' and my draughts for our
subsistence; but that if they should pay the principal of Fiseaux's
loan, it would be an advance of their own: they likewise observed, that
to pay such a sum without your orders, placed them under an unnecessary
responsibility. Upon this, I concluded to ask them only to pay this
year's interest, now becoming due, to desire Fiseaux to receive this,
and with it to endeavor to quiet the creditors till your orders could
be received. I have this day written to Fiseaux, and to Willincks and
Van Staphorsts to this purpose, and avail myself of a vessel about to
sail from Havre, to communicate the whole transaction to you, and to
express my wish that you will be pleased to give an answer to Fiseaux.
I enclose to you his letters to me on the subject. From what I can
learn, I suspect that if there were a cordial understanding between the
Willincks and Van Staphorsts, if the former had been as well disposed
as the latter, the matter would have been settled with Fiseaux. I have
the honor to be, with much respect, Gentlemen, your most obedient, and
most humble servant.




TO JOHN JAY.

PARIS, December 31, 1787.


SIR,--Since the receipt of the letter of Monsieur de Calonnes, of
October the 22d, 1786, I have several times had the honor of mentioning
to you, that I was endeavoring to get the substance of that letter
reduced into an _Arret_, which, instead of being revocable by a single
letter of a Comptroller General, would require an _Arret_ to repeal or
alter it, and of course must be discussed in full Council, and so give
time to prevent it. This has been pressed as much as it could be with
prudence. One cause of delay has been the frequent changes of the
Comptroller General; as we had always our whole work to begin again
with every new one. Monsieur Lambert's continuance in office for some
months, has enabled us, at length, to get through the business; and I
have just received from him a letter, and the _Arret_ duly
authenticated; of which I have the honor to send you a number of
printed copies. You will find that the several alterations and
additions are made, which, on my visit to the sea-ports, I had found to
be necessary, and which my letters of June the 21st and August the 6th,
particularly mentioned to you. Besides these, we have obtained some new
articles of value, for which openings arose in the course of the
negotiation. I say _we_ have done it, because the Marquis de La Fayette
has gone hand in hand with me through this business, and has been a
most invaluable aid. I take the liberty of making some observations on
the articles of the _Arret_, severally, for their explanation, as well
as for the information of Congress.

Article 1. In the course of our conferences with the Comptroller
General, we had prevailed on him to pass this article with a
suppression of all duty. When he reported the _Arret_, however, to the
Council, this suppression was objected to, and it was insisted to
re-establish the duties of seven livres and ten sous, and of ten sous
the livre, reserved in the letter of M. de Calonnes. The passage of the
_Arret_ was stopped, and the difficulty communicated to me. I urged
everything I could, in letters and in conferences, to convince them
that whale oil was an article which could bear no duty at all. That if
the duty fell on the consumer, he would choose to buy vegetable oils;
if on the fisherman, he could no longer live by his calling, remaining
in his own country; and that if he quitted his own country, the
circumstances of vicinity, sameness of language, laws, religion and
manners, and perhaps the ties of kindred, would draw him to Nova
Scotia, in spite of every encouragement which could be given at
Dunkirk; and that thus those fishermen would be shifted out of a scale
friendly to France, into one always hostile. Nothing, however, could
prevail. It hung on this article alone, for two months, during which we
risked the total loss of the _Arret_, on the stability in office of
Monsieur Lambert; for if he had gone out, his successor might be less
favorable; and if Monsieur Neckar were the successor, we might lose the
whole, as he never set any store by us, or the connection with us.
About ten days ago, it became universally believed that Monsieur
Lambert was to go out immediately. I, therefore, declined further
insisting on the total suppression, and desired the _Arret_ might pass,
leaving the duties on whale oil as Monsieur de Calonnes had promised
them; but with a reservation, which may countenance our bringing on
this matter again, at a more favorable moment.

Article 2. The other fish oils are placed in a separate article;
because whatever encouragements we may hereafter obtain for whale oils,
they will not be extended to those which their own fisheries produce.

Article 3. A company had silently, and by unfair means, obtained a
monopoly for the making and selling spermaceti candles: as soon as we
discovered it, we solicited its suppression, which is effected by this
clause.

Article 4. The duty of an eighth per cent. is merely to oblige the
masters of vessels to enter their cargoes, for the information of
government; without inducing them to attempt to smuggle.

Article 6. Tar, pitch and turpentine of America, coming in competition
with the same articles produced in the south-western parts of France,
we could obtain no greater reduction, than two and a-half per cent. The
duties before, were from four to six times that amount.

Article 10. The right of entrepôt given by this article, is almost the
same thing, as the making all their ports, free ports for us. The ships
are, indeed, subject to be visited, and the cargoes must be reported in
ports of entrepôt, which need not be done in the free ports. But the
communication between the entrepôt and the country, is not interrupted
by continual search of all persons passing into the country, which has
proved so troublesome to the inhabitants of our free ports, as that a
considerable proportion of them have wished to give back the privilege
of their freedom.

Article 13. This article gives us the privileges and advantages of
native subjects, in all their possessions in Asia, and in the _scales
leading thereto_. This expression means at present the isles of France
and Bourbon, and will include the Cape of Good Hope, should any future
event put it into the hands of France. It was with a view to this, that
I proposed the expression, because we were then in hourly expectation
of a war, and it was suspected that France would take possession of
that place. It will, in no case, be considered as including anything
westward of the Cape of Good Hope. I must observe further, on this
article, that it will only become valuable on the suppression of their
East India Company; because, as long as their monopoly continues, even
native subjects cannot enter their Asiatic ports for the purposes of
commerce. It is considered, however, as certain, that this Company will
be immediately suppressed.

The article of tobacco could not be introduced into the _Arret_;
because it was necessary to consider the Farmers General as parties to
that arrangement. It rests, therefore, of necessity, on the basis of a
letter only. You will perceive that this is nothing more than a
continuation of the order of Berni, only leaving the prices unfixed;
and like that, it will require a constant and vexatious attention to
have its execution enforced.

The States who have much to carry, and few carriers, will observe,
perhaps, that the benefits of these regulations are somewhat narrowed
by confining them to articles brought hither in French or American
bottoms. But they will consider that nothing in these instruments moves
from us. The advantages they hold out are all given by this country to
us, and the givers will modify their gifts as they please. I suppose it
to be a determined principle of this court not to suffer our carrying
business, so far as their consumption of our commodities extends, to
become a nursery for British seamen. Nor would this, perhaps, be
advantageous to us, considering the dispositions of the two nations
towards us. The preference which our shipping will obtain on this
account, may counterpoise the discouragements it experiences from the
aggravated dangers of the Barbary States. Nor is the idea unpleasing
which shows itself in various parts of these papers, of naturalizing
American bottoms, and American citizens in France and in its foreign
possessions. Once established here, and in their eastern settlements,
they may revolt less at the proposition to extend it to those westward.
They are not yet, however, at that point; we must be contented to go
towards it a step at a time, and trust to future events for hastening
our progress.

With respect to the alliance between this and the two imperial courts,
nothing certain transpires. We are enabled to conjecture its progress
only from facts which now and then show themselves. The following may
be considered as indications of it. 1. The Emperor has made an attempt
to surprise Belgrade. The attempt failed, but will serve to plunge him
into the war, and to show that he had assumed the character of
mediator, only to enable himself to gain some advantage by surprise. 2.
The mediation of France is probably at an end, and their abandonment of
the Turks agreed on; because they have secretly ordered their officers
to quit the Turkish service. This fact is known to but few, and not
intended to be known; but I think it certain. 3. To the offer of
mediation lately made by England and Prussia, the court of Petersburg
answered, that having declined the mediation of a friendly power,
(France,) she could not accept that of two courts, with whose
dispositions she had reason to be dissatisfied. 4. The States General
are said to have instructed their Ambassador here, lately, to ask of M.
de Montmorin, whether the inquiry had been made, which they had
formerly desired: "By what authority the French engineers had been
placed in the service of Holland?" And that he answered that the
inquiry had not been made, nor should be made. Though I do not consider
the channel through which I get this fact, as absolutely sure, yet it
is so respectable that I give credit to it myself. 5. The King of
Prussia is withdrawing his troops from Holland. Should this alliance
show itself, it would seem that France thus strengthened might dictate
the re-establishment of the affairs of Holland in her own form. For it
is not conceivable that Prussia would dare to move, nor that England
would alone undertake such a war, and for such a purpose. She appears,
indeed, triumphant at present, but the question is who will triumph
last?

I enclose you a letter from Mr. Dumas. I received one from him myself,
wherein he assures me that no difficulties shall be produced, by what
he had suggested relative to his mission to Brussels. The gazettes of
France and Leyden to this date accompany this letter, which, with the
several papers put under your cover, I shall send to M. Limozin, our
agent at Havre, to be forwarded by the Juno, Captain Jenkins, which
sails from that port for New York, on the 3d of January.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR LAMBERT.

PARIS, January 3, 1788.


SIR,--I am honored with your Excellency's letter of the 29th of
December, enclosing the _Arret_ on the commerce between France and the
United States. I availed myself of the occasion of a vessel sailing
this day from Havre for New York, to forward it to Congress. They will
receive with singular satisfaction this new testimony of his Majesty's
friendship for the United States, of his dispositions to promote their
interest, and to strengthen the bands which connect the two nations.

Permit me, Sir, to return you, personally, my sincere thanks for the
great attention you have paid to this subject, for the sacrifices you
have kindly made, of time so precious as yours, every moment of which
is demanded and is occupied by objects interesting to the happiness of
millions; and to proffer you the homage of those sincere sentiments of
attachment and respect with which I have the honor to be, your
Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR DE QUESNAY.

PARIS, January 6, 1788.


SIR,--I have never expressed an objection to the part of your plan
relative to the theatre. The utility of this in America is a great
question on which I may be allowed to have an opinion; but it is not
for me to decide on it, nor to object to the proposal of establishing
one at Richmond. The only objection to your plan which I have ever
made, is that contained in my letter to you. I feared it was too
extensive for the poverty of the country. You remove the objection by
observing, it is to extend to several States. Whether professors
itinerant from one State to another may succeed, I am unable to say,
having never known an experiment of it. The fear that these professors
may be disappointed in their expectations, has determined me not to
meddle in the business at all. Knowing how much people going to America
overrate the resources of living there, I have made a point never to
encourage any person to go there, that I may not partake of the censure
which may follow their disappointment. I beg you, therefore, not to
alter your plan in any part of it on my account, but permit me to
pursue mine of being absolutely neutral. Monsieur de La Luzerne and the
Marquis de La Fayette, know too much of the country themselves to need
any information from me, or any reference to my opinion; and the
friendly dispositions which they have towards you, will insure you
their good offices. Convinced of the honesty of your intentions and of
your zeal, I wish you every possible success, and shall be really happy
to see your plan answer your expectations. You have more courage than I
have, to take upon yourself the risk of transplanting and contenting so
many persons. I beg you to be assured of the sincerity of the esteem
with which I have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO MR. DRAYTON.

PARIS, January 13, 1788.


SIR,--By Captain Shewell, who is sailing about this time from
Marseilles to Charleston, I directed to be forwarded to you one of two
couffes of rough rice, which I had brought from Egypt. The other came
on to me here, and will be carried from Havre to New York, addressed to
you, to the care of the Delegates of South Carolina in Congress. I wish
both may arrive in time for the approaching seed time, and that the
trials with this and the Piedmont rice may furnish new advantages to
your agriculture. I have considerable hopes of receiving some dry rice
from Cochin-China, the young Prince of that country, lately gone from
hence, having undertaken that it shall come to me. But it will be some
time first. These are all but experiments; the precept, however, is
wise which directs us to try all things, and hold fast that which is
good.

Your letter of May the 22d, 1787, informs me that mine of May the 6th,
1786, had never got to hand. I now have the honor to enclose you a copy
of it, of no other consequence than to show you that I was incapable of
so insensible an inattention as the miscarriage of that letter exposed
me to the charge of in your mind. I shall take opportunities of
forwarding to you more of the seed of the Spanish Saintfoine, some of
which I have received directly from Malta. I have the honor to be, with
sentiments of the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO LE COMTE BERNSTORFF, MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, COPENHAGEN.

PARIS, January 21, 1788.


SIR,--I am instructed by the United States of America, in Congress
assembled, to bring again under the consideration of his Majesty, the
King of Denmark, and of his ministers, the case of the three prizes
taken from the English during the late war, by an American squadron
under the command of Commodore Paul Jones, put into Bergen in distress,
there rescued from our possession by orders from the court of Denmark,
and delivered back to the English. Dr. Franklin, then Minister
Plenipotentiary from the United States at the court of Versailles, had
the honor of making applications to the court of Denmark, for a just
indemnification to the persons interested, and particularly by a letter
of the 22d of December, 1779, a copy of which I have now the honor of
enclosing to your Excellency. In consequence of this, a sum of ten
thousand pounds was proposed to him, as an indemnification, through the
Baron de Waltersdorff, then at Paris. The departure of both those
gentlemen from this place, soon after, occasioned an intermission in
the correspondence on this subject. But the United States continue to
be very sensibly affected by this delivery of their prizes to Great
Britain, and the more so, as no part of their conduct had forfeited
their claim to those rights of hospitality which civilized nations
extend to each other. Not only a sense of justice due to the
individuals interested in those prizes, but also an earnest desire that
no subject of discontent may check the cultivation and progress of that
friendship which they wish may subsist and increase between the two
countries, prompt them to remind his Majesty of the transaction in
question; and they flatter themselves that his Majesty will concur with
them in thinking, that as restitution of the prizes is not practicable,
it is reasonable and just that he should render, and that they should
accept, a compensation equivalent to the value of them. And the same
principles of justice towards the parties, and of amity to the United
States, which influenced the breast of his Majesty to make, through the
Baron de Waltersdorff, the proposition of a particular sum, will surely
lead him to restore their full value, if that were greater, as is
believed, than the sum proposed. In order to obtain, therefore, a final
arrangement of this demand, Congress have authorized me to depute a
special agent to Copenhagen, to attend the pleasure of his Majesty. No
agent could be so adequate to this business, as the Commodore Paul
Jones, who commanded the squadron which took the prizes. He will,
therefore, have the honor of delivering this letter to your Excellency,
in person; of giving such information as may be material, relative to
the whole transaction; of entering into conferences for its final
adjustment, and, being himself principally interested, not only in his
own right, but as the natural patron of those who fought under him,
whatever shall be satisfactory to him, will have a great right to that
ultimate approbation, which Congress have been pleased to confide to
me.

I beg your Excellency to accept the homage of that respect which your
exalted station, talents, and merit impress, as well as those
sentiments of esteem and regard with which I have the honor to be, your
Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. WILLIAM RUTLEDGE.

PARIS, Feb. 2, 1788.


DEAR SIR,--I should sooner have answered your favor of Jan. the 2d, but
that we have expected for some time to see you here. I beg you not to
think of the trifle I furnished you with, nor to propose to return it,
till you shall have that sum more than you know what to do with. And on
every other occasion of difficulty, I hope you will make use of me
freely. I presume you will now remain at London, to see the trial of
Hastings. Without suffering yourself to be imposed on by the pomp in
which it will be enveloped, I would recommend to you to consider and
decide for yourself these questions. If his offence is to be decided by
the law of the land, why is he not tried in that court in which his
fellow-citizens are tried, that is, the King's bench? If he is cited
before another court, that he may be judged, not according to the law
of the land, but by the discretion of his judges, is he not
disfranchised of his most precious right, the benefit of the laws of
his country, in common with his fellow-citizens? I think you will find,
in investigating this subject, that every solid argument is against the
extraordinary court, and that every one in its favor is specious only.
It is a transfer from a judicature of learning and integrity, to one,
the greatness of which is both illiterate and unprincipled. Yet such is
the force of prejudice with some, and of the want of reflection in
others, that many of our constitutions have copied this absurdity,
without suspecting it to be one. I am glad to hear that our new
Constitution is pretty sure of being accepted by States enough to
secure the good it contains, and to meet with such opposition in some
others, as to give us hopes it will be accommodated to them, by the
amendment of its most glaring faults, particularly the want of a
declaration of rights.

The long expected edict of the Protestants, at length appears here. Its
analysis is this. It is an acknowledgment (hitherto withheld by the
laws) that Protestants can beget children, and that they can die, and
be offensive unless buried. It does not give them permission to think,
to speak, or to worship. It enumerates the humiliations to which they
shall remain subject, and the burthens to which they shall continue to
be unjustly exposed. What are we to think of the condition of the human
mind in a country, where such a wretched thing as this has thrown the
State into convulsions, and how must we bless our own situation in a
country, the most illiterate peasant of which is a Solon, compared with
the authors of this law. There is modesty often, which does itself
injury; our countrymen possess this. They do not know their own
superiority. You see it; you are young, you have time and talents to
correct them. Study the subject while in Europe, in all the instances
which will present themselves to you, and profit your countrymen of
them, by making them to know and value themselves.

Adieu, my dear Sir, and be assured of the esteem with which I am your
friend and servant.




TO HIS EXCELLENCY MR. ADAMS.

PARIS, Feb. 6, 1788.


DEAR SIR,--The Commissioners of the Treasury have given notice to
Willincks and Van Staphorsts, that they shall not be able to remit them
one shilling till the New Government gets into action, and that
therefore the sole resource for the payment of the Dutch interest till
that period is in the progress of the last loan. Willinck and Van
Staphorst reply that there is not the least probability of raising as
much on that loan as will pay the next June interest, and that, if that
payment fails one day, it will do an injury to our credit, which a very
long time will not wipe off. A Mr. Stanitski, one of our brokers, who
holds $4,340,000 of our domestic debt, offers, if we will pay him one
year's interest of that debt, he will have the whole of the loan
immediately filled up, that is to say, he will procure the sum of six
hundred and twenty-two thousand eight hundred and forty florins still
unsubscribed. His year's interest (deducting from it ten per cent.
which he will allow for payment in Europe instead of America) will
require one hundred and eighty thousand florins of this money. Messrs.
Willinck and Van Staphorsts say that, by this means, they can pay
Fiseaux' debt, and all the Dutch interest, and our current expenses
here, till June, 1789, by which time the New Government may be in
action. They have proposed this to the Commissioners of the Treasury;
But it is possible that the delay of letters going and coming, with the
time necessary between the receiving their answer and procuring the
money, may force the decision of this proposition on me at the eleventh
hour. I wish, therefore, to avail myself of your counsel before your
departure, on this proposition. Your knowledge of the subject enables
you to give the best opinion, and your zeal for the public interest,
and I trust your friendly disposition towards me will prompt you to
assist me with your advice on this question, to wit, if the answer of
the Commissioners does not come in time, and there shall appear no
other means of raising the June interest, will it be worse to fail in
that payment, or to accept of about seven hundred thousand florins, on
the condition of letting one hundred and eighty thousand be applied to
the payment of a year's interest of a part of our domestic debt? Do me
the friendship to give me an answer to this as soon as possible, and be
assured of the sentiments of esteem and respect with which I have the
honor to be, dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE TREASURY.

PARIS, Feb. 7, 1788.


GENTLEMEN,--Your favors of November the 10th and 13th, and December the
5th, have been duly received. Commodore Jones left this place for
Copenhagen, the 5th instant, to carry into execution the resolution of
Congress of October the 25th. Whatever moneys that court shall be
willing to allow, shall be remitted to your bankers, either in
Amsterdam or Paris, as shall be found most beneficial, allowing
previously to be withdrawn Commodore Jones' proportion, which will be
necessary for his subsistence. I desired him to endeavor to prevail on
the Danish Minister to have the money paid in Amsterdam or Paris, by
their banker in either of those cities, if they have one.

M. Ast (secretary to the consulate) is at L'Orient. Whether he comes up
with the papers, or sends them, they shall be received, sealed up and
taken care of. I will only ask the favor of you, that I may never be
desired to break the seals, unless very important cause for it should
arise.

I have just received from Messrs. Willincks and Van Staphorsts, a
letter of January the 31st, in which are these words: "The official
communication we have of the actual situation and prospect of the
finances of the United States, would render such a partial payment as
that to Fiseaux' house of no avail towards the support of the public
credit, unless effectual measures shall be adopted, to provide funds
for the two hundred and seventy thousand florins, interest, that will
be due the 1st of June next; a single day's retard in which would
ground a prejudice of long duration." They informed me, at the same
time, that they had made to you the following communication: that Mr.
Stanitski, our principal broker, and holder of thirteen hundred and
forty thousand dollars, of certificates of our domestic debt, offers to
have our loan of a million of guilders (of which six hundred and
twenty-two thousand eight hundred and forty are still unfilled)
immediately made up, on condition that he may retain thereout, one
hundred and eighty thousand guilders, being one year's interest on his
certificates, allowing a deduction of ten per cent. from his said
interest, as a compensation for his receiving it in Amsterdam instead
of America, and not pretending that this shall give him any title to
ask for any payment of future interest in Europe. They observe, that
this will enable them to face the demands of Dutch interest, till the
1st of June, 1789, pay the principal of Fiseaux' debt, and supply the
current expenses of your legation in Europe. On these points, it is for
you to decide. I will only take the liberty to observe, that if they
shall receive your acceptance of the proposition, some day's credit
will still be to be given for producing the cash, and that this must be
produced fifteen days before it is wanting, because that much previous
notice is always given to the creditors that their money is ready. It
is, therefore, but three months from this day, before your answer
should be in Amsterdam. It might answer a useful purpose also, could I
receive a communication of that answer, ten days earlier than they. The
same stagnation attending our passage from the old to the new form of
government, which stops the feeble channel of money hitherto flowing
towards our treasury, has suspended also what foreign credit we had. So
that, at this moment, we may consider the progress of our loan as
stopped. Though much an enemy to the system of borrowing, yet I feel
strongly the necessity of preserving the power to borrow, Without this,
we might be overwhelmed by another nation, merely by the force of its
credit. However, you can best judge whether the payment of a single
year's interest on Stanitski's certificates, in Europe, instead of
America, may be more injurious to us than the shock of our credit in
Amsterdam, which may be produced by a failure to pay our interest.

I have only to offer any services which I can render in this business,
either here or by going to Holland, at a moment's warning, if that
should be necessary.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Gentlemen, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO DOCTOR PRICE.

PARIS, February 7, 1788.


DEAR SIR,--It is rendering mutual service to men of virtue and
understanding to make them acquainted with one another. I need no other
apology for presenting to your notice the bearer hereof, Mr. Barlow. I
know you were among the first who read the Visions of Columbus, while
yet in manuscript; and think the sentiments I heard you express of that
poem will induce you to be pleased with the acquaintance of their
author. He comes to pass a few days only at London, merely to know
something of it. As I have little acquaintance there, I cannot do
better for him than to ask you to be so good as to make him known to
such persons, as his turn and his time might render desirable to him.

I thank you for the volume you were so kind as to send me some time
ago. Everything you write is precious, and this volume is on the most
precious of all our concerns. We may well admit morality to be the
child of the understanding rather than of the senses, when we observe
that it becomes dearer to us as the latter weaken, and as the former
grows stronger by time and experience, till the hour arrives in which
all other objects lose all their value. That that hour may be distant
with you, my friend, and that the intermediate space may be filled with
health and happiness, is the sincere prayer of him who is, with
sentiments of great respect and friendship, dear Sir, your most
obedient humble servant.




TO MR. A. DONALD.

PARIS, February 7, 1788.


DEAR SIR,--I received duly your friendly letter of November the 12th.
By this time, you will have seen published by Congress the new
regulations obtained from this court, in favor of our commerce. You
will observe, that the arrangement relative to tobacco is a
continuation of the order of Berni for five years, only leaving the
price to be settled between the buyer and seller. You will see, too,
that all contracts for tobacco are forbidden, till it arrives in
France. Of course, your proposition for a contract is precluded. I fear
the prices here will be low, especially if the market be crowded. You
should be particularly attentive to the article, which requires that
the tobacco should come in French or American bottoms, as this article
will, in no instance, be departed from.

I wish with all my soul, that the nine first conventions may accept the
new constitution, because this will secure to us the good it contains,
which I think great and important. But I equally wish, that the four
latest conventions, whichever they be, may refuse to accede to it, till
a declaration of rights be annexed. This would probably command the
offer of such a declaration, and thus give to the whole fabric,
perhaps, as much perfection as any one of that kind ever had. By a
declaration of rights, I mean one which shall stipulate freedom of
religion, freedom of the press, freedom of commerce against monopolies,
trial by juries in all cases, no suspensions of the habeas corpus, no
standing armies. These are fetters against doing evil, which no honest
government should decline. There is another strong feature in the new
Constitution, which I as strongly dislike. That is, the perpetual
re-eligibility of the President. Of this I expect no amendment at
present, because I do not see that anybody has objected to it on your
side the water. But it will be productive of cruel distress to our
country, even in your day and mine. The importance to France and
England, to have our government in the hands of a friend or a foe, will
occasion their interference by money, and even by arms. Our President
will be of much more consequence to them than a King of Poland. We must
take care, however, that neither this, nor any other objection to the
new form, produces a schism in our Union. That would be an incurable
evil, because near friends falling out, never re-unite cordially;
whereas, all of us going together, we shall be sure to cure the evils
of our new Constitution, before they do great harm. The box of books I
had taken the liberty to address to you, is but just gone from Havre
for New York. I do not see, at present, any symptoms strongly
indicating war. It is true, that the distrust existing between the two
courts of Versailles and London, is so great, that they can scarcely do
business together. However, the difficulty and doubt of obtaining money
make both afraid to enter into war. The little preparations for war,
which we see, are the effect of distrust, rather than of a design to
commence hostilities. And in such a state of mind, you know, small
things may produce a rupture; so that though peace is rather probable,
war is very possible.

Your letter has kindled all the fond recollections of ancient times;
recollections much dearer to me than anything I have known since. There
are minds which can be pleased by honors and preferments; but I see
nothing in them but envy and enmity. It is only necessary to possess
them, to know how little they contribute to happiness, or rather how
hostile they are to it. No attachments soothe the mind so much as those
contracted in early life; nor do I recollect any societies which have
given me more pleasure, than those of which you have partaken with me.
I had rather be shut up in a very modest cottage, with my books, my
family and a few old friends, dining on simple bacon, and letting the
world roll on as it liked, than to occupy the most splendid post, which
any human power can give. I shall be glad to hear from you often. Give
me the small news as well as the great. Tell Dr. Currie, that I believe
I am indebted to him a letter, but that like the mass of our
countrymen, I am not, at this moment, able to pay all my debts; the
post being to depart in an hour, and the last stroke of a pen I am able
to send by it, being that which assures you of the sentiments of esteem
and attachment, with which I am, dear Sir, your affectionate friend and
servant.




TO MR. WARVILLE.

PARIS, February 12, 1788.


SIR,--I am very sensible of the honor you propose to me, of becoming a
member of the society for the abolition of the slave trade. You know
that nobody wishes more ardently to see an abolition, not only of the
trade, but of the condition of slavery; and certainly, nobody will be
more willing to encounter every sacrifice for that object. But the
influence and information of the friends to this proposition in France
will be far above the need of my association. I am here as a public
servant, and those whom I serve, having never yet been able to give
their voice against the practice, it is decent for me to avoid too
public a demonstration of my wishes to see it abolished. Without
serving the cause here, it might render me less able to serve it beyond
the water. I trust you will be sensible of the prudence of those
motives, therefore, which govern my conduct on this occasion, and be
assured of my wishes for the success of your undertaking, and the
sentiments of esteem and respect, with which I have the honor to be,
Sir, your most obedient humble servant.




TO MR. DUMAS.

PARIS, Feb. 12, 1788.


SIR,--I have duly received your favor of the 5th inst. enclosing that
for Mr. Jay. The packet was gone, as I presume, but I have another
occasion of forwarding it securely. Your attentions to the Leyden
gazette are, in my opinion, very useful. The paper is much read and
respected. It is the only one I know in Europe which merits respect.
Your publications in it will tend to re-establish that credit which the
solidity of our affairs deserve. With respect to the sale of lands, we
know that two sales of five millions and two millions of acres have
been made. Another was begun for four millions, which, in the course of
the negotiation, may have been reduced to three millions, as you
mention. I have not heard that this sale is absolutely concluded, but
there is reason to presume it. Stating these sales at two-thirds of a
dollar the acre, and allowing for 3 or 400,000 acres sold at public
sale, and a very high price, we may say they have absorbed seven
millions of dollars of the domestic federal debt. The States, by
taxation and otherwise, have absorbed eleven millions more: so that
debt stands now at about ten millions of dollars, and will probably be
all absorbed in the course of the next year. There will remain then our
foreign debt, between ten and twelve millions, including interest. The
sale of lands will then go on for the payment of this. But, as this
payment must be in cash, not in public effects, the lands must be sold
cheaper. The demand will probably be less brisk. So we may suppose this
will be longer paying off than the domestic debt. With respect to the
new Government, nine or ten States will probably have accepted by the
end of this month. The others may oppose it. Virginia, I think, will be
of this number. Besides other objections of less moment, she will
insist on annexing a bill of rights to the new Constitution, _i. e._ a
bill wherein the Government shall declare that, 1. Religion shall be
free; 2. Printing presses free; 3. Trials by jury preserved in all
cases; 4. No monopolies in commerce; 5. No standing army. Upon
receiving this bill of rights, she will probably depart from her other
objections; and this bill is so much to the interest of all the States,
that I presume they will offer it, and thus our Constitution be
amended, and our Union closed by the end of the present year. In this
way, there will have been opposition enough to do good, and not enough
to do harm. I have such reliance on the good sense of the body of the
people, and the honesty of their leaders, that I am not afraid of their
letting things go wrong to any length in any cause. Wishing you better
health, and much happiness, I have the honor to be, with sentiments of
the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir, your most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO MONSIEUR DE BERTROUS.

PARIS, Feb. 21, 1788.


SIR,--I am now to acknowledge the receipt of the letter you did me the
honor to write me on the 21st of January, together with the book on the
culture of the olive tree. This is a precious present to me, and I pray
you to accept my thanks for it. I am just gratified by letters from
South Carolina, which inform me that in consequence of the information
I had given them on the subject of the olive tree, and the probability
of its succeeding with them, several rich individuals propose to begin
its culture there. This will not interfere with the commerce of France,
because she imports much more oil than she exports, and because the
consumption of oil in the United States at present, is so
inconsiderable, that should their demand be totally withdrawn at the
European market, and supplied at home, it will produce no sensible
effect in Europe. We can never produce that article in very great
quantity, because it happens that in our two southernmost States, where
only the climate is adapted to the olive, the soil is so generally rich
as to be unfit for that tree, and proper for other productions of more
immediate profit. I am to thank you, also, for the raisins of Smyrna,
without seed, which I received from you through Mr. Grand. * * * * *




TO MONSIEUR TROUCHIN.

PARIS, February 26, 1788.


SIR,--I should with great cheerfulness have done anything I could for
the manufacturers of Bourges, had anything been in my power. To this I
should have been induced by justice to them, and a desire to serve
whomsoever you befriend. This company is part of a great mass of
creditors to whom the United States contracted debts during the late
war. Those States, like others, are not able to pay immediately all the
debts which the war brought on them; but they are proceeding rapidly in
that payment, and will, perhaps, get through it more speedily than any
nation ever did before.

You will have seen in the public papers the progress they are making in
this matter. They proceed in this by fixed rules, from which it is
their principle never to depart in any instance, nor to do on any
account for any one person what they will not be able to do for all
others claiming on the same grounds. This company should engage the
French Consul, or some other person on the spot, to be always ready to
present their claim whenever anything can be received on it, according
to the order of payment established by Congress. I suppose that the
interest might have been annually received. With respect to what they
call the reduction of the debt from its nominal sum, it is not a
reduction of it, but an appreciation at its true value. The public
effects of the United States, such as their paper bills of credit, loan
office bills, etc., were a commodity which varied its value from time
to time. A scale of their value for every month has been settled
according to what they sold for at market, in silver or gold. This
value in gold or silver, with an interest of six per cent. annually
till payment, is what the United States pay. This they are able to pay;
but were they to propose to pay off all their paper, not according to
what it cost the holder, in gold or silver, but according to the sum
named in it, their whole country, if sold, and all their persons into
the bargain, might not suffice. They would, in this case, make a
bankruptcy where none exists, as an individual, who being very able to
pay the real debts he has contracted, would undertake to give to every
man fifty times as much as he had received from him. The company will
receive the market value of the public effects they have on their
hands, and six per cent. per annum on that; and I can only repeat my
advice to them, to appoint some friend on the spot to act for them
whenever anything can be received. I have the honor to be, with
sentiments of the most perfect esteem and respect, Sir, your most
obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. JOHN ADAMS.

PARIS, March 2, 1788.--Sunday.


DEAR SIR,--I received this day, a letter from Mrs. Adams, of the 26th
ultimo, informing me you would set out on the 29th, for the Hague. Our
affairs at Amsterdam press on my mind like a mountain. I have no
information to go on, but that of Willincks and Van Staphorsts, and
according to that, something seems necessary to be done. I am so
anxious to confer with you on this subject, and to see you and them
together, and get some effectual arrangement made in time, that I
determine to meet you at the Hague. I will set out the moment some
repairs are made to my carriage; it is promised me at three o'clock
to-morrow; but probably they will make it night, and that I may not set
out till Tuesday morning. In that case, I shall be at the Hague on
Friday night; in the meantime, you will perhaps have made all your bows
there. I am sensible how irksome this must be to you, in the moment of
your departure. But it is a great interest of the United States which
is at stake, and I am sure you will sacrifice to that, your feelings
and your interest. I hope to shake you by the hand, within twenty-four
hours after you receive this; and in the meantime, I am, with much
esteem and respect, dear Sir, your affectionate friend and humble
servant.




TO THE HON. JOHN JAY.

AMSTERDAM, March 13, 1788.


SIR,--Mr. Adams having announced to our bankers here his approaching
departure from Europe, and referred them to me for counsel on our
affairs in their hands, they sent me a state of them, and of the
difficulties which were pressing at the moment, and impending more
seriously for the month of June. They were urging me by almost every
post on this subject. In this situation, information of Mr. Adams'
journey of leave to the Hague reached me on the day of his arrival
there. I was sensible how important it was to have the benefit of his
interference in a department which had been his peculiarly from the
beginning, and with all the details of which he was as intimately
acquainted as I was little so. I set out therefore in the instant,
joined him at the Hague, and he readily concurred with me in the
necessity of our coming here to confer with our bankers on the measures
which might be proper and practicable. We are now engaged on this
subject, and the result, together with a full explanation of the
difficulties which commanded our attention, shall be the subject of a
letter which I shall do myself the honor of writing you by Mr. Adams,
to be forwarded by Colonel Smith, who will go in the English packet. I
avoid further particulars in the present letter, because it is to pass
through the different post-offices to Paris. It will be forwarded
thence by Mr. Short, whom I have desired to do himself the honor of
writing to you any occurrences since my departure, which may be worthy
of being communicated, by the French packet of this month. I have the
honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect respect and esteem,
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO THE HON. JOHN JAY.

AMSTERDAM, March 16, 1788.


SIR,--In a letter of the 13th instant, which I had the honor of
addressing you from this place, I mentioned in general terms, the
object of my journey hither, and that I should enter into more
particular details, by the confidential conveyance which would occur
through Mr. Adams and Colonel Smith.

The board of treasury had, in the month of December, informed me and
our bankers here, that it would be impossible for them to make any
remittances to Europe for the then ensuing year, and that they must,
therefore, rely altogether on the progress of the late loan. But this,
in the meantime, after being about one-third filled, had ceased to get
forward. The bankers who had been referred to me for advice by Mr.
Adams, stated those circumstances, and pressed their apprehension for
the ensuing month of June, when two hundred and seventy thousand
florins would be wanting for interest. In fine, they urged an offer of
the holders of the former bonds to take all those remaining on hand,
provided they might receive out of them the interest on a part of our
domestic debt, of which they had also become the holders. This would
have been one hundred and eighty thousand florins. To this proposition
I could not presume any authority to listen. Thus pressed between the
danger of failure on one hand, and this proposition on the other, I
heard of Mr. Adams being gone to the Hague, to take leave. His
knowledge of the subject was too valuable to be neglected under the
present difficulty, and it was the last moment in which we could be
availed of it. I set out immediately, therefore, for the Hague, and we
came on to this place together, in order to see what could be done. It
was easier to discover, than to remove, the causes which obstructed the
progress of the loan. Our affairs here, like those of other nations,
are in the hands of particular bankers. These employ particular, and
they have their particular circle of money lenders. These money
lenders, as I have before mentioned, while placing a part of their
money in our foreign loans, had at the same time employed another part
in a joint speculation, to the amount of eight hundred and forty
thousand dollars, in our domestic debt. A year's interest was becoming
due on this, and they wished to avail themselves of our want of money
for the foreign interest, to obtain payment of the domestic. Our first
object was to convince our bankers, that there was no power on this
side the Atlantic which could accede to this proposition, or give it
any countenance. They at length, therefore, but with difficulty,
receded from this ground, and agreed to enter into conferences with the
brokers and lenders, and to use every exertion to clear the loan from
the embarrassment in which this speculation had engaged it. What will
be the result of these conferences, is not yet known. We have hopes,
however, that it is not desperate, because the bankers consented
yesterday to pay off the capital of fifty-one thousand florins, which
had become due on the first day of January, and which had not yet been
paid. We have gone still further. The treasury-board gives no hope of
remittances, till the new government can procure them. For that
government to be adopted, its legislature assembled, its system of
taxation and collection arranged, the money gathered from the people
into the treasury, and then remitted to Europe, must extend
considerably into the year 1790. To secure our credit then, for the
present year only, is but to put off the evil day to the next. What
remains of the last loan, when it shall be filled up, will little more
than clear us of present demands, as may be seen by the estimate
enclosed. We thought it better, therefore, to provide at once for the
years 1789 and 1790, also; and thus to place the Government at its
ease, and her credit in security, during that trying interval. The same
estimate will show, that another million of florins will be necessary
to effect this. We stated this to our bankers, who concurred in our
views, and that to ask the whole sum at once, would be better than to
make demands from time to time so small, as that they betray to the
money holders the extreme feebleness of our resources. Mr. Adams,
therefore, has executed bonds for another million of florins; which,
however, are to remain unissued till Congress shall have ratified the
measure; so that this transaction is something or nothing, at their
pleasure. We suppose its expediency so apparent, as to leave little
doubt of its ratification. In this case, much time will have been saved
by the execution of the bonds at this moment, and the proposition will
be presented under a more favorable appearance, according to the
opinion of the bankers. Mr. Adams is under a necessity of setting out
to-morrow morning, but I shall stay two or three days longer, to attend
to and encourage the efforts of the bankers; though it is yet doubtful
whether they will ensure us a safe passage over the month of June. Not
having my letters here to turn to, I am unable to say whether the last
I wrote mentioned the declaration of the Emperor that he should take
part in the war against the Turks. This declaration appeared a little
before, or a little after that letter, I do not recollect which. Some
little hostilities have taken place between them. The court of
Versailles seems to pursue immovably its pacific system, and from every
appearance in the country from which I write, we must conclude that its
tragedy is wound up. The triumph appears complete, and tranquillity
perfectly established. The numbers who have emigrated are differently
estimated, from twenty to forty thousand.

A little before I left Paris, I received a piece of intelligence, which
should be communicated, leaving you to lay what stress on it, it may
seem to deserve. Its authenticity may be surely relied on. At the time
of the late pacification, Spain had about fifteen ships of the line
nearly ready for sea. The convention for disarming did not extend to
her, nor did she disarm. This gave inquietude to the court of London,
and they demanded an explanation. One was given, they say, which is
perfectly satisfactory. The Russian Minister at Versailles, getting
knowledge of this, became suspicious on his part. He recollected that
Spain, during the late war, had been opposed to the entrance of a
Russian fleet into the Mediterranean, and concluded if England was not
the object of this armament, Russia might be. It is known that that
power means to send a fleet of about twenty-four ships into the
Mediterranean this summer. He sent to the Count de Montmorin, and
expressed his apprehensions. The Count de Montmorin declared that the
object of Spain in that armament, was totally different; that he was
not sure she would succeed; but that France and Spain were to be
considered as one, and that the former would become guarantee for the
latter; that she would make no opposition to the Russian fleet. If
neither England nor Russia be the object, the question recurs, who is
it for? You know best if our affairs with Spain are in a situation to
give jealousy to either of us. I think it very possible that the
satisfaction of the court of London may have been pretended, or
premature. It is possible, also, that the affairs of Spain in South
America, may require them to assume a threatening appearance. I give
you the facts, however, and you will judge whether they are objects of
attention or of mere curiosity.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of sincere esteem and respect,
Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant.

P. S. I enclose herewith an extract of a letter from the Count de
Vergennes to the French Ambassador at the Hague, which will make a
remarkable chapter in the history of the late revolution here. It is
not public, nor should be made so by us. Probably those who have been
the victims of it, will some day publish it.




TO MR. DUMAS.

AMSTERDAM, March 29, 1788.


SIR,--I have now to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of the 14th,
18th and 23d instant. I would have preferred doing it in person, but
the season, and the desire of seeing what I have not yet seen, invite
me to take the route of the Rhine, I shall leave this place to-morrow
morning, and probably not reach Paris till the latter end of April. In
the moment we were to have conferred on the subject of paying the
arrears due to you, a letter of the 20th of February from the Board of
Treasury was received, forbidding the application of money to any
purpose, (except our current claims,) till the June interest should be
actually in hand. Being by the letter tied up from giving an order in
your favor, I return you the letter you had written to Mr. Jay, on the
supposition that the order for your arrears was given. It has been
suggested, however, that if you could receive bonds of the loan, you
could make them answer your purpose, and the commissioners say this
would in no wise interfere with the views of the treasury board, nor
the provision for the June interest. I have, therefore, recommended to
them in writing, to give you bonds to the amount of your balance, if
you choose to take them, rather than to wait. I wish this may answer
your purpose. I remember that in the conversation which I had the honor
of having with you, on the evening I was at the Hague, you said that
your enemies had endeavored to have it believed that Congress would
abandon you, and withdraw your appointments. An enemy generally says
and believes what he wishes, and your enemies particularly, are not
those who are most in the councils of Congress, nor the best qualified
to tell what Congress will do. From the evidences you have received of
their approbation, and from their well-known steadiness and justice,
you must be assured of a continuance of their favor, were they to
continue under the present form. Nor do I see anything in the new
government which threatens us with less firmness. The Senate, who will
make and remove their foreign officers, must, from its constitution, be
a wise and steady body. Nor would a new government begin its
administration by discarding old servants; servants who have put all to
the risk, and when the risk was great, to obtain that freedom and
security under which themselves will be what they shall be. Upon the
whole, my dear Sir, tranquillize yourself and your family upon this
subject. All the evidence which exists as yet, authorizes you to do
this, nor can I foresee any cause of disquiet in future. That none may
arise, that yourself and family may enjoy health, happiness, and the
continued approbation of those by whom you wish most to be approved, is
the sincere wish of him, who has the honor to be, with sentiments of
sincere esteem and attachment, your most obedient, and most humble
servant.




TO THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE TREASURY.

AMSTERDAM, March 29, 1788.


GENTLEMEN, * * * * * *

I cannot close my letter without some observations on the transfer of
our domestic debt to foreigners. This circumstance and the failure to
pay off Fiseaux' loan, were the sole causes of the stagnation of our
late loan. For otherwise, our credit would have stood on more hopeful
grounds than heretofore. There was a condition in the last loan, that
the lenders furnished one-third of the money, the remaining two-thirds
of the bonds should remain eighteen months unsold, and at their option
to take or not, and that in the meantime the same bankers should open
no other loan for us. These same lenders became purchasers of our
domestic debt, and they were disposed to avail themselves of the power
they had thus acquired over us as to our foreign demands, to make us
pay the domestic one. Should the present necessities have obliged you
to comply with their proposition for the present year, I should be of
opinion it ought to be the last instance. If the transfer of these
debts to Europe, meet with any encouragement from us, we can no more
borrow money here, let our necessities be what they will. For who will
give ninety-six per cent. for the foreign obligations of the same
nation, whose domestic ones can be bought at the same market for
fifty-five per cent.; the former, too, bearing an interest of only five
per cent., while the latter yields six. If any discouragements can be
honestly thrown on this transfer, it would seem advisable, in order to
keep the domestic debt at home. It would be a very effectual one, if,
instead of the title existing in our treasury books alone, it was made
to exist in loose papers, as our loan office debts do. The European
holder would then be obliged to risk the title paper of his capital, as
well as his interest, in the hands of his agents in America, whenever
the interest was to be demanded; whereas, at present, he trusts him
with the interest only. This single circumstance would put a total stop
to all future sales of domestic debt at this market. Whether this, or
any other obstruction, can or should be thrown in the way of these
operations, is not for me to decide; but I have thought the subject
worthy your consideration.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most perfect esteem and
respect, Gentlemen, your most obedient, and most humble servant.




TO MR. SHORT.

AMSTERDAM, March 29, 1788.


DEAR SIR,--I have received from you three letters of March the 9th,
14th, and 17th, and written you two of the 10th and 13th. In the last,
I mentioned to you that I should leave this place the 13th but I have
been drawn on from day to day by the hope of seeing the business on
which I came settled, on the basis of positive engagement, and the
great object of the month of June appeared so sure, that we were about
proceeding to immediate payment of Mr. Grand, the State of Virginia,
and all smaller claims, when a letter of the 20th February, from the
Commissioners of the Treasury, arrived, forbidding the application of
money to any object except the diplomatic expenses, till the cash for
the June interest was actually in hand. No room was left for the
bankers to execute their discretion. The consequence is a delay of all
other objects for some weeks, which probably might have been effected
instantly, without danger to the great one. Indeed, I had obtained a
positive engagement on that ground. Be so good as to communicate this
much to Mr. Grand.

A letter from Mr. Van Berkel, at New York, confirms the arrival of the
Count de Moustier there on the 18th of January, and removes all
suspense and anxiety on that subject. You know we received a similar
account the day before I left Paris, which I communicated to M. de
Montmorin. It is with infinite affliction that I recollect, in the
hurry of my departure, to have omitted to have notified the same to M.
Dupont, who had a son embarked in the same bottom. I am haunted with
this recollection, and would beg either yourself or Mr. Grand,
whichever sees M. Dupont first, to let him know that it was neither
want of attention nor attachment to him which occasioned it to escape
me, but the confusion which attended the setting out on such a journey
on so short notice.

I set out to-morrow for Utrecht, Nimeguen, etc., and shall pursue the
course of the Rhine as far as the roads will permit me, not exceeding
Strasburg. Whenever they become impassable, or too difficult, if they
do become so, I shall turn off to Paris. So also if anything of
importance should call for me at Paris sooner, you will be so good as
to address to me at Frankfort and Strasburg. I will call at the post
office there, and be happy to find news from you relative to yourself,
my daughters, and America. I shall be at Frankfort about the 8th of
April, and at Strasburg about the 15th. You shall hear from me on the
road.






TO GENERAL WASHINGTON.

PARIS, May 2, 1788.


DEAR SIR,--I am honored with your Excellency's letter by the last
packet, and thank you for the information it contains on the
communication between the Cayahoga and Big Beaver. I have ever
considered the opening a canal between those two water courses as the
most important work in that line which the State of Virginia could
undertake. It will infallibly turn through the Potomac all the commerce
of Lake Erie, and the country west of that, except what may pass down
the Mississippi; and it is important that it be soon done, lest that
commerce should, in the meantime, get established in another channel.
Having, in the spring of the last year, taken a journey through the
southern parts of France, and particularly examined the canal of
Languedoc, through its whole course, I take the liberty of sending you
the notes I made on the spot, as you may find in them something,
perhaps, which may be turned to account, some time or other, in the
prosecution of the Potomac canal. Being merely a copy from my
travelling notes, they are undigested and imperfect, but may still
perhaps give hints capable of improvement in your mind.

The affairs of Europe are in such a state still, that it is impossible
to say what form they will take ultimately. France and Prussia, viewing
the Emperor as their most dangerous and common enemy, had heretofore
seen their common safety as depending on a strict connection with one
another. This had naturally inclined the Emperor to the scale of
England, and the Empress also, as having views in common with the
Emperor, against the Turks. But these two powers would, at any time,
have gladly quitted England, to coalesce with France, as being the
power which they met everywhere, opposed as a barrier to all their
schemes of aggrandisement. When, therefore, the present King of Prussia
took the eccentric measure of bidding defiance to France, by placing
his brother in law on the throne of Holland, the two empires
immediately seized the occasion of soliciting an alliance with France.
The motives for this appeared so plausible, that it was believed the
latter would have entered into this alliance, and that thus, the whole
political system of Europe would have taken a new form. What has
prevented this court from coming into it, we know not. The unmeasurable
ambition of the Emperor, and his total want of moral principle and
honor, are suspected. A great share of Turkey, the recovery of Silesia,
the consolidation of his dominions by the Bavarian exchange, the
liberties of the Germanic body, all occupy his mind together, and his
head is not well enough organized, to pursue so much only of all this
as is practicable. Still, it was thought that France might safely have
coalesced with these powers, because Russia and herself, holding close
together, as their interests would naturally dictate, the Emperor could
never stir but with their permission. France seems, however, to have
taken the worst of all parties, that is, none at all. She folds her
arms, lets the two empires go to work to cut up Turkey as they can, and
holds Prussia aloof, neither as a friend nor foe. This is withdrawing
her opposition from the two empires, without the benefit of any
condition whatever. In the meantime, England has clearly overreached
herself. She excited the war between the Russians and Turks, in hopes
that France, still supporting the Turks, would be embarrassed with the
two empires. She did not foresee the event which has taken place, of
France abandoning the Turks, and that which may take place, of her
union with the two empires. She allied herself with Holland, but cannot
obtain the alliance of Prussia. This latter power would be very glad to
close again the breach with France, and, therefore, while there remains
an opening for this, holds off from England, whose fleets could not
enter into Silesia, to protect that from the Emperor. Thus, you see,
that the old system is unhinged, and no new one hung in its place.
Probabilities are rather in favor of a connection between the two
empires, France and Spain. Several symptoms show themselves, of
friendly dispositions between Russia and France, unfriendly ones
between Russia and England, and such as are barely short of hostility
between England and France. But into real hostilities, this country
would with difficulty be drawn. Her finances are too deranged, her
internal union too much dissolved, to hazard a war. The nation is
pressing on fast to a fixed constitution. Such a revolution in the
public opinion has taken place, that the crown already feels its powers
bounded, and is obliged, by its measures, to acknowledge limits. A
States General will be called at some epoch not distant; they will
probably establish a civil list, and leave the government to temporary
provisions of money, so as to render frequent assemblies of the
national representative necessary. How that representative will be
organized is yet uncertain. Among a thousand projects, the best seems
to me, that of dividing them into two Houses, of Commons and Nobles;
the Commons to be chosen by the Provincial Assemblies, who are chosen
themselves by the people, and the Nobles by the body of Noblesse, as in
Scotland. But there is no reason to conjecture that this is the
particular scheme which will be preferred.

The war between the Russians and Turks, has made an opening for our
Commodore Paul Jones. The Empress has invited him into her service. She
insures to him the rank of rear admiral; will give him a separate
command, and, it is understood, that he is never to be commanded. I
think she means to oppose him to the Captain Pacha, on the Black Sea.
He is by this time, probably, at St. Petersburg. The circumstances did
not permit his awaiting the permission of Congress, because the season
was close at hand for opening the campaign. But he has made it a
condition, that he shall be free at all times to return to the orders
of Congress, whenever they shall please to call for him; and also, that
he shall not in any case be expected to bear arms against France. I
believe Congress had it in contemplation, to give him the grade of
admiral, from the date of his taking the Serapis. Such a measure now
would greatly gratify him, second the efforts of fortune in his favor,
and better the opportunities of improving him for our service, whenever
the moment shall come in which we may want him.

The danger of our incurring something like a bankruptcy in Holland,
which might have been long, and even fatally felt in a moment of
crisis, induced me to take advantage of Mr. Adams' journey to take
leave at the Hague to meet him there, get him to go on to Amsterdam,
and try to avert the impending danger. The moment of paying a great sum
of annual interest was approaching. There was no money on hand, the
board of treasury had notified that they could not remit any; and the
progress of the loan which had been opened there, had absolutely
stopped. Our bankers there gave me notice of all this; and that a
single day's failure in the payment of interest would have the most
fatal effect on our credit. I am happy to inform you we were able to
set the loan a going again, and that the evil is at least postponed.
Indeed, I am tolerably satisfied, that if the measures we proposed are
ratified by Congress, all European calls for money (except the French
debt) are secure enough, till the end of the year 1790; by which time,
we calculated that the new government might be able to get money into
their treasury. Much conversation with the bankers, brokers and money
holders, gave me insight into the state of national credit there, which
I had never before been able satisfactorily to get. The English credit
is the first, because they never open a loan, without laying and
appropriating taxes for the payment of the interest, and there has
never been an instance of their failing one day, in that payment. The
Emperor and Empress have good credit, because they use it little, and
have hitherto been very punctual. This country is among the lowest, in
point of credit. Ours stands in hope only. They consider us as the
surest nation on earth for the repayment of the capital; but as the
punctual payment of interest is of absolute necessity in their
arrangements, we cannot borrow but with difficulty and disadvantage.
The moneyed men, however, look towards our new government with a great
degree of partiality, and even anxiety. If they see that set out on the
English plan, the first degree of credit will be transferred to us. A
favorable occasion will arise to our new government of asserting this
ground to themselves. The transfer of the French debt, public and
private, to Amsterdam, is certainly desirable. An act of the new
government, therefore, for opening a loan in Holland for the purpose,
laying taxes at the same time, for paying annually the interest and a
part of the principal, will answer the two valuable purposes, of
ascertaining the degree of our credit, and of removing those causes of
bickering and irritation, which should never be permitted to subsist
with a nation, with which it is so much our interest to be on cordial
terms as with France. A very small portion of this debt, I mean that
part due to the French officers, has done us an injury, of which, those
in office in America, cannot have an idea. The interest is unpaid for
the last three years; and these creditors, highly connected, and at the
same time needy, have felt and communicated hard thoughts of us.
Borrowing, as we have done, three hundred thousand florins a year, to
pay our interest in Holland, it would have been worth while to have
added twenty thousand more to suppress those clamors. I am anxious
about everything which may affect our credit. My wish would be, to
possess it in the highest degree, but to use it little. Were we without
credit, we might be crushed by a nation of much inferior resources, but
possessing higher credit. The present system of war renders it
necessary to make exertions far beyond the annual resources of the
State, and to consume in one year the efforts of many. And this system
we cannot change. It remains then, that we cultivate our credit with
the utmost attention.

I had intended to have written a word to your Excellency on the subject
of the new Constitution, but I have already spun out my letter to an
immoderate length. I will just observe, therefore, that according to my
ideas, there is a great deal of good in it. There are two things,
however, which I dislike strongly. 1. The want of a declaration of
rights. I am in hopes the opposition of Virginia will remedy this, and
produce such a declaration. 2. The perpetual re-eligibility of the
President. This, I fear, will make that an office for life, first, and
then hereditary. I was much an enemy to monarchies before I came to
Europe. I am ten thousand times more so, since I have seen what they
are. There is scarcely an evil known in these countries, which may not
be traced to their king, as its source, nor a good, which is not
derived from the small fibres of republicanism existing among them. I
can further say, with safety, there is not a crowned head in Europe,
whose talents or merits would entitle him to be elected a vestryman, by
the people of any parish in America. However, I shall hope, that before
there is danger of this change taking place in the office of President,
the good sense and free spirit of our countrymen, will make the changes
necessary to prevent it. Under this hope, I look forward to the general
adoption of the new Constitution with anxiety, as necessary for us
under our present circumstances. I have so much trespassed on your
patience already, by the length of this letter, that I will add nothing
further, than those assurances of sincere esteem and attachment with
which I have the honor to be, your Excellency's most obedient, and most
humble servant.




TO MR. JAMES MADISON.

PARIS, May 3, 1788.


DEAR SIR,--Mine of February the 6th, acknowledged the receipt of yours
of December the 9th and 20th; since that, those of February the 19th
and 20th have come to hand. The present will be delivered to you by Mr.
Warville, whom you will find truly estimable, and a great enthusiast
for liberty. His writings will have shown you this.

For public news, I must refer you to my letters to Mr. Jay. Those I
wrote to him from Amsterdam will have informed you of my journey
thither. While there, I endeavored to get, as well as I could, into the
state of national credit there; for though I am an enemy to the using
our credit but under absolute necessity, yet the possessing a good
credit I consider as indispensable, in the present system of carrying
on war. The existence of a nation having no credit is always
precarious. The credit of England is the best. Their paper sells at par
on the exchange of Amsterdam the moment any of it is offered, and they
can command there any sum they please. The reason is, that they never
borrow, without establishing taxes for the payment of the interest, and
they never yet failed one day in that payment. The Emperor and Empress
have good credit enough. They use it little and have been ever
punctual. This country cannot borrow at all there; for though they
always pay their interest within the year, yet it is often some months
behind. It is difficult to assign to our credit its exact station in
this scale. They consider us as the most certain nation on earth for
the principal; but they see that we borrow of themselves to pay the
interest, so that this is only a conversion of their interest into
principal. Our paper, for this reason, sells for from four to eight per
cent. below par, on the exchange, and our loans are negotiated with the
Patriots only. But the whole body of money dealers, Patriot and
Stadtholderian, look forward to our new government with a great degree
of partiality and interest. They are disposed to have much confidence
in it, and it was the prospect of its establishment, which enabled us
to set the loan of last year into motion again. They will attend
steadfastly to its first money operations. If these are injudiciously
begun, correction, whenever they shall be corrected, will come too
late. Our borrowings will always be difficult and disadvantageous. If
they begin well, our credit will immediately take the first station.
Equal provision for the interest, adding to it a certain prospect for
the principal, will give us a preference to all nations, the English
not excepted. The first act of the new government should be some
operation, whereby they may assume to themselves this station. Their
European debts form a proper subject for this. Digest the whole, public
and private, Dutch, French and Spanish, into a table, showing the sum
of interest due every year, and the portions of principal payable the
same year. Take the most certain branch of revenue, and one which shall
suffice to pay the interest, and leave such a surplus as may accomplish
all the payments of the capital, at terms somewhat short of those at
which they will become due. Let the surplusses of those years, in which
no reimbursement of principal falls, be applied to buy up our paper on
the exchange of Amsterdam, and thus anticipate the demands of
principal. In this way, our paper will be kept up at par; and this
alone will enable us to command in four and twenty hours, at any time,
on the exchange of Amsterdam, as many millions as that capital can
produce. The same act which makes this provision for the existing
debts, should go on to open a loan to their whole amount; the produce
of that loan to be applied, as fast as received, to the payment of such
parts of the existing debts as admit of payment. The rate of interest
to be as the government should privately instruct their agent, because
it must depend on the effect these measures would have on the exchange.
Probably it could be lowered from time to time. Honest and annual
publications of the payments made will inspire confidence, while
silence would conceal nothing from those interested to know.

You will perceive by the _compte rendu_ which I send you, that this
country now calls seriously for its interest at least. The non-payment
of this, hitherto, has done our credit little injury, because the
government here, saying nothing about it, the public have supposed they
wished to leave us at our ease as to the payment. It is now seen that
they call for it, and they will publish annually the effect of that
call. A failure here, therefore, will have the same effect on our
credit hereafter, as a failure at Amsterdam. I consider it then, as of
a necessity not to be dispensed with, that these calls be effectually
provided for. If it shall be seen that the general provision, before
hinted at, cannot be in time, then it is the present Government which
should take on itself to borrow in Amsterdam, what may be necessary.
The new Government should by no means be left by the old, to the
necessity of borrowing a stiver, before it can tax for its interest.
This will be to destroy the credit of the new Government in its birth.
And I am of opinion, that if the present Congress will add to the loan
of a million (which Mr. Adams and myself have proposed this year) what
may be necessary for the French calls to the year 1790, the money can
be obtained at the usual disadvantage. Though I have not, at this
moment, received such authentic information from our bankers as I may
communicate to Congress, yet I know privately from one of them, (Mr.
Jacob Van Staphorst, who is here,) that they had on hand a fortnight
ago, four hundred thousand florins, and the sale going on well. So that
the June interest, which had been in so critical a predicament, was
already secured. If the loan of a million on Mr. Adams' bonds of this
year, be ratified by Congress, the applications of the money on hand
may go on immediately, according to the statement I sent to Mr. Jay.
One article in this, I must beg you to press on the treasury board;
that is, an immediate order for the payment of the three years'
arrearages to the French officers. They were about holding a meeting to
take desperate measures on this subject, when I was called to Holland.
I desired them to be quiet till my return, and since my return, I have
pressed a further tranquillity till July, by which time, I have given
them reason to hope I may have an answer from the treasury board, to my
letters of March. Their ill humor can be contained no longer, and as I
know no reason why they may not be paid at that time, I shall have
nothing to urge in our defence after that.



You remember the report, drawn by Governor Randolph, on the navigation
of the Mississippi. When I came to Europe, Mr. Thompson was so kind as
to have me a copy of it made out. I lent it to Dr. Franklin, and he
mislaid it, so that it could never be found. Could you make interest
with him to have me another copy made, and send it to me? By Mr.
Warville I send your pedometer. To the loop at the bottom of it, you
must sew a tape, and at the other end of the tape, a small hook, (such
as we use under the name of hooks and eyes) cut a little hole in the
bottom of your left watch pocket, pass the hook and tape through it,
and down between the breeches and drawers, and fix the hook on the edge
of your knee band, an inch from the knee buckle; then hook the
instrument itself by its swivel hook, on the upper edge of the watch
pocket. Your tape being well adjusted in length, your double steps will
be exactly counted by the instrument, the shortest hand pointing out
the thousands, the flat hand the hundreds, and the long hand the tens
and units. Never turn the hands backward; indeed, it is best not to set
them to any given place, but to note the number they stand at when you
begin to walk. The adjusting the tape to its exact length is a critical
business, and will cost you many trials. But once done, it is done for
ever. The best way is, to have a small buckle fixed on the middle of
the tape, by which you can take it up, and let it out at pleasure. When
you choose it should cease to count, unhook it from the top of the
watch pocket, and let it fall down to the bottom of the pocket.



I am, with sentiments of the most sincere esteem and attachment, dear
Sir your affectionate friend and servant.




David Humphreys

(1752-1818)


David Humphreys fought through the Revolutionary War, and early in 1780
was selected as aide to General Washington with the rank of
Lieutenant-Colonel. Having particularly distinguished himself at the
siege of York, Congress voted him a handsome sword. In July, 1784, he
went to France as Secretary of Legation to Thomas Jefferson. In 1790 he
was appointed Minister to Portugal, and in 1797 accepted the office of
Minister to Spain, continuing at that post till 1802, after concluding
treaties with Tripoli and Algiers. In 1812 he took command of the
militia of Connecticut, and as a member of the Legislature was active
in reorganizing for the local defence. A collection of his writings was
published in 1804.




John Jay

(1745-1829)


John Jay was sent in 1774 as a delegate to the first Congress, and took
a leading part in its proceedings. He drew up the 'Address to the
People of Great Britain, and wrote the address issued by Congress in
1775 to the people of Canada. He was a leading member of the New York
Convention, serving on the most important committees, and actively
engaged in repelling invasions and suppressing Tory combinations. He
had a chief share in framing the Constitution of New York and in May,
1777, was appointed Chief Justice of New York. From December 1778 to
September, 1779 he was again a member of Congress. He was then
appointed Minister to Spain and with Adams, Franklin and others, signed
the treaty of peace between the United States and Great Britain on
September 3, 1783. In 1787 he united with Hamilton and Madison in
writing "The Federalist" to answer objections to the proposed Federal
Constitution, and contributed powerfully to its adoption. In 1788 he
was appointed Chief Justice of the United States, and from 1795 to 1801
was Governor of New York.