"Now there is the problem, and while we may differ on the estimates, I
think that most sane Americans would agree that the balance is
overwhelmingly in favor of throwing off the yoke of tyranny, and
asserting your rights, established by agreement as well as by nature.
In a like manner I work out all my important problems, so that every
factor is visible and subject to change.

"I only fear that I may not be able to provide for her in a suitable
manner," said Jack.

"Oh, you are well off," said the philosopher.  "You have some capital
and recognized talent and occupation for it.  When I reached
Philadelphia I had an empty stomach and also a Dutch dollar, a few
pennies, two soiled shirts and a pair of dirty stockings in my pockets.
Many years passed and I had a family before I was as well off as you
are."

Dinner was brought in and Jack ate with the Doctor and when the table
was cleared they played with magic squares--an invention of the
philosopher with which he was wont to divert himself and friends of an
evening.  When Jack was about to go, the Doctor asked:

"Will you hand me that little red book?  I wish to put down a credit
mark for my conscience.  This old foot of mine has been rather impudent
to-day.  There have been moments when I could have expressed my opinion
of it with joyous violence.  But I did not.  I let it carry on like a
tinker in a public house, and never said a word."

He showed the boy an interesting table containing the days of the week,
at the head of seven columns, and opposite cross-columns below were the
virtues he aimed to acquire--patience, temperance, frugality and the
like.  The book contained a table for every week in the year.  It had
been his practise, at the end of each day, to enter a black mark
opposite the virtues in which he had failed.

It was a curious and impressive document--a frank, candid record in
black and white of the history of a human soul.  To Jack it had a
sacred aspect like the story of the trials of Job.

"I begin to understand how you have built up this wonderful structure
we call Franklin," he said.

"Oh, it is but a poor and shaky thing at best, likely to tumble in a
high wind--but some work has gone into it," said the old gentleman.
"You see these white pages are rather spotted, but when I look over the
history of my spirit, as I do now and then, I observe that the pages
are slowly getting cleaner.  There is not so much ink on them as there
used to be.  You see I was once a free thinker.  I had no gods to
bother me, and my friends were of the same stripe.  In time I
discovered that they were a lot of scamps and that I was little better.
I found myself in the wrong road and immediately faced about.  Then I
began keeping these tables.  They have been a help to me."

This reminded Jack of the evil words of the melancholy Mr. Pinhorn
which had been so promptly rebuked by his friend John Adams on the ride
to Philadelphia.  The young man made a copy of one of the tables and
was saying good night to his venerable friend when the latter remarked:

"I shall go to Sir John Pringle's in the morning for advice.  He is a
noted physician.  My man will be having a day off.  Could you go with
me at ten?"

"Gladly," said Jack.

"Then I shall pick you up at your lodgings.  You will see your rival at
Pringle's.  He is at home on leave and has been going to Sir John's
office every Tuesday morning at ten-thirty with his father.  General
Clarke, a gruff, gouty old hero of the French and Indian wars and an
aggressive Tory.  He is forever tossing and goring the Whigs.  It may
be the only chance you will have to see that rival of yours.  He is a
handsome lad."

Doctor Franklin, with his crutch beside him in the cab, called for his
young friend at the hour appointed.

"I go to his office when I have need of his advice," said the Doctor.
"If ever he came to me, the wretch would charge me two guineas.  We
have much argument over the processes of life in the human body, of
which I have gained some little knowledge.  Often he flatters me by
seeking my counsel in difficult cases."

The office of the Doctor Baronet was on the first floor of a large
building in Gough Square, Fleet Street.  A number of gentlemen sat in
comfortable chairs in a large waiting room.

"Sir John will see you in a moment, sir," an attendant said to Doctor
Franklin as they entered.  The moment was a very long one.

"In London there are many people who disagree with the clock," Franklin
laughed.  "In this office, even the moments have the gout.  They limp
along with slow feet."

It was a gloomy room.  The chairs, lounges and tables had a venerable
look like that of the men who came there with warped legs and old
mahogany faces.  The red rugs and hangings suggested "the effect of old
port on the human countenance, being of a hue like unto that of many
cheeks and noses in the waiting company," as the young man wrote.  The
door to the private room of the great physician creaked on its hinges
with a kind of groan when he came out accompanied by a limping patient.

"Wait here for a minute--a gout minute," said Franklin to his young
friend.  "When Pringle dismisses me, I will present you."

Jack sat and waited while the room filled with ruddy, crotchety
gentlemen supported by canes or crutches--elderly, old and of middle
age.  Among those of the latter class was a giant of a man, erect and
dignified, accompanied by a big blond youngster in a lieutenant's
uniform.  He sat down and began to talk with another patient of the
troubles in America.

"I see the damned Yankees have thrown another cargo of tea overboard,"
said he in a tone of anger.

"This time it was in Cape Cod.  We must give those Yahoos a lesson."

Jack surmised now that here was the aggressive Tory General of whom the
Doctor had spoken and that the young man was his son.

"I fear that it would be a costly business sending men to fight across
three thousand miles of sea," said the other.

"Bosh!  There is not one Yankee in a hundred that has the courage of a
rabbit.  With a thousand British grenadiers, I would undertake to go
from one end of America to another and amputate the heads of the males,
partly by force and partly by coaxing."

A laugh followed these insulting words.  Jack Irons rose quickly and
approached the man who had uttered them.  The young American was angry,
but he managed to say with good composure:

"I am an American, sir, and I demand a retraction of those words or a
chance to match my courage against yours."

A murmur of surprise greeted his challenge.

The Britisher turned quickly with color mounting to his brow and
surveyed the sturdy form of the young man.

"I take back nothing that I say," he declared.

"Then, in behalf of my slandered countrymen, I demand the right to
fight you or any Britisher who has the courage to take up your quarrel."

Jack Irons had spoken calmly like one who had weighed his words.

The young Lieutenant who had entered the room with the fiery,
middle-aged Britisher, rose and faced the American and said:

"I will take up his quarrel, sir.  Here is my card."

"And here is mine," said Jack.  "When will you be at home?"

"At noon to-morrow."

"Some friend of mine will call upon you," Jack assured the other.

A look of surprise came to the face of the Lieutenant as he surveyed
the card in his hand.  Jack was prepared for the name he read which was
that of Lionel Clarke.

Franklin wrote some weeks later in a letter to John Irons of Albany:
"When I came out of the physician's office I saw nothing in Jack's face
and manner to suggest the serious proceeding he had entered upon.  If I
had, or if some one had dropped a hint to me, I should have done what I
could to prevent this unfortunate affair.  He chatted with Sir John a
moment and we went out as if nothing unusual had happened.  On the way
to my house we talked of the good weather we were having, of the late
news from America and of my summons to appear before the Privy Council.
He betrayed no sign of the folly which was on foot.  I saw him only
once after he helped me into the house and left me to go to his
lodgings.  But often I find myself thinking of his handsome face and
heroic figure and gentle voice and hand.  He was like a loving son to
me."



2

That evening Solomon arrived with Preston.  Solomon gave a whistle of
relief as he entered their lodgings on Bloomsbury Square and dropped
into a chair.

"Wal, sir!  We been flyin' eround as brisk as a bee," he remarked.  "I
feel as if I had spraint one leg and spavined t'other.  The sun was
over the fore yard when we got back, and since then, we went to see the
wild animals, a hip'pottermas, an' lions, an' tigers, an' snakes, an' a
bird with a neck as long as a hoe handle, an' a head like a tommyhawk.
I wouldn't wonder if he could peck some, an' they say he can fetch a
kick that would knock a hoss down.  Gosh!  I kind o' felt fer my gun!
Gol darn his pictur'!  Think o' bein' kicked by a bird an' havin' to be
picked up an' carried off to be mended.  We took a long, crooked trail
hum an' walked all the way.  It's kind o' hard footin'."

Solomon spoke with the animation of a boy.  At last he had found
something in London which had pleased and excited him.

"Did you have a good time at Sir Jeffrey's?" the young man asked.

"Better'n a barn raisin'!  Say, hones', I never seen nothin' like
it--'twere so blandiferous!  At fust I were a leetle bit like a man
tied to a tree--felt so helpless an' unsart'in.  Didn't know what were
goin' to happen.  Then ol' Jeff come an' ontied me, as ye might say,
an' I 'gun to feel right.  'Course Preston tol' me not to be
skeered--that the doin's would be friendly, an' they was.  Gol darn my
pictur'!  I'll bet a pint o' powder an' a fish hook thar ain't no nicer
womern in this world than ol' Jeff's wife--not one.  I give her my
jack-knife.  She ast me fer it.  'Twere a good knife, but I were glad
to give it to her.  Gosh!  I dunno what she wants to do with it.  Mebbe
she likes to whittle.  They's some does.  I kind o' like it myself.  I
warned her to be keerful not to cut herself 'cause 'twere sharper'n the
tooth o' a weasel.  The vittles was tasty--no common ven'son er moose
meat, but the best roast beef, an' mutton, an' ham an' jest 'nough
Santa Cruz rum to keep the timber floatin'!  They snickered when I tol'
'em I'd take my tea bar' foot.  I set 'mongst a lot o' young folks,
mostly gals, full o' laugh an' ginger, an' as purty to look at as a
flock o' red birds, an' I sot thar tellin' stories 'bout the Injun
wars, an' bear, an' moose, an' painters till the moon were down an' a
clock hollered one.  Then I let each o' them gals snip off a grab o' my
hair.  I dunno what they wanted to do with it, but they 'pear to be as
fond o' takin' hair as Injuns.  Mebbe 'twas fer good luck.  I wouldn't
wonder if my head looks like it was shingled.  Ayes!  I had an almighty
good time.

"These 'ere British is good folks as fur as I've been able to look 'em
over.  It's the gov'ment that's down on us an' the gov'ment ain't the
people--you hear to me.  They's lots o' good, friendly folks here, but
I'm ready to go hum.  They's a ship leaves Dover Thursday 'fore sunrise
an' my name is put down."

Jack told them in detail of the unfortunate event of the morning.

Solomon whistled while his face began to get ready for a shot.

"Neevarious!" he exclaimed.  "Here's suthin' that'll have to be 'tended
to 'fore I take the water."

"Clarke is full of hartshorn and vinegar," said Preston.  "He was like
that in America.  He could make more trouble in ten minutes than a
regiment could mend in a year.  He is what you would call 'a mean
cuss.'  But for him and Lord Cornwallis, I should be back in the
service.  They blame me for the present posture of affairs in America."

"Jack, I'm glad that young pup ain't me," said Solomon.  "Thar never
was a man better cocalated to please a friend er hurt an enemy.  If he
was to say pistols I guess that ol' sling o' yours would bu'st out
laughin' an' I ain't no idee he could stan' a minnit in front o' your
hanger."

"It's bad business, and especially for you," said Preston.  "Dueling is
not so much in favor here as in France.  Of course there are duels, but
the best people in England are set against the practise.  You would be
sure to get the worst of it.  The old General is a favorite of the
King.  He is booked for knighthood.  If you were to kill his son in the
present state of feeling here, your neck would be in danger.  If you
were to injure him you would have to make a lucky escape, or go to
prison.  It is not a pleasant outlook for one who is engaged to an
English girl.  He has a great advantage over you."

"True, but it gives me a better chance to vindicate the courage of an
American.  I shall fight.  I would rather die than lie down to such an
insult.  There has been too much of that kind of talk here.  It can not
go on in my hearing without being trumped.  If I were capable of taking
such an insult, I could never again face the girl I love.  There must
be an apology as public as the insult or a fight.  I don't want to kill
any man, but I must show them that their cap doesn't fit me."

Jack and Solomon sat up late.  The young man had tried to see Margaret
that evening, but the door boy at Sir Benjamin's had informed him that
the family was not at home.  He rightly suspected that the boy had done
this under orders from the Baronet.  He wrote a long letter to the girl
apprising her of late developments in the relations of the ministry and
Doctor Franklin, regarding which the latter desired no secrecy, and of
his own unhappy situation.

"If I could bear such an insult in silence," he added, "I should be
unworthy of the fairest and dearest girl on earth.  With such an
estimate of you, I must keep myself in good countenance.  Whatever
happens, be sure that I am loving you with all my heart, and longing
for the time when I can make you my wife."

This letter he put into his pocket with the purpose of asking Preston
to deliver it if circumstances should drive him out of England or into
prison.

Captain Preston went with Solomon Binkus next day to the address on the
card of Lieutenant Clarke.  It was the house of the General, who was
waiting with his son in the reception room.  They walked together to
the Almack Club.  The General was self-contained.  It would seem that
his bad opinion of Yankees was not quite so comprehensive as it had
been.  The whole proceeding went forward with the utmost politeness.

"General, Mr. Binkus and John Irons, Jr., are my friends," said Captain
Preston.

"Indeed!" the General answered.

"Yes, and they are friends of England.  They saved my neck in America.
I have assured young Irons that your words, if they were correctly
reported to me, were spoken in haste, and that they do not express your
real opinion."

"And what, sir, were the words reported to you?" the General asked.

Preston repeated them.

"That is my opinion."

"It is mine also," young Clarke declared.

Solomon's face changed quickly.  He took deliberate aim at the enemy
and drawled:

"Can't be yer opinion is wuth more than the lives o' these young
fellers that's goin' to fight."

"Gentlemen, you will save time by dropping all thought of apologies,"
said the General.

"Then it only remains for you to choose your weapons and agree with us
as to time and place," said Preston.

"I choose pistols," said the young Britisher.  "The time and place may
suit your convenience, so it be soon and not too far away,"

"Let us say the cow wallow on Shooter's Hill, near the oaks, at sunrise
to-morrow," Preston proposed.

"I agree," the Lieutenant answered.

"Whatever comes of it, let us have secrecy and all possible protection
from each side to the other when the affair is ended," said Preston.

"I agree to that also," was the answer of young Clarke.

When they were leaving, Solomon said to Preston:

"That 'ere Gin'ral is as big as Goliar."




CHAPTER IX

THE ENCOUNTER

Solomon, Jack and their friend left London that afternoon in the saddle
and took lodgings at The Rose and Garter, less than a mile from the
scene appointed for the encounter.  That morning the Americans had sent
a friend of Preston by post chaise to Deal, with Solomon's luggage.
Preston had also engaged the celebrated surgeon, Doctor Brooks, to
spend the night with them so that he would be sure to be on hand in the
morning.  The doctor had officiated at no less than a dozen duels and
enjoyed these affairs so keenly that he was glad to give his help
without a fee.  The party had gone out in the saddle because Preston
had said that the horses might be useful.

So, having discussed the perils of the immediate future, they had done
all it was in their power to do to prepare for them.  Late that evening
the General and his son and four other gentlemen arrived at The Rose
and Garter.  Certain of them had spent the afternoon in the
neighborhood shooting birds and rabbits.

Solomon got Jack to bed early and sat for a time in their room
tinkering with the pistols.  When the locks were working "right," as he
put it, he polished their grips and barrels.

"Now I reckon they'll speak out when ye pull the trigger," he said to
Jack.  "An' yer eyesight 'll skate erlong easy on the top o' them
bar'ls."

"It's a miserable kind of business," said the young man, who was lying
in bed and looking at his friend.  "We Americans have a rather hard
time of it, I say.  Life is a fight from beginning to end.  We have had
to fight with the wilderness for our land and with the Indians and the
French for our lives, and now the British come along and tell us what
we must and mustn't do and burn up our houses."

"An' spit on us an' talk as if we was a lot o' boar pigs," said
Solomon.  "But ol' Jeff tol' me 'twere the King an' his crowd that was
makin' all the trouble."

"Well, the King and his army can make us trouble enough," Jack
answered.  "It's as necessary for an American to know how to fight as
to know how to walk."

"Now ye stop worryin' an' go to sleep 'er I'll take ye crost my knee,"
said Solomon.  "They ain't goin' to be no great damage done, not if ye
do as I tell ye.  I've been an' looked the ground over an' if we have
to leg it, I know which way to go."

Solomon had heard from Preston that evening that the Lieutenant was the
best pistol shot in his regiment, but he kept the gossip to himself,
knowing it would not improve the aim of his young friend.  But Solomon
was made uneasy by this report.

"My boy kin throw a bullet straight as a plumb line an' quick as
lightnin'," he had said to Preston.  "It's as nat'ral fer him as
drawin' his breath.  That ere chap may git bored 'fore he has time to
pull.  I ain't much skeered."

Jack was nervous, although not from fear.  His estimate of the value of
human life had been increased by his affection for Margaret.  When
Solomon had gone to bed and the lights were blown, the young man felt
every side of his predicament to see if there were any peaceable way
out of it.  For hours he labored with this hopeless task, until he fell
into a troubled sleep, in which he saw great battalions marching toward
each other.  On one side, the figures of himself and Solomon were
repeated thousands of times, and on the other was a host of Lionel
Clarkes.

The words came to his ear: "My son, we're goin' to fight the first
battle o' the war."

Jack awoke suddenly and opened his eyes.  The candle was lighted.
Solomon was leaning over him.  He was drawing on his trousers.

"Come, my son," said the scout in a gentle voice.  "They ain't a cloud
an' the moon has got a smile on her face.  Come, my young David.
Here's the breeches an' the purty stockin's an' shoes, an' the lily
white shirt.  Slip 'em on an' we'll kneel down an' have a word o'
prayer.  This 'ere ain't no common fight.  It's a battle with tyranny.
It's like the fight o' David an' Goliar.  Here's yer ol' sling waitin'
fer ye!"

Solomon felt the pistols and stroked their grips with a loving hand.

Side by side they knelt by the bed together for a moment of silent
prayer.

Others were stirring in the inn.  They could hear footsteps and low
voices in a room near them.  Jack put on his suit of brown velvet and
his white silk stockings and best linen, which he had brought in a
small bag.  Jack was looking at the pistols, when there came a rap at
the door.  Preston entered with Doctor Brooks.

"We are to go out quietly ahead of the others," said the Captain.
"They will follow in five minutes."

Solomon had put on the old hanger which had come to England with him in
his box.  He put the pistols in his pocket and they left the inn by a
rear door.  A groom was waiting there with the horses saddled and
bridled.  They mounted them and rode to the field of honor.  When they
dismounted on the ground chosen, the day was dawning, but the great
oaks were still waist deep in gloom.  It was cold.

Preston called his friends to his side and said:

"You will fight at twenty paces.  I shall count three and when I drop
my handkerchief you are both to fire."

Solomon turned to Jack and said:

"If ye fire quick mebbe ye'll take the crook out o' his finger 'fore it
has time to pull."

The other party was coming.  There were six men in it.  The General and
his son and one other were in military dress.  The General was chatting
with a friend.  The pistols were loaded by Solomon and General Clarke,
while each watched the other.  The Lieutenant's friends and seconds
stood close together laughing at some jest.

"That's funny, I'll say, what--what!" said one of the gentlemen.

Jack turned to look at him, for there had been a curious inflection in
his "what, what!"  He was a stout, highly colored man with large,
staring gray eyes.  The young American wondered where he had seen him
before.

Preston paced the ground and laid down strips of white ribband marking
the distance which was to separate the principals.  He summoned the
young men and said: "Gentlemen, is there no way in which your honor can
be satisfied without fighting?"

They shook their heads.

"Your stations have been chosen by lot.  Irons, yours is there.  Take
your ground, gentlemen."

The young men walked to their places and at this point the graphic
Major Solomon Binkus, whose keen eyes observed every detail of the
scene, is able to assume the position of narrator, the words which
follow being from a letter he wrote to John Irons of Albany.

"Our young David stood up thar as straight an' han'some as a young
spruce on a still day--not a quiver in ary twig.  The Clarke boy was a
leetle pale an' when he raised his pistol I could see a twitch in his
lips.  He looked kind o' stiff.  I see they was one thing' 'bout
shootin' he hadn't learnt.  It don't do to tighten up.  I were
skeered--I don't deny it--'cause a gun don't allus have to be p'inted
careful to kill a man.

"We all stood watchin' every move.  I could hear a bird singin' twenty
rod,--'twere that still.  Preston stood a leetle out o' line 'bout
half-way betwixt 'em.  Up come his hand with the han'kerchief in it.
Then Jack raised his pistol and took a peek down the line he wanted.
The han'kerchief was in the air.  Don't seem so it had fell an inch
when the pistols went pop! pop!  Jack's hollered fust.  Clarke's pistol
fell.  His arm dropped an' swung limp as a rope's end.  His hand turned
red an' blood began to spurt above it.  I see Jack's bullet had jumped
into his right wrist an' tore it wide open.  The Lieutenant staggered,
bleedin' like a stuck whale.  He'd 'a' gone to the ground but his
friends grabbed him.  I run to Jack.

"'Be ye hit?' I says.

"'I think his bullet teched me a little on the top o' the left
shoulder,' says he.

"I see his coat were tore an' we took it off an' the jacket, an' I
ripped the shirt some an' see that the bullet had kind o' scuffed its
foot on him goin' by, an' left a track in the skin.  It didn't mount to
nothin'.  The Doctor washed it off an' put a plaster on.

"'Looks as if he'd drawed a line on yer heart an' yer bullet had lifted
his aim,' I says.  'Ye shoot quick, Jack, an' mebbe that's what saved
ye.'

"It looked kind o' neevarious like that 'ere Englishman had intended
they was goin' to be one Yankee less.  Jack put on his jacket an' his
coat an' we stepped over to see how they was gettin' erlong with the
other feller.  The two doctors was tryin' fer to fix his arm and he
were groanin' severe.  Jack leaned over and looked down at him.

"'I'm sorry,' he says.  'Is there anything I can do?'

"'No, sir.  You've done enuff,' growled the old General.

"One o' his party stepped up to Jack.  He were dressed like a high-up
officer in the army.  They was a cur'ous look in his eyes--kind o'
skeered like.  Seemed so I'd seen him afore somewheres.

"'I fancy ye're a good shot, sir--a good shot, sir--what--what?' he
says to Jack, an' the words come as fast as a bird's twitter.

"I've had a lot o' practise,' says our boy.

"'Kin ye kill that bird--what--what?" says he, p'intin' at a hawk that
were a-cuttin' circles in the air.

"'If he comes clus' 'nough,' says Jack.

"I passed him the loaded pistol.  In 'bout two seconds he lifted it and
bang she went, an' down come the hawk.

"Them fellers all looked at one 'nother.

"'Gin'ral, shake hands with this 'ere boy,' says the man with the
skeered eyes.  'If he is a Yankey he's a decent lad--what--what?'

"The Gin'ral shook hands with Jack an', says he: 'Young man, I have no
doubt o' 'yer curidge or yer decency.'

"A grand pair o' hosses an' a closed coach druv up an' the ol'
what-whatter an' two other men got into it an' hustled off 'cross the
field towards the pike which it looked as if they was in a hurry.
'Fore he were out o' sight a military amb'lance druv up.  Preston come
over to us an' says he:

"'We better be goin'.'

"'Do ye know who he were?' asks Jack.

"'If ye know ye better fergit it,' says Preston.

"'How could I?  He were the King o' England,' says Jack.  'I knowed him
by the look o' his eyes.'

"'Sart'in sure,' says I.  'He's the man that wus bein' toted in a
chair.'

"'Hush!  I tell ye to fergit it,' says Preston.

"'I can fergit all but the fact that he behaved like a gentleman,' says
Jack.

"'I 'spose he were usin' his private brain,' says I."

This, with some slight changes in spelling, paragraphing and
punctuation, is the account which Solomon Binkus gave of the most
exciting adventure these two friends had met with.

Preston came to Jack and whispered: "The outcome is a great surprise to
the other side.  Young Clarke is a dead shot.  An injured officer of
the English army may cause unexpected embarrassment.  But you have time
enough and no haste.  You can take the post chaise and reach the ship
well ahead of her sailing."

"I am of a mind not to go with you," Jack said to Solomon.  "When I go,
I shall take Margaret with me."

So it happened that Jack returned to London while Solomon waited for
the post chaise to Deal.




CHAPTER X

THE LADY OF THE HIDDEN FACE

Next morning at ten, the door boy at his lodgings informed Jack that a
lady was waiting to see him in the parlor.  The lady was deeply veiled.
She did not speak, but arose as he entered the room and handed him a
note.  She was tall and erect with a fine carriage.  Her silence was
impressive, her costume admirable.

The note in a script unfamiliar to the young man was as follows:

"You will find Margaret waiting in a coach at eleven to-day at the
corner of Harley Street and Twickenham Road."

The veiled lady walked to the door and turned and stood looking at him.

Her attitude said clearly: "Well, what is your answer ?"

"I will be there at eleven," said the young man.  The veiled lady
nodded, as if to indicate that her mission was ended, and withdrew.

Jack was thrilled by the information but wondered why it was so wrapped
in mystery.  Not ten minutes had passed after the departure of the
veiled lady when a messenger came with a note from Sir Benjamin Hare.
In a cordial tone, it invited Jack to breakfast at the Almack Club at
twelve-thirty.  The young man returned his acceptance by the same
messenger, and in his best morning suit went to meet Margaret.  A cab
conveyed him to the corner named.  There was the coach with shades
drawn low, waiting.  A footman stood near it.  The door was opened and
he saw Margaret looking out at him and shaking her hand.

"You see what a sly thing I am!" she said when, the greetings over, he
sat by her side and the coach was moving.  "A London girl knows how to
get her way.  She is terribly wise, Jack."

"But, tell me, who was the veiled lady?"

"A go-between.  She makes her living that way.  She is wise, discreet
and reliable.  There is employment for many such in this wicked city.
I feel disgraced, Jack.  I hope you will not think that I am accustomed
to dark and secret ways.  This has worried and distressed me, but I had
to see you."

"And I was longing for a look at you," he said.

"I was sure you would not know how to pull these ropes of intrigue.  I
have heard all about them.  I couldn't help that, you know, and be a
young lady who is quite alive."

"Our time is short and I have much to say," said Jack.  "I am to
breakfast with your father at the Almack Club at twelve-thirty."

She clapped her hands and said, with a laughing face, "I knew he would
ask you!"

"Margaret, I want to take you to America with the approval of your
father, if possible, and without it, if necessary."

"I think you will get his approval," said the girl with enthusiasm.
"He has heard all about the duel.  He says every one he met, of the
court party, last evening, was speaking of it.  They agree that the old
General needed that lesson.  Jack, how proud I am of you!"

She pressed his hand in both of hers.

"I couldn't help knowing how to shoot," he answered.  "And I would not
be worthy to touch this fair hand of yours if I had failed to resent an
insult."

"Although he is a friend of the General, my father was pleased," she
went on.  "He calls you a good sport.  'A young man of high spirit who
is not to be played with,' that is what he said.  Now, Jack, if you do
not stick too hard on principles--if you can yield, only a little, I am
sure he will let us be married."

"I am eager to hear what he may say now," said Jack.  "Whatever it may
be, let us stick together and go to America and be happy.  It would be
a dark world without you.  May I see you to-morrow?"

"At the same hour and place," she answered.

They talked of the home they would have in Philadelphia and planned its
garden, Jack having told of the site he had bought with great trees and
a river view.  They spent an hour which lent its abundant happiness to
many a long year and when they parted, soon after twelve o'clock, Jack
hurried away to keep his appointment.



2

Sir Benjamin received the young man with a warm greeting and friendly
words.  Their breakfast was served in a small room where they were
alone together, and when they were seated the Baronet observed:

"I have heard of the duel.  It has set some of the best tongues in
England wagging in praise of 'the Yankee boy.'  One would scarcely have
expected that."

"No, I was prepared to run for my life--not that I planned to do any
great damage," said Jack.

"You can shoot straight--that is evident.  They call your delivery of
that bullet swift, accurate and merciful.  Your behavior has pleased
some very eminent people.  The blustering talk of the General excites
no sympathy here.  In London, strangers are not likely to be treated as
you were."

"If I did not believe that I should be leaving it," said Jack.  "I
should not like to take up dueling for an amusement, as some men have
done in France."

"You are a well built man inside and out," Sir Benjamin answered.  "You
might have a great future in England.  I speak advisedly."

Their talk had taken a turn quite unexpected.  It flattered the young
man.  He blushed and answered:

"Sir Benjamin, I have no great faith in my talents."

"On terms which I would call easy, you could have fame, honor and
riches, I would say."

"At present I want only your daughter.  As to the rest, I shall make
myself content with what may naturally come to me."

"And let me name the terms on which I should be glad to welcome you to
my family."

"What are the terms?"

"Loyalty to your King and a will to understand and assist his plans."

"I could not follow him unless he will change his plans."

The Baronet put down his fork and looked up at the young man.  "Do you
really mean what you say?" he demanded.  "Is it so difficult for you to
do your duty as a British subject?"

"Sir Benjamin, always I have been taught that it is the duty of a
British subject to resist oppression.  The plans of the King are
oppressive.  I can not fall in with them.  I love Margaret as I love my
life, but I must keep myself worthy of her.  If I could think so well
of my conduct, it is because I have principles that are inviolable."

"At least I hope you would promise me not to take up arms against the
King."

"Please don't ask me to do that.  It would grieve me to fight against
England.  I hope it may never be, but I would rather fight than submit
to tyranny."

The Baronet made no reply to this declaration so firmly made.  A new
look came into his face.  Indignation and resentment were there, but he
did not forget the duty of a host.  He began to speak of other things.
The breakfast went on to its end in an atmosphere of cool politeness.

When they were out upon the street together, Sir Benjamin turned to him
and said:

"Now that we are on neutral ground, I want to say that you Americans
are a stiff-necked lot of people.  You are not like any other breed of
men.  I am done with you.  My way can not be yours.  Let us part as
friends and gentlemen ought to part.  I say good-by with a sense of
regret.  I shall never forget your service to my wife and daughter."

"Think not of that," said the young man.  "What I did for them I would
do for any one who needed my help."

"I have to ask you to give up all hope of marrying my daughter."

"That I can not do," said Jack.  "Over that hope I have no control.  I
might as well promise not to breathe."

"But I must ask you to give me your word as a gentleman that you will
hold no further communication with her."

"Sir Benjamin, I shall be frank with you.  It is an unfair request.  I
can not agree to it."

"What do you say?" the Englishman asked in a tone of astonishment, and
his query was emphasized with a firm tap of his cane on the pavement.

"I hate to displease you, sir, but if I made such a promise, I would be
sure to break it."

"Then, sir, I shall see to it that you have no opportunity to oppose my
will."

In spite of his fine restraint, the eyes of the Baronet glowed with
anger, as he quickly turned from the young man and hurried away.

"Here is more tyranny," the American thought as he went in the opposite
direction.  "But I do not believe he can keep us apart."

"I walked on and on," he wrote to a friend.  "Never had I felt such a
sense of loss and loneliness and dejection.  I almost resented the
inflexible tyranny of my own spirit which had turned him against me.  I
accused myself of a kind of selfishness in the matter.  Had it been
right in me to take a course which endangered the happiness of another,
to say nothing of my own?  But I couldn't have done otherwise, not if I
had known that a mountain were to fall upon me.  I am like all of those
who follow the star in the west.  We do as we must.  I had not seen
Franklin since my duel, and largely because I had been ashamed to face
him.  Now I felt the need of his wisdom and so I turned my steps toward
his door."



3

"I am like the land of Goshen amid the plagues of Egypt," said
Franklin, when the young man was admitted to his office.  "My gout is
gone and I am in good spirits in spite of your adventure."

"And I suppose you will scold me for the adventure."

"You will scold yourself when the consequences have arrived.  They will
be sure to give you a spanking.  The deed is done, and well done.  On
the whole I think it has been good for the cause, but bad for you."

"Why?"

"You may have to run out of England to save your neck and the face of
the King.  He was there, I believe?"

"Yes, sir."

"The injured lad is in a bad way.  The wound caught an infection.
Intense fever and swelling have set in.  I helped Sir John Pringle to
amputate the arm this afternoon, but even that may not save the
patient.  Here is a storm to warn the wandering linnet to his shade.  A
ship goes to-morrow evening.  Get ready to take it.  In that case your
marriage will have to be delayed.  Rash men are often compelled to live
on hope and die fasting."

"With Sir Benjamin, the duel has been a help instead of a hindrance,"
said the young man.  "My stubborn soul has been the great obstacle."

Then he told of his interview with Sir Benjamin Hare.

Franklin put his hand on Jack's shoulder and said with a smile:

"My son, I love you.  I could wish you to be no different.  Cheer up.
Time will lay the dust, and perhaps sooner than you think."

"I hope to see Margaret to-morrow morning."

"Ah, then, 'what Grecian arts of soft persuasion!'" Franklin quoted.
"I hope that she, too, will follow the great star in the west!"

"I hope so, but I greatly fear that our meeting will be prevented."

"Did you get my note of to-day at your lodgings?" Franklin asked.

"No," said Jack.  "I left there soon after ten."

"Lord Chatham has kindly offered to secure admission for you and me to
the House of Lords.  He is making an important motion.  Come, let us go
and see the hereditary legislators."

Lord Stanhope met them at the door of the House of Lords.  There was a
great bustle among the officers when His Lordship announced their names
and his desire to have them admitted.  The officers hurried in after
members and there was some delay, in the course of which the Americans
were turned from the division reserved for eldest sons and brothers of
peers.  Not less than ten minutes were consumed in the process of
seating Franklin and his friend.

Soon Lord Chatham arose and moved that His Majesty's forces be
withdrawn from Boston.  With a singular charm of personality and
address, the great dissenter made his speech.  Jack wrote in his diary
that evening: "The most captivating figure that ever I saw is a
well-bred Englishman trained in the art of public speaking."  The words
were no doubt inspired by the impressive speech of Chatham, which is
now an imperishable part of the history of England.  These words from
it the young man remembered:

"If the ministers thus persevere in misleading and misadvising the
King, I will not say that they can alienate the affection of his
subjects from his crown, but I will affirm that they will make his
crown not worth his wearing; I will not say that the King is betrayed,
but I will say that the kingdom is undone."

Lord Sandwich in a petulant speech declared that the motion ought not
to be received.  He could never believe it the production of a British
peer.  Turning toward Franklin, he flung out:

"I fancy that I have in my eye the person who drew it up--one of the
bitterest and most mischievous enemies this country has ever known."

"Franklin sat immovable and without the slightest change in his
countenance," Jack wrote in a letter to _The Pennsylvania Gazette_.

Chatham declared that the motion was his own, and added:

"If I were the first minister of this country, charged with the
settling of its momentous business, I should not be ashamed to call to
my assistance a man so perfectly acquainted with all American affairs,
as the gentleman so injuriously referred to--one whom all Europe holds
in high estimation for his knowledge and wisdom, which are an honor,
not only to England, but to human nature."

"Franklin told me that this was harder for him to bear than the abuse,
but he kept his countenance as blank as a sheet of white paper," Jack
wrote.  "There was much vehement declamation against the measure and it
was rejected.

"When we had left the chamber, Franklin said to me:

"'That motion was made by the first statesman of the age, who took the
helm of state when the latter was in the depths of despondency and led
it to glorious victory through a war with two of the mightiest kingdoms
in Europe.  Only a few of those men had the slightest understanding of
its merits.  Yet they would not even consider it in a second reading.
They are satisfied with their ignorance.  They have nothing to learn.
Hereditary legislators!  There would be more propriety in hereditary
professors of mathematics!  Heredity is a great success with only one
kind of creature.'

"'What creature?' I asked.

"'The ass,' he answered, with as serious a countenance as I have seen
him wear.

"No further word was spoken as we rode back to his home," the young man
wrote.  "We knew the die had been cast.  We had seen it fall carelessly
out of the hand of Ignorance, obeying intellects swelled with
hereditary passion and conceit.  I now had something to say to my
countrymen."




CHAPTER XI

THE DEPARTURE

That evening Jack received a brief note from Preston.  It said:

"I learn that young Clarke is very ill.  I think you would better get
out of England for fear of what may come.  A trial would be apt to
cause embarrassment in high places.  Can I give you assistance?"

Jack returned this note by the same messenger:

"Thanks, good friend, I shall go as soon as my business is finished,
which I hope may be to-morrow."

Just before the young man went to bed a brief note arrived from
Margaret.  It read;


"DEAREST JACK.  My father has learned of our meeting yesterday and of
how it came about.  He is angry.  He forbids another meeting.  I shall
not submit to his tyranny.  We must assert our rights like good
Americans.  I have a plan.  You will learn of it when we meet to-morrow
at eleven.  Do not send an answer.  Lovingly, MARGARET."


He slept little, and in the morning awaited with keen impatience the
hour of his appointment.

On his way to the place he heard a newsboy shouting the words "duel"
and "Yankee," followed by the suggestive statement: "Bloody murder in
high life."

Evidently Lionel Clarke had died of his wound.  He saw people standing
in groups and reading the paper.  He began to share the nervousness of
Preston and the wise, far-seeing Franklin.  He jumped into a cab and
was at the corner some minutes ahead of time.  Precisely at eleven he
saw the coach draw near.  He hurried to its side.  The footman
dismounted and opened the door.  Inside he saw, not Margaret, but the
lady of the hidden face.

"You are to get in, sir, and make a little journey with the madame,"
said the footman.

Jack got into the coach.  Its door closed, the horses started with a
jump and he was on his way whither he knew not.  Nor did he know the
reason for the rapid pace at which the horses had begun to travel.

"If you do not mind, sir, we will not lift the shades," said the veiled
lady, as the coach started.  "We shall see Margaret soon, I hope."

She had a colorless, cold voice and what was then known in London as
the "patrician manner."  Her tone and silence seemed to say: "Please
remember this is all a matter of business and not a highly agreeable
business to me."

"Where is Margaret?" he asked.

"A long way from here.  We shall meet her at The Ship and Anchor in
Gravesend.  She will be making the journey by another road."

She had answered in a voice as cold as the day and in the manner of one
who had said quite enough.

"Where is Gravesend?"

"On the Thames near the sea," she answered briskly, as if in pity of
his ignorance.

He saw the plan now--an admirable plan.  They were to meet near the
port of sailing and be married and go aboard the ship and away.  It was
the plan of Margaret and much better than any he could have made, for
he knew little of London and its ports.

"Should I not take my baggage with me?"

"There is not time for that," the veiled lady answered.  "We must make
haste.  I have some clothes for you in a bag."

She pointed to a leathern case under the front seat.

He sat thinking of the cleverness of Margaret as they left the edge of
the city and hurried away on the east turnpike.  A mist was coming up
from the sea.  The air ahead had the color of a wool stack.  They
stopped at an inn to feed and water the horses and went on in a dense
fog, which covered the hedge rows on either side and lay thick on the
earth so that the horses seemed to be wading in it.  Their pace slowed
to a walk.  From that time on, the road was like a long ford over which
they proceeded with caution, the driver now and then winding a horn.

Each sat quietly in a corner of the seat with a wall of cold fog
between them.  The young man liked it better than the wall of mystery
through which he had been able to see the silent, veiled form beside
him.

"Do you have much weather like this?" he ventured to inquire by and by.

This answer came out of the bank of fog: "Yes," as if she would have
him understand that she was not being paid for conversation.

From that time forward they rode in a silence broken only by the
creaking of the coach and the sound of the horses' hoofs.  Darkness had
fallen when they reached the little city of Gravesend.  The Ship and
Anchor stood by the water's edge.

"You will please wait here," said the stern lady in a milder voice than
she had used before, as the coach drew up at the inn door, "I shall see
if she has come."

His strange companion entered the inn and returned presently, saying:
"She has not yet arrived.  Delayed by the fog.  We will have our
dinner, if you please."

Jack had not broken his fast since nine and felt keenly the need of
refreshment, but he answered:

"I think that I would better wait for Margaret."

"No, she will have dined at Tillbury," said the masterful lady.  "It
will save time.  Please come and have dinner, sir."

He followed her into the inn.  The landlady, a stout, obsequious woman,
led them to a small dining-room above stairs lighted by many candles
where an open fire was burning cheerfully.

A handsomely dressed man waited by them for orders and retired with the
landlady when they were given.

From this point the scene at the inn is described in the diary of the
American.

"She drew off her hat and veil and a young woman about twenty-eight
years of age and of astonishing beauty stood before me."

"'There, now, I am out of business,' she remarked in a pleasant voice
as she sat down at the table which, had been spread before the
fireplace.  'I will do my best to be a companion to you until Margaret
arrives.'

"She looked into my eyes and smiled.  Her sheath of ice had fallen from
her.

"'You will please forgive my impertinence,' said she.  'I earn my
living by it.  In a world of sentiment and passion I must be as cold
and bloodless as a stone, but in fact, I am very--very human.'

"The waiter came with a tray containing soup, glasses and a bottle of
sherry.  We sat down at the table and our waiter filled two glasses
with the sherry.

"'Thank you, but self-denial is another duty of mine,' she remarked
when I offered her a glass of the wine.  'I live in a tipsy world and
drink--water.  I live in a merry world and keep a stern face.  It is a
vile world and yet I am unpolluted.'

"I drank my glass of wine and had begun to eat my soup when a strange
feeling came over me.  My plate seemed to be sinking through the table.
The wall and fireplace were receding into dim distance.  I knew then
that I had tasted the cup of Circe.  My hands fell through my lap and
suddenly the day ended.  It was like sawing off a board.  The end had
fallen.  There is nothing more to be said of it because my brain had
ceased to receive and record impressions.  I was as totally out of
business as a man in his grave.  When I came to, I was in a berth on
the ship _King William_ bound for New York.  As soon as I knew
anything, I knew that I had been tricked.  My clothes had been removed
and were lying on a chair near me.  My watch and money were
undisturbed.  I had a severe pain in my head.  I dressed and went up on
deck.  The Captain was there.

"'You must have had a night of it in Gravesend,' he said.  'You were
like a dead man when they brought you aboard.'

"'Where am I going?' I asked.

"'To New York,' he answered with a laugh.  'You must have had a time!'

"How much is the fare?"

"'Young man, that need not concern you,' said the Captain.  'Your fare
has been paid in full.  I saw them put a letter in your pocket.  Have
you read it?'"

Jack found the letter and read:


"DEAR SIR--When you see this you will be well out of danger and, it is
hoped, none the worse for your dissipation.  This from one who admires
your skill and courage and who advises you to keep out of England for
at least a year.

        "A WELL WISHER."


He looked back over the stern of the ship.  The shore had fallen out of
sight.  The sky was clear.  The sun shining.  The wind was blowing from
the east.

He stood for a long time looking toward the land he had left.

"Oh, ye wings of the wind! take my love to her and give her news of me
and bid her to be steadfast in her faith and hope," he whispered.

He leaned against the bulwark and tried to think.

"Sir Benjamin has seen to it," he said to himself.  "I shall have no
opportunity to meet her again."

He reviewed the events of the day and their under-current of intrigue.
The King himself might have been concerned in that and Preston also.
It had been on the whole a rather decent performance, he mused, and
perhaps it had kept him out of worse trouble than he was now in.  But
what had happened to Margaret?

He reread her note.

"My father has learned of our meeting and of how it came about," he
quoted.

"More bribery," he thought.  "The intrigante naturally sold her
services to the highest bidder."

He recalled the violent haste with which the coach had rolled away from
the place of meeting.  Had that been due to a fear that Margaret would
defeat their plans?

All these speculations and regrets were soon put away.  But for a long
time one cause of worry was barking at his heels.  It slept beside him
and often touched and awoke him at night.  He had been responsible for
the death of a human being.  What an unlucky hour he had had at Sir
John Pringle's!  Yet he found a degree of comfort in the hope that
those proud men might now have a better thought of the Yankees.




CHAPTER XII

THE FRIEND AND THE GIRL HE LEFT BEHIND HIM

After Jack had been whirled out of London, Franklin called at his
lodgings and learned that he had not been seen for a day.  The wise
philosopher entertained no doubt that the young man had taken ship
agreeably with the advice given him.  A report had been running through
the clubs of London that Lionel Clarke had succumbed.  In fact he had
had a bad turn but had rallied.  Jack must have heard the false report
and taken ship suddenly.

Doctor Franklin went that day to the meeting of the Privy Council,
whither he had been sternly summoned for examination in the matter of
the letters of Hutchinson et al.  For an hour he had stood unmoved
while Alexander Wedderburn, the wittiest barrister in the kingdom,
poured upon him a torrent of abuse.  Even the Judges, against all
traditions of decorum in the high courts of Britain, laughed at the
cleverness of the assault.  That was the speech of which Charles James
Fox declared that it was the most expensive bit of oratory which had
been heard in England since it had cost the kingdom its colonies.

It was alleged that in some manner Franklin had stolen the letters and
violated their sacred privacy.  It is known now that an English
nobleman had put them in his hands to read and that he was in no way
responsible for their publication.  The truth, if it could have been
told, would have bent the proud heads of Wedderburn and the judges to
whom he appealed, in confusion.  But Franklin held his peace, as a man
of honor was bound to do.  He stood erect and dignified with a face
like one carved in wood.

The counsel for the colonies made a weak defense.  The triumph was
complete.  The venerable man was convicted of conduct inconsistent with
the character of a gentleman and deprived of his office as Postmaster
General of the Colonies.

But he had two friends in court.  They were the Lady Hare and her
daughter.  They followed him out of the chamber.  In the great hallway,
Margaret, her eyes wet with tears, embraced and kissed the philosopher.

"I want you to know that I am your friend, and that I love America,"
she said.

"My daughter, it has been a hard hour, but I am sixty-eight years old
and have learned many things," he answered.  "Time is the only avenger
I need.  It will lay the dust."

The girl embraced and kissed him again and said in a voice shaking with
emotion:

"I wish my father and all Englishmen to know that I am your friend and
that I have a love that can not be turned aside or destroyed and that I
will have my right as a human being."

"Come let us go and talk together--we three," he proposed.

They took a cab and drove away.

"You will think all this a singular proceeding," Lady Hare remarked.
"I must tell you that rebellion has started in our home.  Its peace is
quite destroyed.  Margaret has declared her right to the use of her own
mind."

"Well, if she is to use any mind it will have to be that one," Franklin
answered.  "I do not see why women should not be entitled to use their
minds as well as their hands and feet."

"I was kept at home yesterday by force," said Margaret.  "Every door
locked and guarded!  It was brutal tyranny."

"The poor child has my sympathy but what can I do?" Lady Hare inquired.

"Being an American, you can expect but one answer from me," said the
philosopher.  "To us tyranny in home or state is intolerable.  They
tried it on me when I was a boy and I ran away."

"That is what I shall do if necessary," said Margaret.

"Oh, my child!  How would you live?" her mother asked.

"I will answer that question for her, if you will let me," said
Franklin.  "If she needs it, she shall have an allowance out of my
purse."

"Thank you, but that would raise a scandal," said the woman.

"Oh, Your Ladyship, I am old enough to be her grandfather."

"I wish to go with Jack, if you know where he is," Margaret declared,
looking up into the face of the philosopher.

"I think he is pushing toward America," Franklin answered.  "Being
alarmed at the condition of his adversary, I advised him to slip away.
A ship went yesterday.  Probably he's on it.  He had no chance to see
me or to pick up his baggage."

"I shall follow him soon," the girl declared.

"If you will only contain yourself, you will get along with your father
very well," said Lady Hare.  "I know him better than you.  He has
promised to take you to America in December.  You must wait and be
patient.  After all, your father has a large claim upon you."

"I think you will do well to wait, my child," said the philosopher.
"Jack will keep and you are both young.  Fathers are like other
children.  They make mistakes--they even do wrong now and then.  They
have to be forgiven and allowed a chance to repent and improve their
conduct.  Your father is a good man.  Try to win him to your cause."

"And die a maiden," said the girl with a sigh.

"Impossible!" Franklin exclaimed.

"I shall marry Jack or never marry.  I would rather be his wife than
the Queen of England."

"This is surely the age of romance," said the smiling philosopher as
the ladies alighted at their door.  "I wish I were young again."




BOOK TWO


CHAPTER XIII

THE FERMENT

On his voyage to New York, Jack wrote long letters to Margaret and to
Doctor Franklin, which were deposited in the Post-Office on his
arrival, the tenth of March.  He observed a great change in the spirit
of the people.  They were no longer content with words.  The ferment
was showing itself in acts of open and violent disorder.  The statue of
George III, near the Battery, was treated to a volley of decayed eggs,
in the evening of his arrival.  This hot blood was due to the effort to
prevent free speech in the colonies and the proposal to send political
prisoners to England for trial.

Jack took the first boat to Albany and found Solomon working on the
Irons farm.  In his diary he tells of the delightful days of rest he
enjoyed with his family.  Solomon had told them of the great adventure
but Jack would have little to say of it, having no pride in that
achievement.

Soon the scout left on a mission for the Committee of Safety to distant
settlements in the great north bush.

"I'll be spendin' the hull moon in the wilderness," he said to Jack.
"Goin' to Virginny when I get back, an' I'll look fer ye on the way
down."

Jack set out for Philadelphia the day after Solomon left.  He stopped
at Kinderhook on his way down the river and addressed its people on
conditions in England.  A young Tory interrupted his remarks.  At the
barbecue, which followed, this young man was seized and punished by a
number of stalwart girls who removed his collar and jacket by force and
covered his head and neck with molasses and the fuzz of cat tails.
Jack interceded for the Tory and stopped the proceeding.

"My friends, we must control our anger," he said.  "Let us not try to
subdue tyranny by using it ourselves."

Everywhere he found the people in such a temper that Tories had to hold
their peace or suffer punishment.  At the office he learned that his
most important letters had failed to pass the hidden censorship of mail
in England.  He began, at once, to write a series of articles which
hastened the crisis.  The first of them was a talk with Franklin, which
told how his mail had been tampered with; that no letter had come to
his hand through the Post-Office which had not been opened with
apparent indifference as to the evidence of its violation.  The
Doctor's words regarding free speech in America and the proposal to try
the bolder critics for treason were read and discussed in every
household from the sea to the mountains and from Maine to Florida.

"Grievances can not be redressed unless they are known and they can not
be known save through complaints and petitions," the philosopher had
said.  "If these are taken as affronts and the messengers punished, the
vent of grief is stopped up--a dangerous thing in any state.  It is
sure to produce an explosion.

"An evil magistrate with the power to punish for words would be armed
with a terrible weapon.

"Augustus Caesar, with the avowed purpose of preserving Romans from
defamation, made libel subject to the penalties of treason.
Thenceforward every man's life hung by a thread easily severed by some
lying informer.

"Soon it was resolved by all good judges of law that whoever should
insinuate the least doubt of Nero's preeminence in the noble art of
fiddling should be deemed a traitor.  Grief became treason and one lady
was put to death for bewailing the fate of her murdered son.  In time,
silence became treason, and even a look was considered an overt act."

These words of the wise philosopher strengthened the spirit of the land
for its great ordeal.

Jack described the prejudice of the Lords who, content with their
ignorance, spurned every effort to inform them of the conditions in
America.

"And this little tail is wagging the great dog of England, most of
whose people believe in the justice of our complaints," he wrote.

The young man's work had set the bells ringing and they were the bells
of revolt.  The arrival of General Gage at Boston in May, to be civil
governor and commander-in-chief for the continent, and the blockade of
the port twenty days later, compelling its population who had been fed
by the sea to starve or subsist on the bounty of others, drove the most
conservative citizens into the open.  Parties went out Tory hunting.
Every suspected man was compelled to declare himself and if
incorrigible, was sent away.  Town meetings were held even under the
eyes of the King's soldiers and no tribunal was allowed to sit in any
court-house.  At Salem, a meeting was held behind locked doors with the
Governor and his Secretary shouting a proclamation through its keyhole,
declaring it to be dissolved.  The meeting proceeded to its end, and
when the citizens filed out, they had invited the thirteen colonies to
a General Congress in Philadelphia.

It was Solomon Binkus who conveyed the invitation to Pennsylvania and
Virginia.  He had gone on a second mission to Springfield and Boston
and had been in the meeting at Salem with General Ward.  Another man
carried that historic call to the colonies farther south.  In five
weeks, delegates were chosen, and early in August, they were traveling
on many different roads toward the Quaker City.  Crowds gathered in
every town and village they passed.  Solomon, who rode with the
Virginia delegation, told Jack that he hadn't heard so much noise since
the Injun war.

"They was poundin' the bells, an shootin' cannons everywhere," he
declared.  "Men, women and childern crowded 'round us an' split their
lungs yellin'.  They's a streak o' sore throats all the way from
Alexandry to here."

Solomon and his young friend met John Adams on the street.  The
distinguished Massachusetts lawyer said to Jack when the greetings were
over:

"Young man, your pen has been not writing, but making history."

"Does it mean war?" Jack queried.

Mr. Adams wiped his brow with his handkerchief and said; "People in our
circumstances have seldom grown old or died in their beds."

"We ought to be getting ready," said Jack.

"And we are doing little but eat and drink and shout and bluster," Mr.
Adams answered.  "We are being entertained here with meats and curds
and custards and jellies and tarts and floating islands and Madeira
wine.  It is for you to induce the people of Philadelphia to begin to
save.  We need to learn Franklin's philosophy of thrift."

Colonel Washington was a member of the Virginia delegation.  Jack wrote
that he was in uniform, blue coat and red waistcoat and breeches; that
he was a big man standing very erect and about six feet, two inches in
height; that his eyes were blue, his complexion light and rather
florid, his face slightly pock-marked, his brown hair tinged with gray;
that he had the largest hands, save those of Solomon Binkus, that he
had ever seen.  His letter contains these informing words:

"I never quite realized the full meaning of the word 'dignity' until I
saw this man and heard his deep rich voice.  There was a kind of
magnificence in his manner and person when he said:

"'I will raise one thousand men toward the relief of Boston and subsist
them at my own expense.'

"That was all he said and it was the most eloquent speech made in the
convention.  It won the hearts of the New Englanders.  Thereafter, he
was the central figure in that Congress of trusted men.  It is also
evident that he will be the central figure on this side of the ocean
when the storm breaks.  Next day, he announced that he was, as yet,
opposed to any definite move toward independence.  So the delegates
contented themselves with a declaration of rights opposing importations
and especially slaves."

When the Congress adjourned October twenty-sixth to meet again on the
tenth of May, there was little hope of peace among those who had had a
part in its proceedings.

Jack, who knew the conditions in England, knew also that war would come
soon, and freely expressed his views.



2

Letters had come from Margaret giving him the welcome news that Lionel
Clarke had recovered and announcing that her own little revolution had
achieved success.  She and her father would be taking ship for Boston
in December.  Jack had urged that she try to induce him to start at
once, fearing that December would be too late, and so it fell out.
When the news of the Congress reached London, the King made new plans.
He began to prepare for war.  Sir Benjamin Hare, who was to be the
first deputy of General Gage, was assigned to a brigade and immediately
put his regiments in training for service overseas.  He had spent six
months in America and was supposed, in England, to have learned the art
of bush fighting.  Such was the easy optimism of the cheerful young
Minister of War, and his confrères, in the House of Lords.  After the
arrival of the _King William_ at Gravesend on the eighth of December,
no English women went down to the sea in ships for a long time.
Thereafter the water roads were thought to be only for fighting men.
Jack's hope was that armed resistance would convince the British of
their folly.

"A change of front in the Parliament would quickly end the war," he was
wont to say.  Not that he quite believed it.  But young men in love are
apt to say things which they do not quite believe.  In February, 1775,
he gave up his work on _The Gazette_ to aid in the problem of defense.
Solomon, then in Albany, had written that he was going the twentieth of
that month on a mission to the Six Nations of The Long House.

It was unusual for the northern tribes to hold a council in
winter--especially during the moon of the hard snow, but the growing
bitterness of the white men had alarmed them.  They had learned that
another and greater war was at hand and they were restless for fear of
it.  The quarrel was of no concern to the red man, but he foresaw the
deadly peril of choosing the wrong side.  So the wise men of the tribes
were coming into council.

"If we fight England, we got to have the Injuns on our side er else
Tryon County won't be no healthy place fer white folks," Solomon wrote.
"I wished you could go 'long with me an' show 'em the kind o' shootin'
we'll do ag'in' the English an' tell 'em they could count the leaves in
the bush easier than the men in the home o' the south wind, an' all
good shooters.  Put on a big, two-story bearskin cap with a red ribband
tied around it an' bring plenty o' gewgaws.  I don't care what they be
so long as they shine an' rattle.  I cocalate you an' me could do good
work."

Immediately the young man packed his box and set out by stage on his
way to the North.  Near West Point, he left the sleigh, which had
stopped for repairs, and put on his skates and with the wind mostly at
his back, made Albany early that evening on the river roof.  He found
the family and Solomon eating supper, with the table drawn close to the
fireside, it being a cold night.

"I think that St. Nicholas was never more welcome in any home or the
creator of more happiness than I was that night," he wrote in a letter
to Margaret, sent through his friend Doctor Franklin.  "What a glow was
in the faces of my mother and father and Solomon Binkus--the man who
was so liked in London!  What cries of joy came from the children!
They clung to me and my little brother, Josiah, sat on my knee while I
ate my sausage and flapjacks and maple molasses.  I shall never forget
that supper hour for, belike, I was hungry enough to eat an ox.  You
would never see a homecoming like that in England, I fancy.  Here the
family ties are very strong.  We have no opera, no theater, no balls
and only now and then a simple party of neighborhood folk.  We work
hard and are weary at night.  So our pleasures are few and mostly those
shared in the family circles.  A little thing, such as a homecoming, or
a new book, brings a joy that we remember as long as we live.  I hope
that you will not be appalled by the simplicity of my father's home and
neighborhood.  There is something very sweet and beautiful in it,
which, I am sure, you would not fail to discover.

"Philadelphia and Boston are more like the cities you know.  They are
getting ambitious and are beginning to ape the manners of England but,
even there, you would, find most people like my own.  The attempts at
grandeur are often ludicrous.  In Philadelphia, I have seen men sitting
at public banquets without coat or collar and drinking out of bottles."

Next day, Jack and Solomon set out with packs and snow-shoes for The
Long House, which was the great highway of the Indians.  It cut the
province from the Hudson to Lake Erie.  In summer it was roofed by the
leaves of the forest.  The chief villages of the Six Tribes were on or
near it.  This trail was probably the ancient route of the cloven hoof
on its way to the prairies--the thoroughfare of the elk and the
buffalo.  How wisely it was chosen time has shown, for now it is
covered with iron rails, the surveyors having tried in vain to find a
better one.

Late in the second day out, they came suddenly on a young moose.  Jack
presented his piece and brought the animal down.  They skinned him and
cut out the loins and a part of each hind quarter.  When Solomon
wrapped the meat in a part of the hide and slung it over his shoulder,
night was falling.

"Cat's blood an' gunpowder!  The ol' night has a sly foot," said
Solomon.  "We won't see no Crow Hill tavern.  We got t' make a snow
house."

On the south side of a steep hill near them was a deep, hard frozen
drift.  Solomon cut the crust with his hatchet and began moving big
blocks of snow.  Soon he had made a cavern in the great white pile, a
fathom deep and high, and as long as a full grown man.  They put in a
floor of balsam boughs and spread their blankets on it.  Then they cut
a small dead pine and built a fire a few feet in front of their house
and fried some bacon and a steak and made snow water and a pot of tea.
The steak and bacon were eaten on slices of bread without knife or
fork.  Their repast over, Solomon made a rack and began jerking the
meat with a slow fire of green hardwood smoldering some three feet
below it.   The "jerk" under way, they reclined on their blankets in
the snow house secure from the touch of a cold wind that swept down the
hillside, looking out at the dying firelight while Solomon told of his
adventures in the Ohio country.

Jack was a bit afflicted with "snow-shoe evil," being unaccustomed to
that kind of travel, and he never forgot the sense of relief and
comfort which he found in the snow house, or the droll talk of Solomon.

"You're havin' more trouble to git married than a Mingo brave," Solomon
said to Jack.  "'Mongst them, when a boy an' gal want to git married,
both fam'lies have to go an' take a sweat together.  They heat a lot o'
rocks an' roll 'em into a pen made o' sticks put in crotches an'
covered over with skins an' blankets.  The hot rocks turn it into a
kind o' oven.  They all crawl in thar an' begin to sweat an' hoot an'
holler.  You kin hear 'em a mile off.  It's a reg'lar hootin' match.
I'd call it a kind o' camp meetin'.  When they holler it means that the
devil is lettin' go.  They're bein' purified.  It kind o' seasons 'em
so they kin stan' the heat o' a family quarrel.  When Injuns have had
the grease sweat out of 'em, they know suthin' has happened.  The
women'll talk fer years 'bout the weddin' sweat."

Now and then, as he talked, Solomon arose to put more wood on the fire
and keep "the jerk sizzling."  Just before he lay down for the night,
he took some hard wood coals and stored them in a griddle full of hot
ashes so as to save tinder in the morning.

They were awakened in the night by the ravening of a pack of wolves at
the carcass of the slain moose, which lay within twenty rods of the
snow camp.  They were growling and snapping as they tore the meat from
the bones.  Solomon rose and drew on his boots.

"Cat's blood an' gunpowder!  I thought the smell o' the jerk would
bring 'em," Solomon whispered.  "Say, they's quite a passel o' wolves
thar--you hear to me.  No, I ain't skeered o' them thar whelps, but
it's ag'in' my principles to go to sleep if they's nuthin' but air
'twixt me an' them.  They might be jest fools 'nough to think I were
good eatin'; which I ain't.  I guess it's 'bout time to take keer o'
this 'ere jerk an' start up a fire.  I won't give them loafers nothin'
but hell, if they come 'round here--not a crumb."

Solomon went to work with his ax in the moonlight, while Jack kindled
up the fire.

"We don't need to tear off our buttons hurryin'," said the former, as
he flung down a dead spruce by the fireside and began chopping it into
sticks.  "They won't be lookin' for more fodder till they've picked the
bones o' that 'ere moose.  Don't make it a big fire er you'll melt our
roof.  We jest need a little belt o' blaze eround our front.  Our rear
is safe.  Chain lightnin' couldn't slide down this 'ere hill without
puttin' on the brakes."

Soon they had a good stack of wood inside the fire line and in the pile
were some straight young birches.  Solomon made stakes of these and
drove them deep in the snow close up to the entrance of their refuge,
making a stockade with an opening in the middle large enough for a man
to pass through.  Then they sat down on their blankets, going out often
to put wood on the fire.  While sitting quietly with their rifles in
hand, they observed that the growling and yelping had ceased.

"They've got that 'ere moose in their packs," Solomon whispered.  "Now
keep yer eye peeled.  They'll be snoopin' eround here to git our share.
You see."

In half a moment, Jack's rifle spoke, followed by the loud yelp of a
wolf well away from the firelight.

"Uh, huh!  You warmed the wax in his ear, that's sart'in;" said Solomon
as Jack was reloading.  "Did ye hear him say 'Don't'?"

The scout's rifle spoke and another wolf yelped.

"Yer welcome," Solomon shouted.  "I slammed that 'er hunk o' lead into
the pack leader--a whale of a wolf.  The ol' Cap'n stepped right up
clus.  Seen 'im plain--gray, long legged ol' whelp.  He were walkin'
towards the fire when he stubbed his toe.  It's all over now.  They'll
snook erway.  The army has lost its Gin'ral."

They saw nothing more of the wolf pack and after an hour or so of
watching, they put more wood on the fire, filled the opening in their
stockade and lay down to rest.  Solomon called it a night of "one-eyed
sleep" when they got up at daylight and rekindled the fire and washed
their hands and faces in the snow.  The two dead wolves lay within
fifty feet of the fire and Solomon cut off the tail of the larger one
for a souvenir.

They had more steak and bread, moistened with tea, for breakfast and
set out again with a good store of jerked meat in their packs.  So they
proceeded on their journey, as sundry faded clippings inform us,
spending their nights thereafter at rude inns or in the cabins of
settlers until they had passed the village of the Mohawks, where they
found only a few old Indians and their squaws and many dogs and young
children.  The chief and his sachems and warriors and their wives had
gone on to the great council fire in the land of Kiodote, the Thorny
Tree.

They spent a night in the little cabin tavern of Bill Scott on the
upper waters of the Mohawk.  Mrs. Scott, a comely woman of twenty-six,
had been a sister of Solomon's wife.  She and the scout had a pleasant
visit about old times in Cherry Valley where they had spent a part of
their childhood, and she was most thoughtful and generous in providing
for their comfort.  The Scotts had lost two children and another, a
baby, was lying asleep in the cradle.  Scott was a hard working, sullen
sort of a man who made his living chiefly by selling rum to the
Indians.  Solomon used to say that he had been "hooked by the love o'
money an' et up by land hunger."

"You'll have to git away from The Long House," Solomon said to Scott.
"One reason I come here was to tell ye."

"What makes ye think so?" Scott asked.

"The Injuns'll hug ye when they're drunk but they'll hate ye when
they're sober," Solomon answered.  "They lay all their trouble to
fire-water an' they're right.  If the cat jumps the wrong way an' they
go on the war-path, ye got to look out."

"I ain't no way skeered," was Scott's answer.  He had a hoarse, damp
voice that suggested the sound of rum gurgling out of a jug.  His red
face indicated that he was himself too fond of the look and taste of
fire-water.

"Ye got to git erway from here I tell ye," Solomon insisted.

Scott stroked his sandy beard and answered: "I guess I know my business
'bout as well as you do."

"Le's go back to Cherry Valley, Bill," the woman urged.

"Oh, keep yer trap shet," Scott said to her.

"He's as selfish as a he-bear," said Solomon as he and Jack were
leaving soon after daylight.  "Don't think o' nuthin' but gittin' rich.
Keeps swappin' firewater fer land an' no idee o' the danger."

They left the woman in tears.

"It's awful lonesome here.  I'll never see ye ag'in," she declared as
she stood wiping her eyes with her apron.

"Here now--you behave!" Solomon exclaimed.  "I'll toddle up to your
door some time next summer."

"Mirandy is a likely womern--I tell ye," Solomon whispered as they went
away.  "He is a mean devil!  Ain't the kind of a man fer her--nary bit.
A rum bottle is the only comp'ny he keers fer."

They often spoke of the pathetic loneliness of this good-looking,
kindly, mismated woman.  Jack and Solomon reached the council on the
fifth day of their travel.  There, a level plain in the forest was
covered with Indians and the snow trodden smooth.  Around it were their
tents and huts and houses.  There were males and females, many of the
latter in rich silks and scarlet cloths bordered with gold fringe.
Some wore brooches and rings in their noses.  Among them were handsome
faces and erect and noble forms.

In the center of the plain stood a great stack of wood and green boughs
of spruce and balsam built up in layers for the evening council fire.

Old Kiodote knew Solomon and remembered Jack, whom he had seen in the
great council at Albany in 1761.

"He says your name was 'Boiling Water,'" Solomon said to Jack after a
moment's talk with the chief.

"He has a good memory," the young man answered.

The two white men were invited to take part in the games.  All the
warriors had heard of Solomon's skill with a rifle.  "Son of the
Thunder," they called him in the League of the Iroquois.  The red men
gathered in great numbers to see him shoot.  Again, as of old, they
were thrilled by his feats with the rifle, but when Jack began his
quick and deadly firing, crushing butternuts thrown into the air, with
rifle and pistol, a kind of awe possessed the crowd.  Many came and
touched him and stared into his face and called him "The Brother of
Death."



3

Solomon's speech that evening before the council fire impressed the
Indians.  He had given much thought to its composition and Jack had
helped him in the invention of vivid phrases loved by the red men.  He
addressed them in the dialect of the Senecas, that being the one with
which he was most familiar.  He spoke of the thunder cloud of war
coming up in the east and the cause of it and begged them to fight with
their white neighbors, under the leadership of The Great Spirit for the
justice which He loved.  Solomon had brought them many gifts in token
of the friendship of himself and his people.

Old Theandenaga, of the Mohawks, answered him in a speech distinguished
by its noble expressions of good will and by an eloquent, but not
ill-tempered, account of the wrongs of the red men.  He laid particular
stress on the corrupting of the young braves with fire-water.

"Let all bad feeling be buried in a deep pool," Solomon answered.
"There are bad white men and there are bad Indians but they are not
many.  The good men are like the leaves of the forest--you can not
count them--but the bad man is like the scent pedlar [the skunk].
Though he is but one, he can make much trouble."

Every judgment of the league in council had to be unanimous.  They
voted in sections, whereupon each section sent its representative into
the higher council and no verdict was announced until its members were
of one mind.  The deliberations were proceeding toward a favorable
judgment as Solomon thought, when Guy Johnson arrived from Johnson
Castle with a train of pack bearers.  A wild night of drunken revelry
followed his arrival.  Jack and Solomon were lodging at a log inn, kept
by a Dutch trader, half a mile or so from the scene of the council.  A
little past midnight, the trader came up into the loft where they were
sleeping on a heap of straw and awakened Solomon.

"Come down the ladder," said the Dutchman.  "A young squaw has come out
from the council.  She will speak to you."

Solomon slipped on his trousers, coat and boots, and went below.  The
squaw was sitting on the floor against the wall.  A blanket was drawn
over the back of her head.  Her handsome face had a familiar look.

"Put out the light," she whispered in English.

The candle was quickly snuffed and then:

"I am the Little White Birch," she said.  "You and my beautiful young
brave were good to me.  You took me to the school and he kissed my
cheek and spoke words like the song of the little brown bird of the
forest.  I have come here to warn you.  Turn away from the great camp
of the red man.  Make your feet go fast.  The young warriors are drunk.
They will come here to slay you.  I say go like the rabbit when he is
scared.  Before daylight, put half a sleep between you and them."

Solomon called Jack and in the darkness they quickly got ready to go.
The Dutchman could give them only a loaf of bread, some salt and a slab
of bacon.  The squaw stood on the door-step watching while they were
getting ready.  Snow was falling.

"They are near," she whispered when the men came out.  "I have heard
them."

She held Jack's hand to her lips and said:

"Let me feel your face.  I can not see it.  I shall see it not again
this side of the Happy Hunting-Grounds."

For a second she touched the face of the young man and he kissed her
forehead.

"This way," she whispered.  "Now go like the snow in the wind, my
beautiful pale face."

"Can we help you?" Jack queried.  "Will you go with us back to the
white man's school?"

"No, I am old woman now.  I have taken the yoke of the red man.  In the
Happy Hunting-Grounds maybe the Great Spirit will give me a pale face.
Then I will go with my father and his people and my beautiful young
brave will take me to his house and not be ashamed.  Go now.  Good-by."

"Little White Birch, I give you this," said Jack, as he put in her hand
the tail of the great gray wolf, beautifully adorned with silver braid
and blue ribbands.

It was snowing hard.  Jack and Solomon started toward a belt of timber
east of the log inn.  Before they reached it, their clothes were white
with snow--a fact which probably saved their lives.  They were shot at
from the edge of the bush.  Solomon shouted to Jack to come on and
wisely ran straight toward the spot from which the rifle flashes had
proceeded.  In the edge of the woods, Jack shot an Indian with his
pistol.  The red man was loading.  So they got through what appeared to
be a cordon around the house and cut into the bush.

"They won't foller us," said Solomon, as the two stopped presently to
put on their snow-shoes.

"What makes you think so ?"

"They don't keer to see us lessen they're hid.  We are the Son o' the
Thunder an' the Brother o' Death.  It would hurt to see us.  The second
our eyes drop on an Injun, he's got a hole in his guts an' they know
it.  They'd ruther go an' set down with a jug o' rum."

"It was a low and devilish trick to bring fire-water into that camp,"
said Jack.

"Guy Johnson is mean enough to steal acorns from a blind hog," Solomon
answered.

Suddenly they heard a loud whooping in the distance and looking back
into the valley they saw a great flare of light.

"They've put the torch to the tavern and will have a dance," said
Solomon.  "We got out jest in time."

"I am afraid for the Little White Birch," said Jack.

"They'll let her alone.  She is one of the wives of ol' Theandenaga.
She will lead the Dutchman an' his family to the house o' the great
chief.  She won't let 'em be hurt if she kin help it.  She knowed they
was a'ter us."

"Why do they want to kill us?" Jack queried.

"'Cause they're goin' to fight with the British an' we shoot so damn
well they want to git us out o' the way an' do it sly an' without
gittin' hurt.  But fer the squaw, we'd be hoppin' eround in that 'ere
loft like a pair o' rats.  They'd 'a' sneaked the Dutchman an' his
folks outdoors with tommyhawks over their heads and scattered grease
an' gunpowder an' boughs on the floor, an' set 'er goin' an' me an' you
asleep above the ladder.  I reckon we'd had to do some climbin' an'
they's no tellin' where we'd 'a' landed, which there ain't do doubt
'bout that."

Solomon seemed to know his way by an instinct like that of a dog.  They
were in the deep woods, traveling by snow light without a trail.  Jack
felt sure they were going wrong, but he said nothing.  By and by there
was a glow in the sky ahead.  The snow had ceased falling and the
heavens were clear.

"Ye see we're goin' right," said Solomon.  "The sun'll be up in half an
hour, but afore we swing to the trail we better git a bite.  Gulf Brook
is down yender in the valley an' I'd kind o' like to taste of it."

They proceeded down a long, wooded slope and came presently to the
brook whose white floored aisle was walled with evergreen thickets
heavy with snow.  Beneath its crystal vault they could hear the song of
the water.  It was a grateful sound for they were warm and thirsty.
Near the point where they deposited their packs was a big beaver dam.

Solomon took his ax and teapot and started up stream.

"Want to git cl'ar 'bove," said he.

"Why?" Jack inquired.

"This 'ere is a beaver nest," said Solomon.

He returned in a moment with his pot full of beautiful clear water of
which they drank deeply.

"Ye see the beavers make a dam an' raise the water," Solomon explained.
"When it gits a good ice roof so thick the sun won't burn a hole in it
afore spring, they tap the dam an' let the water out.  Then they've got
a purty house to live in with a floor o' clean water an' a glass roof
an' plenty o' green popple sticks stored in the corners to feed on.
They have stiddy weather down thar--no cold winds 'er deep snow to
bother 'em.  When the roof rots an' breaks in the sunlight an' slides
off they patch up the dam with mud an' sticks an' they've got a
swimmin' hole to play in."

They built a fire and spread their blankets on a bed of boughs and had
some hot tea and jerked meat and slices of bread soaked in bacon fat.

"Ye see them Injuns is doomed," said Solomon.  "Some on 'em has got
good sense, but rum kind o' kills all argeyment.  Rum is now the great
chief o' the red man.  Rum an' Johnson 'll win 'em over.  Sir William
was their Great White Father.  They trusted him.  Guy an' John have got
his name behind 'em.  The right an' wrong o' the matter ain't able to
git under the Injun's hide.  They'll go with the British an' burn, an'
rob, an' kill.  The settlers 'll give hot blood to their childern.  The
Injun 'll be forever a brother to the snake.  We an' our childern an'
gran'childern 'll curse him an' meller his head.  The League o' the
Iroquois 'll be scattered like dust in the wind, an' we'll wonder where
it has gone.  But 'fore then, they's goin' to be great trouble.  The
white settlers has got to give up their land an' move, 'er turn Tory,
'er be tommy-hawked."

With a sense of failure, they slowly made their way back to Albany,
riding the last half of it on the sled of a settler who was going to
the river city with a grist and a load of furs.




CHAPTER XIV

ADVENTURES IN THE SERVICE OF THE COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF

Soon after they reached home Jack received a letter from Doctor
Franklin who had given up his fruitless work in London and returned to
Philadelphia.

It said: 'My work in England has been fruitless and I am done with it.
I bring you much love from the fair lady of your choice.  That, my
young friend, is a better possession than houses and lands, for even
the flames of war can not destroy it.  I have not seen, in all this
life of mine, a dearer creature or a nobler passion.  And I will tell
you why it is dear to me, as well as to you.  She is like the good
people of England whose heart is with the colonies, but whose will is
being baffled and oppressed.  Let us hope it may not be for long.  My
good wishes for you involve the whole race whose blood is in my veins.
That race has ever been like the patient ox, treading out the corn,
whose leading trait is endurance.

"There is little light in the present outlook.  You and Binkus will do
well to come here.  This, for a time, will be the center of our
activities and you may be needed any moment."

Jack and Solomon went to Philadelphia soon after news of the battle of
Lexington had reached Albany in the last days of April.  They were
among the cheering crowds that welcomed the delegates to the Second
Congress.

Colonel Washington, the only delegate in uniform, was the most
impressive figure in the Congress.  He had come up with a coach and six
horses from Virginia.  The Colonel used to say that even with six
horses, one had a slow and rough journey in the mud and sand.  His
dignity and noble stature, the fame he had won in the Indian wars and
his wisdom and modesty in council, had silenced opposition and opened
his way.  He was a man highly favored of Heaven.  The people of
Philadelphia felt the power of his personality.  They seemed to regard
him with affectionate awe.  All eyes were on him when he walked around.
Not even the magnificent Hancock or the eloquent Patrick Henry
attracted so much attention.  Yet he would stop in the street to speak
to a child or to say a pleasant word to an old acquaintance as he did
to Solomon.

That day in June when the beloved Virginian was chosen to be
Commander-in-Chief of the American forces, Jack and Solomon dined with
Franklin at his home.  John Adams of Boston and John Brown, the great
merchant of Providence, were his other guests.  The distinguished men
were discussing the choice of Colonel Washington.

"I think that Ward is a greater soldier," said Brown.  "Washington has
done no fighting since '58.  Our battles will be in the open.  He is a
bush fighter."

"True, but he is a fighter and, like Achilles, a born master of men,"
Franklin answered.  "His fiery energy saved Braddock's army from being
utterly wiped out.  His gift for deliberation won the confidence of
Congress.  He has wisdom and personality.  He can express them in calm
debate or terrific action.  Above all, he has a sense of the oneness of
America.  Massachusetts and Georgia are as dear to him as Virginia."

"He is a Christian gentleman of proved courage and great sagacity,"
said Adams.  "His one defeat proved him to be the master of himself.
It was a noble defeat."

Doctor Franklin, who never failed to show some token of respect for
every guest at his table, turned to Solomon and said:

"Major Binkus, you have been with him a good deal.  What do you think
of Colonel Washington?"

"I think he's a hull four hoss team an' the dog under the waggin," said
Solomon.

John Adams often quoted these words of the scout and they became a
saying in New England.

"To ask you a question is like priming a pump," said Franklin, as he
turned to Solomon with a laugh.  "Washington is about four times the
average man, with something to spare and that something is the dog
under the wagon.  It would seem that the Lord God has bred and prepared
and sent him among us to be chosen.  We saw and knew and voted.  There
was no room for doubt in my mind."

"And while I am a friend of Ward, I am after all convinced that
Washington is the man," said Brown.  "Nothing so became him as when he
called upon all gentlemen present to remember that he thought himself
unequal to the task."

Washington set out in June with Colonel Lee and a company of Light
Horse for Boston where some sixteen thousand men had assembled with
their rifles and muskets to be organized into an army for the defense
of Massachusetts.



2

A little later Jack and Solomon followed with eight horses and two
wagons loaded with barrels of gunpowder made under the direction of
Benjamin Franklin and paid for with his money.  A British fleet being
in American waters, the overland route was chosen as the safer one.  It
was a slow and toilsome journey with here and there a touch of stern
adventure.  Crossing the pine barrens of New Jersey, they were held up
by a band of Tory refugees and deprived of all the money in their
pockets.  Always Solomon got a squint in one eye and a solemn look in
the other when that matter was referred to.

"'Twere all due to the freight," he said to a friend.  "Ye see their
guns was p'intin' our way and behind us were a ton o' gunpowder.  She's
awful particular comp'ny.  Makes her nervous to have anybody nigh her
that's bein' shot at.  Ye got to be peaceful an' p'lite.  Don't let no
argements come up.  If some feller wants yer money an' has got a gun
it'll be cheaper to let him have it.  I tell ye she's an uppity,
hot-tempered ol' critter--got to be treated jest so er she'll stomp her
foot an' say, 'Scat,' an' then--"

Solomon smiled and gave his right hand a little upward fling and said
no more, having lifted the burden off his mind.

On the post road, beyond Horse Neck in Connecticut, they had a more
serious adventure.  They had been traveling with a crude map of each
main road, showing the location of houses in the settled country where,
at night, they could find shelter and hospitality.  Owing to the
peculiar character of their freight, the Committee in Philadelphia had
requested them to avoid inns and had caused these maps to be sent to
them at post-offices on the road indicating the homes of trusted
patriots from twenty to thirty miles apart.  About six o'clock in the
evening of July twentieth, they reached the home of Israel Lockwood,
three miles above Horse Neck.  They had ridden through a storm which
had shaken and smitten the earth with its thunder-bolts some of which
had fallen near them.  Mr. Lockwood directed them to leave their wagons
on a large empty barn floor and asked them in to supper.

"If you'll bring suthin' out to us, I guess we better stay by her,"
said Solomon.  "She might be nervous."

"Do you have to stay with this stuff all the while?" Lockwood asked.

"Night an' day," said Solomon.  "Don't do to let 'er git lonesome.
To-day when the lightnin' were slappin' the ground on both sides o' me,
I wanted to hop down an' run off in the bush a mile er so fer to see
the kentry, but I jest had to set an' hope that she would hold her
temper an' not go to slappin' back."

"She," as Solomon called the two loads, was a most exacting mistress.
They never left her alone for a moment.  While one was putting away the
horses the other was on guard.  They slept near her at night.

Israel Lockwood sat down for a visit with them when he brought their
food.  While they were eating, another terrific thunder-storm arrived.
In the midst of it a bolt struck the barn and rent its roof open and
set the top of the mow afire.  Solomon jumped to the rear wheel of one
of the wagons while Jack seized the tongue.  In a second it was rolling
down the barn bridge and away.  The barn had filled with smoke and
cinders but these dauntless men rolled out the second wagon.

Rain was falling.  Solomon observed a wisp of smoke coming out from
under the roof of this wagon.  He jumped in and found a live cinder
which had burned through the cover and fallen on one of the barrels.
It was eating into the wood.  Solomon tossed it out in the rain and
smothered "the live spot."  He examined the barrels and the wagon floor
and was satisfied.  In speaking of that incident next day he said to
Jack:

"If I hadn't 'a' had purty good control o' my legs, I guess they'd 'a'
run erway with me.  I had to put the whip on 'em to git 'em to step in
under that wagon roof--you hear to me."

While Solomon was engaged with this trying duty, Lockwood had led the
horses out of the stable below and rescued the harness.  A heavy shower
was falling.  The flames had burst through the roof and in spite of the
rain, the structure was soon destroyed.

"The wind was favorable and we all stood watching the fire, safe but
helpless to do anything for our host," Jack wrote in a letter.
"Fortunately there was another house near and I took the horses to its
barn for the night.  We slept in a woodshed close to the wagons.  We
slipped out of trouble by being on hand when it started.  If we had
gone into the house for supper, I'm inclined to think that the British
would not have been driven out of Boston.

"We passed many companies of marching riflemen.  In front of one of
these, the fife and drum corps playing behind him, was a young Tory,
who had insulted the company, and was, therefore, made to carry a gray
goose in his arms with this maxim of Poor Richard on his back: 'Not
every goose has feathers on him.'

"On the twentieth we reported to General Washington in Cambridge.  This
was the first time I saw him in the uniform of a general.  He wore a
blue coat with buff facings and buff underdress, a small sword, rich
epaulets, a black cockade in his three-cornered hat, and a blue sash
under his coat.  His hair was done up in a queue.  He was in boots and
spurs.  He received us politely, directing a young officer to go with
us to the powder house.  There we saw a large number of barrels.

"'All full of sand,' the officer whispered.  'We keep 'em here to fool
the enemy,'

"Not far from the powder house I overheard this little dialogue between
a captain and a private.

"'Bill, go get a pail o' water,' said the captain.

"'I shan't do it.  'Tain't my turn,' the private answered."

The men and officers were under many kinds of shelter in the big camp.
There were tents and marquees and rude structures built of boards and
roughly hewn timber, and of stone and turf and brick and brush.  Some
had doors and windows wrought out of withes knit together in the
fashion of a basket.  There were handsome young men whose thighs had
never felt the touch of steel; elderly men in faded, moth-eaten
uniforms and wigs.

In their possession were rifles and muskets of varying size, age and
caliber.  Some of them had helped to make the thunders of Naseby and
Marston Moor.  There were old sabers which had touched the ground when
the hosts of Cromwell had knelt in prayer.

Certain of the men were swapping clothes.  No uniforms had been
provided for this singular assemblage of patriots all eager for
service.  Sergeants wore a strip of red on the right shoulder;
corporals a strip of green.  Field officers mounted a red cockade;
captains flaunted a like signal in yellow.  Generals wore a pink
ribband and aides a green one.

This great body of men which had come to besiege Boston was able to
shoot and dig.  That is about all they knew of the art of war.
Training had begun in earnest.  The sergeants were working with squads;
Generals Lee and Ward and Green and Putnam and Sullivan with companies
and regiments from daylight to dark.

Jack was particularly interested in Putnam--a short, rugged, fat,
white-haired farmer from Connecticut of bluff manners and nasal twang
and of great animation for one of his years--he was then fifty-seven.
He was often seen flying about the camp on a horse.  The young man had
read of the heroic exploits of this veteran of the Indian wars.

Their mission finished, that evening Jack and Solomon called at General
Washington's headquarters.

[Illustration: Jack Irons and Solomon Binkus with General George
Washington.]

"General, Doctor Franklin told us to turn over the bosses and wagons to
you," said Solomon.  "He didn't tell us what to do with ourselves
'cause 'twasn't necessary an' he knew it.  We want to enlist."

"For what term?"

"Till the British are licked."

"You are the kind of men I need," said Washington.  "I shall put you on
scout duty.  Mr. Irons will go into my regiment of sharp shooters with
the rank of captain.  You have told me of his training in Philadelphia."



3

So the two friends were enlisted and began service in the army of
Washington.

A letter from Jack to his mother dated July 25, 1775, is full of the
camp color:

"General Charles Lee is in command of my regiment," he writes.  "He is
a rough, slovenly old dog of a man who seems to bark at us on the
training ground.  He has two or three hunting dogs that live with him
in his tent and also a rare gift of profanity which is with him
everywhere--save at headquarters.

"To-day I saw these notices posted in camp:

"'Punctual attendance on divine service is required of all not on
actual duty.'

"'No burning of the pope allowed.'

"'Fifteen stripes for denying duty.'

"'Ten for getting drunk.'

"'Thirty-nine for stealing and desertion.'

"Rogues are put in terror, lazy men are energized.  The quarters are
kept clean, the food is well cooked and in plentiful supply, but the
British over in town are said to be getting hungry."

Early in August a London letter was forwarded to Jack from
Philadelphia.  He was filled with new hope as he read these lines:

"Dearest Jack: I am sailing for Boston on one of the next troop ships
to join my father.  So when the war ends--God grant it may be
soon!--you will not have far to go to find me.  Perhaps by Christmas
time we may be together.  Let us both pray for that.  Meanwhile, I
shall be happier for being nearer you and for doing what I can to heal
the wounds made by this wretched war.  I am going to be a nurse in a
hospital.  You see the truth is that since I met you, I like all men
better, and I shall love to be trying to relieve their sufferings . . ."

It was a long letter but above is as much of it as can claim admission
to these pages.

"Who but she could write such a letter?" Jack asked himself, and then
he held it to his lips a moment.  It thrilled him to think that even
then she was probably in Boston.  In the tent where he and Solomon
lived when they were both in camp, he found the scout.  The night
before Solomon had slept out.  Now he had built a small fire in front
of the tent and lain down on a blanket, having delivered his report at
headquarters.

"Margaret is in Boston," said Jack as soon as he entered, and then
standing in the firelight read the letter to his friend.

"Thar is a real, genewine, likely gal," said the scout.

"I wish there were some way of getting to her," the young man remarked.

"Might as well think o' goin' to hell an' back ag'in," said Solomon.
"Since Bunker Hill the British are like a lot o' hornets.  I run on to
one of 'em to-day.  He fired at me an' didn't hit a thing but the air
an' run like a scared rabbit.  Could 'a' killed him easy but I kind o'
enjoyed seein' him run.  He were like chain lightnin' on a greased
pole--you hear to me."

"If the General will let me, I'm going to try spy duty and see if I can
get into town and out again," he proposed.

"You keep out o' that business," said Solomon.  "They's too many that
know ye over in town.  The two Clarkes an' their friends an' Colonel
Hare an' his friends, an' Cap. Preston, an' a hull passle.  They know
all 'bout ye.  If you got snapped, they'd stan' ye ag'in' a wall an'
put ye out o' the way quick.  It would be pie for the Clarkes, an' the
ol' man Hare wouldn't spill no tears over it.  Cap. Preston couldn't
save ye that's sart'in.  No, sir, I won't 'low it.  They's plenty o'
old cusses fer such work."

For a time Jack abandoned the idea, but later, when Solomon failed to
return from a scouting tour and a report reached camp that he was
captured, the young man began to think of that rather romantic plan
again.  He had grown a full beard; his skin was tanned; his clothes
were worn and torn and faded.  His father, who had visited the camp
bringing a supply of clothes for his son, had failed, at first, to
recognize him.

December had arrived.  The General was having his first great trial in
keeping an army about him.  Terms of enlistment were expiring.  Cold
weather had come.  The camp was uncomfortable.  Regiments of the
homesick lads of New England were leaving or preparing to leave.  Jack
and a number of young ministers in the service organized a campaign of
persuasion and many were prevailed upon to reenlist.  But hundreds of
boys were hurrying homeward on the frozen roads.  The southern
riflemen, who were a long journey from their homes, had not the like
temptation to break away.  Bitter rivalry arose between the boys of the
north and the south.  The latter, especially the Virginia lads, were in
handsome uniforms.  They looked down upon the awkward, homespun ranks
in the regiments of Massachusetts, Rhode Island and Connecticut.  Then
came the famous snowball battle between the boys of Virginia and New
England.  In the midst of it, Washington arrived and, leaping from his
white horse, was quickly in the thick of the fight.  He seized a couple
of Virginia lads and gave them a shaking.

"No more of this," he commanded.

It was all over in a moment.  The men were running toward their
quarters.

"There is a wholesome regard here for the Commander-in-Chief," Jack
wrote to his mother.  "I look not upon his heroic figure without a
thought of the great burden which rests upon it and a thrill of
emotion.  There are many who fear him.  Most severely he will punish
the man who neglects his duty, but how gentle and indulgent he can be,
especially to a new recruit, until the latter has learned the game of
war!  He is like a good father to these thousands of boys and young
men.  No soldier can be flogged when he is near.  If he sees a fellow
tied to the halberds, he will ask about his offense and order him to be
taken down.  In camp his black servant, Bill, is always with him.  Out
of camp he has an escort of light horse.  Morning and evening he holds
divine service in his tent.  When a man does a brave act, the Chief
summons him to headquarters and gives him a token of his appreciation.
I hope to be called one of these days."

Soon after this letter was written, the young man was sent for.  He and
his company had captured a number of men in a skirmish.

"Captain, you have done well," said the General.  "I want to make a
scout of you.  In our present circumstances it's about the most
important, dangerous and difficult work there is to be done here,
especially the work which Solomon Binkus undertook to do.  There is no
other in whom I should have so much confidence."

"You do me great honor," said Jack.  "I shall make a poor showing
compared with that of my friend Major Binkus, but I have some knowledge
of his methods and will do my best."

"You will do well to imitate them with caution," said the General.  "He
was a most intrepid and astute observer.  In the bush they would not
have captured him.  The clearings toward the sea make the work arduous
and full of danger.  It is only for men of your strength and courage.
Major Bartlett knows the part of the line which Colonel Binkus
traversed.  He will be going out that way to-morrow.  I should like
you, sir, to go with him.  After one trip I shall be greatly pleased if
you are capable of doing the work alone."

Orders were delivered and Jack reported to Bartlett, an agreeable,
middle-aged farmer-soldier, who had been on scout duty since July.
They left camp together next morning an hour before reveille.  They had
an uneventful day, mostly in wooded flats and ridges, and from the
latter looking across with a spy-glass into Bruteland, as they called
the country held by the British, and seeing only, now and then, an
enemy picket or distant camps.  About midday they sat down in a thicket
together for a bite to eat and a whispered conference.

"Binkus, as you know, had his own way of scouting," said the Major.
"He was an Indian fighter.  He liked to get inside the enemy lines and
lie close an' watch 'em an' mebbe hear what they were talking about.
Now an' then he would surprise a British sentinel and disarm him an'
bring him into camp."

Jack wondered that his friend had never spoken of the capture of
prisoners.

"He was a modest man," said the young scout.

"He didn't want the British to know where Solomon Binkus was at work,
and I guess he was wise," said the Major.  "I advise you against taking
the chances that he took.  It isn't necessary.  You would be caught
much sooner than he was."

That day Bartlett took Jack over Solomon's trail and gave him the lay
of the land and much good advice.  A young man of Jack's spirit,
however, is apt to have a degree of enterprise and self-confidence not
easily controlled by advice.  He had been traveling alone for three
days when he felt the need of more exciting action.  That night he
crossed the Charles River on the ice in a snow-storm and captured a
sentinel and brought him back to camp.

About this time he wrote another letter to the family, in which he said:

"The boys are coming back from home and reenlisting.  They have not
been paid--no one has been paid--but they are coming back.  More of
them are coming than went away.

"They all tell one story.  The women and the old men made a row about
their being at home in time of war.  On Sunday the minister called them
shirks.  Everybody looked askance at them.  A committee of girls went
from house to house reenlisting the boys.  So here they are, and
Washington has an army, such as it is."



4

Soon after that the daring spirit of the youth led him into a great
adventure.  It was on the night of January fifth that Jack penetrated
the British lines in a snow-storm and got close to an outpost in a
strip of forest.  There a camp-fire was burning.  He came close.  His
garments had been whitened by the storm.  The air was thick with snow,
his feet were muffled in a foot of it.  He sat by a stump scarcely
twenty feet from the fire, seeing those in its light, but quite
invisible.  There he could distinctly hear the talk of the Britishers.
It related to a proposed evacuation of the city by Howe.

"I'm weary of starving to death in this God-forsaken place," said one
of them.  "You can't keep an army without meat or vegetables.  I've
eaten fish till I'm getting scales on me."

"Colonel Riffington says that the army will leave here within a
fortnight," another observed.

It was important information which had come to the ear of the young
scout.  The talk was that of well bred Englishmen who were probably
officers.

"We ought not to speak of those matters aloud," one of them remarked.
"Some damned Yankee may be listening like the one we captured."

"He was Amherst's old scout," said another.  "He swore a blue streak
when we shoved him into jail.  They don't like to be treated like
rebels.  They want to be prisoners of war."

"I don't know why they shouldn't," another answered.  "If this isn't a
war, I never saw one.  There are twenty thousand men under arms across
the river and they've got us nailed in here tighter than a drum.  They
used to say in London that the rebellion was a teapot tempest and that
a thousand grenadiers could march to the Alleghanies in a week and
subdue the country on the way.  You are aware of how far we have
marched from the sea.  It's just about to where we are now.  We've gone
about five miles in eight months.  How many hundreds of years will pass
before we reach the Alleghanies?  But old Gage will tell you that it
isn't a war."

A young man came along with his rifle on his shoulder.

"Hello, Bill!" said one of the men.  "Going out on post?"

"I am, God help me," the youth answered.  "It's what I'd call a hell of
a night."

The sentinel passed close by Jack on his way to his post.  The latter
crept away and followed, gradually closing in upon his quarry.  When
they were well away from the fire, Jack came close and called, "Bill."

The sentinel stopped and faced about.

"You've forgotten something," said Jack, in a genial tone.

"What is it?"

"Your caution," Jack answered, with his pistol against the breast of
his enemy.  "I shall have to kill you if you call or fail to obey me.
Give me the rifle and go on ahead.  When I say gee go to the right, haw
to the left."

So the capture was made, and on the way out Jack picked up the sentinel
who stood waiting to be relieved and took both men into camp.

From documents on the person of one of these young Britishers, it
appeared that General Clarke was in command of a brigade behind the
lines which Jack had been watching and robbing.

When Jack delivered his report the Chief called him a brave lad and
said:

"It is valuable information you have brought to me.  Do not speak of
it.  Let me warn you.  Captain, that from now on they will try to trap
you.  Perhaps, even, you may look for daring enterprises on that part
of their line."

The General was right.  The young scout ran into a most daring and
successful British enterprise on the twentieth of January.  The snow
had been swept away in a warm rain and the ground had frozen bare, or
it would not have been possible.  Jack had got to a strip of woods in a
lonely bit of country near the British lines and was climbing a tall
tree to take observations when he saw a movement on the ground beneath
him.  He stopped and quickly discovered that the tree was surrounded by
British soldiers.  One of them, who stood with a raised rifle, called
to him:

"Irons, I will trouble you to drop your pistols and come down at once."

Jack saw that he had run into an ambush.  He dropped his pistols and
came down.  He had disregarded the warning of the General.  He should
have been looking out for an ambush.  A squad of five men stood about
him with rifles in hand.  Among them was Lionel Clarke, his right
sleeve empty.

"We've got you at last--you damned rebel!" said Clarke.

"I suppose you need some one to swear at," Jack answered.

"And to shoot at," Clarke suggested.

"I thought that you would not care for another match with me," the
young scout remarked as they began to move away.

"Hereafter you will be treated like a rebel and not like a gentleman,"
Clarke answered.

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that you will be standing, blindfolded against a wall."

"That kind of a threat doesn't scare me," Jack answered.  "We have too
many of your men in our hands."




CHAPTER XV

IN BOSTON JAIL

Jack was marched under a guard into the streets of Boston.  Church
bells were ringing.  It was Sunday morning.  Young Clarke came with the
guard beyond the city limits.  They had seemed to be very careless in
the control of their prisoner.  They gave him every chance to make a
break for liberty.  Jack was not fooled.

"I see that you want to get rid of me," said Jack to the young officer.
"You'd like to have me run a race with your bullets.  That is base
ingratitude.  I was careful of you when we met and you do not seem to
know it."

"I know how well you can shoot," Clarke answered.  "But you do not know
how well I can shoot."

"And when I learn, I want to have a fair chance for my life."

Beyond the city limits young Clarke, who was then a captain, left them,
and Jack proceeded with the others.

The streets were quiet--indeed almost deserted.  There were no children
playing on the common.  A crowd was coming out of one of the churches.
In the midst of it the prisoner saw Preston and Lady Hare.  They were
so near that he could have touched them with his hand as he passed.
They did not see him.  He noted the name of the church and its
minister.  In a few minutes he was delivered at the jail--a noisome,
ill-smelling, badly ventilated place.  The jailer was a tall, slim,
sallow man with a thin gray beard.  His face and form were familiar.
He heard Jack's name with a look of great astonishment.  Then the young
man recognized him.  He was Mr. Eliphalet Pinhorn, who had so
distinguished himself on the stage trip to Philadelphia some years
before.

"It is a long time since we met," said Jack.

Mr. Pinhorn's face seemed to lengthen.  His mouth and eyes opened wide
in a silent demand for information.

Jack reminded him of the day and circumstances.

For a moment Mr. Pinhorn held his hand against his forehead and was
dumb with astonishment.  Then he said:

"I knew!  I foresaw!  But it is not too late."

"Too late for what?"

"To turn, to be redeemed, loved, forgiven.  Think it over, sir.  Think
it over."

Jack's name and age and residence were registered.  Then Pinhorn took
his arm and walked with him down the corridor toward an open door.
About half-way to the door he stopped and put his hand on Jack's
shoulder and said with a look of great seriousness:

"A sinking cause!  Death!  Destruction!  Misery!  The ship is going
down.  Leave it."

"You are misinformed.  There is no leak in our ship," said Jack.

Mr. Pinhorn shut his eyes and shook his head mournfully.  Then, with a
wave of his hand, he pronounced the doom of the western world in one
whispered word:

"Ashes!"

For a moment his face and form were alive with exclamatory suggestion.
Then he shook his head and said:

"Doomed!  Poor soul!  Go out in the yard with your fellow rebels.  They
are taking the air."

The yard was an opening walled in by the main structure and its two
wings and a wooden fence some fifteen feet high.  There was a ragged,
dirty rabble of "rebel" prisoners, among whom was Solomon Binkus, all
out for an airing.  The old scout had lost flesh and color.  He held
Jack's hand and stood for a moment without speaking.

"I never was so glad and so sorry in my life," said Solomon.  "It's a
hell-mogrified place to be in.  Smells like a blasted whale an' is as
cold as the north side of a grave stun on a Janooary night, an'
starvation fare, an' they's a man here that's come down with the
smallpox.  How'd ye git ketched?"

Jack briefly told of his capture.

"I got sick one day an' couldn't hide 'cause I were makin' tracks in
the snow so I had to give in," said Solomon.  "Margaret has been here,
but they won't let 'er come no more 'count o' the smallpox.  Sends me
suthin' tasty ev'ry day er two.  I tol' er all 'bout ye.  I guess the
smallpox couldn't keep 'er 'way if she knowed you was here.  But she
won't be 'lowed to know it.  This 'ere Clarke boy has p'isoned the
jail.  Nobody 'll come here 'cept them that's dragged.  He's got it all
fixed fer ye.  I wouldn't wonder if he'd be glad to see ye rotted up
with smallpox."

"What kind of a man is Pinhorn?"

"A whey-faced hypercrit an' a Tory.  Licks the feet o' the British when
they come here."

Jack and Solomon lay for weeks in this dirty, noisome jail, where their
treatment was well calculated to change opinions not deeply rooted in
firm soil.  They did not fear the smallpox, as both were immune.  But
their confinement was, as doubtless it was intended to be, memorably
punitive.  They were "rebels"--law-breakers, human rubbish whose
offenses bordered upon treason.  The smallpox patient was soon taken
away, but other conditions were not improved.  They slept on straw
infested with vermin.  Their cover and food were insufficient and "not
fit fer a dog," in the words of Solomon.  Some of the boys gave in and
were set free on parole, and there was one, at least, who went to work
in the ranks of the British.

There is a passage in a letter of Jack Irons regarding conditions in
the jail which should be quoted here:

"One boy has lung fever and every night I hear him sobbing.  His sorrow
travels like fire among the weaker men.  I have heard a number of cold,
half-starved, homesick lads crying like women in the middle of the
night.  It makes me feel like letting go myself.  There is one man who
swears like a trooper when it begins.  I suppose that I shall be as
hysterical as the rest of them in time.  I don't believe General Howe
knows what is going on here.  The jail is run by American Tories, who
are wreaking their hatred on us."

Jack sent a line to the rector of the Church of England, where he had
seen Preston and Lady Howe, inviting him to call, but saw him not, and
no word came from him.  Letters were entrusted to Mr. Pinhorn for
Preston, Margaret and General Sir Benjamin Hare with handsome payment
for their delivery, but they waited in vain for an answer.

"They's suthin' wrong 'bout this 'ere business," said Solomon.  "You'll
find that ol' Pinhorn has got a pair o' split hoofs under his luther."

One day Jack was sent for by Mr. Pinhorn and conducted to his office.

"Honor!  Good luck!  Relief!" was the threefold exclamation with which
the young man was greeted.

"What do you mean?" Jack inquired.

"General Howe!  You!  Message to Mr. Washington!  To-night!"

"Do you mean General Washington?"

"No.  Mister!  Title not recognized here!"'

"I shall take no message to 'Mr.' Washington," Jack answered.  "If I
did, I am sure that he would not receive it."

Mr. Pinhorn's face expressed a high degree of astonishment.

"Pride!  Error!  Persistent error!" he exclaimed.  "Never mind!
Details can be fixed.  You are to go to-night.  Return to-morrow!"

The prospect of getting away from his misery even for a day or two was
alluring.

"Let me have the details in writing and I will let you know at once,"
he answered.

The plan was soon delivered.  Jack was to pass the lines on the
northeast front in the vicinity of Breed's Hill with a British
sergeant, under a white flag, and proceed to Washington's headquarters.

"Looks kind o' neevarious," said Solomon when they were out in the jail
yard together.  "Looks like ye might be grabbed in the jaws o' a trap.
Nobody's name is signed to this 'ere paper.  There's nothin' behind the
hull thing but ol' Pinhorn an'--who?  I'm skeered o' Mr. Who?  Pinhorn
an' Who an' a Dark Night!  There's a pardnership!  Kind o' well mated!
They want ye to put yer life in their hands.  What fer?  Wal, ye know
it 'pears to me they'd be apt to be car'less with it.  It's jest
possible that there's some feller who'll be happier if you was rubbed
off the slate.  War is goin' on an' you belong to that breed o' pups
they call rebels.  A dead rebel don't cause no hard feelin's in the
British army.  Now, Jack, you stay where ye be.  'Tain't a fust rate
place, but it's better'n a hole in the ground.  Suthin' is goin' to
happen--you mark my words, boy.  I kind o' think Margaret is gittin'
anxious to talk with me an' kin't be kept erway no longer.  Mebbe the
British army is goin' to move.  Ye know fer two days an' nights we been
hearin' cannon fire."

"Solomon, I'm not going out to be shot in the back," said the young
man.  "If I am to be executed, it must be done with witnesses in proper
form.  I shall refuse to go.  If Margaret should come, and it is
possible, I want you to sit down with her in front of my cell so that I
can see her, but do not tell her that I am here.  It would increase her
trouble and do no good.  Besides, I could not permit myself to touch
her hand even, but I would love to look into her face."

So it happened that the proposal which had come to Jack through Mr.
Pinhorn was firmly declined, whereupon the astonishment of that
official was expressed in a sorrowful gesture and the exclamation:
"Doomed!  Stubborn youth!"



2

Solomon Binkus was indeed a shrewd man.  In the faded packet of letters
is one which recites the history of the confinement of the two scouts
in the Boston jail.  It tells of the coming of Margaret that very
evening with an order from the Adjutant General directing Mr. Pinhorn
to allow her to talk with the "rebel prisoner Solomon Binkus."

The official conducted her to the iron grated door in front of
Solomon's cell.

"I will talk with him in the corridor, if you please," she said, as she
gave the jailer a guinea, whereupon he became most obliging.  The cell
door was opened and chairs were brought for them to sit upon.  Cannons
were roaring again and the sound was nearer than it had been before.

"Have you heard from Jack?" she asked when they were seated in front of
the cell of the latter.

"Yes, ma'am.  He is well, but like a man shot with rock salt."

"What do you mean?"

"Sufferin'," Solomon answered.  "Kind o' riddled with thoughts o' you
an' I wouldn't wonder."

"Did you get a letter?" she asked.

"No.  A young officer who was ketched an' brought here t'other day has
told me all 'bout him."

"Is the officer here?"

"Yes, ma'am," Solomon answered.

"I want to see him--I want to talk with him.  I must meet the man who
has come from the presence of my Jack."

Solomon was visibly embarrassed.  He was in trouble for a moment and
then he answered: "I'm 'fraid 'twouldn't do no good."

"Why?"

"'Cause he's deef an' dumb."

"But do you not understand?  It would be a comfort to look at him."

"He's in this cell, but I wouldn't know how to call him," Solomon
assured her.

She went to Jack's door and peered at him through the grating.  He was
lying on his straw bed.  The light which came from candles set in
brackets on the stone wall of the corridor was dim.

"Poor, poor fellow!" she exclaimed.  "I suppose he is thinking of his
sweetheart or of some one very dear to him.  His eyes are covered with
his handkerchief.  So you have lately seen the boy I love!  How I wish
you could tell me about him!"

The voice of the young lady had had a curious effect upon that
nerve-racked, homesick company of soldier lads in prison.  Doubtless it
had reminded some of dear and familiar voices which they had lost hope
of hearing again.

One began to groan and sob, then another and another.

"Ain't that like the bawlin' o' the damned?" Solomon asked.  "Some on
'em is sick; some is wore out.  They're all half starved!"

"It is dreadful!" said she, as she covered her eyes with her
handkerchief.  "I can not help thinking that any day _he_ may have to
come here.  I shall go to see General Howe to-night."

"To-morrer I'll git this 'ere boy to write out all he knows 'bout Jack,
but if ye see it, ye'll have to come 'ere an' let me put it straight
into yer hands," Solomon assured her.

"I'll be here at ten o'clock," she said, and went away.

Pinhorn stepped into the corridor as Solomon called to Jack:

"Things be goin' to improve, ol' man.  Hang on to yer hosses.  The
English people is to have a talk with General Howe to-night an' suthin'
'll be said, now you hear to me.  That damn German King ain't a-goin'
to have his way much longer here in Boston jail."

Early next morning shells began to fall in the city.  Suddenly the
firing ceased.  At nine o'clock all prisoners in the jail were sent
for, to be exchanged.  Preston came with the order from General Howe
and news of a truce.

"This means yer army is lightin' out," Solomon said to him.

"The city will be evacuated," was Preston's answer.

"Could I send a message to Gin'ral Hare's house?"

"The General and his brigade and family sailed for another port at
eight.  If you wish, I'll take your message."

Solomon delivered to Preston a letter written by Jack to Margaret.  It
told of his capture and imprisonment.

"Better than I, you will know if there is good ground for these dark
suspicions which have come to us," he wrote.  "As well as I, you will
know what a trial I underwent last evening.  That I had the strength to
hold my peace, I am glad, knowing that you are the happier to-day
because of it."

The third of March had come.  The sun was shining.  The wind was in the
south.  They were not strong enough to walk, so Preston had brought
horses for them to ride.  There were long patches of snow on the
Dorchester Heights.  A little beyond they met the brigade of Putnam.
It was moving toward the city and had stopped for its noon mess.  The
odor of fresh beef and onions was in the air.

"Cat's blood an' gunpowder!" said Solomon.  "Tie me to a tree."

"What for?" Preston asked.

"I'll kill myself eatin'," the scout declared.  "I'm so got durn hungry
I kin't be trusted."

"I guess we'll have to put the brakes on each other," Jack remarked.

"An' it'll be steep goin'," said Solomon.

Washington rode up to the camp with a squad of cavalry while they were
eating.  He had a kind word for every liberated man.  To Jack he said:

"I am glad to address you as Colonel Irons.  You have suffered much,
but it will be a comfort for you to know that the information you
brought enabled me to hasten the departure of the British."

Turning to Solomon, he added:

"Colonel Binkus, I am indebted to you for faithful, effective and
valiant service.  You shall have a medal."

"Gin'ral Washington, we're a-goin' to lick 'em," said Solomon.  "We're
a-goin' to break their necks."

"Colonel, you are very confident," the General answered with a smile.

"You'll see," Solomon continued.  "God A'mighty is sick o' tyrants.
They're doomed."

"Let us hope so," said the Commander-in-Chief.  "But let us not forget
the words of Poor Richard: 'God helps those who help themselves.'"




CHAPTER XVI

JACK AND SOLOMON MEET THE GREAT ALLY

The Selectmen of Boston, seeing the city threatened with destruction,
had made terms with Washington for the British army.  It was to be
allowed peaceably to abandon the city and withdraw in its fleet of one
hundred and fifty vessels.  The American army was now well organized
and in high spirit.  Washington waited on Dorchester Heights for the
evacuation of Boston to be completed.  Meanwhile, a large force was
sent to New York to assist in the defense of that city.  Jack and
Solomon went with it.  On account of their physical condition, horses
were provided for them, and on their arrival each was to have a leave
of two weeks, "for repairs," as Solomon put it.  They went up to Albany
for a rest and a visit and returned eager for the work which awaited
them.

They spent a spring and summer of heavy toil in building defenses and
training recruits.  The country was aflame with excitement.  Rhode
Island and Connecticut declared for independence.  The fire ran across
their borders and down the seaboard.  Other colonies were making or
discussing like declarations.  John Adams, on his way to Congress, told
of the defeat of the Northern army in Canada and how it was heading
southward "eaten with vermin, diseased, scattered, dispirited, unclad,
unfed, disgraced."  Colonies were ignoring the old order of things,
electing their own assemblies and enacting their own laws.  The Tory
provincial assemblies were unable to get men enough together to make a
pretense of doing business.

In June, by a narrow margin, the Congress declared for independence, on
the motion of Richard Henry Lee of Virginia.  A declaration was drafted
and soon adopted by all the Provincial Congresses.  It was engrossed on
parchment and signed by the delegates of the thirteen states on the
second of August.  Jack went to that memorable scene as an aid to John
Adams, who was then the head of the War Board.

He writes in a letter to his friends in Albany:

"They were a solemn looking lot of men with the exception of Doctor
Franklin and Thomas Jefferson of Virginia.  The latter wore a
long-tailed buff coat with round gold buttons.  He is a tall, big-boned
man.  I have never seen longer arms than he has.  His wrists and hands
are large and powerful.

"When they began to sign the parchment he smiled and said:

"'Gentlemen, Benjamin Franklin should have written this document.  The
committee, however, knew well that he would be sure to put a joke in
it.'

"'Let me remind you that behind it all is the greatest joke in
history,' said the philosopher.

"'What is that?' Mr. Jefferson asked,

"'The British House of Lords,' said Franklin.

"A smile broke through the cloud of solemnity on those many faces, and
was followed by a little ripple of laughter.

"'The committee wishes you all to know that it is indebted to Doctor
Franklin for wise revision of the instrument,' said Mr. Jefferson.

"When the last man had signed, Mr. Jefferson rose and said:

"'Gentlemen, we have taken a long and important step.  On this new
ground we must hang together to the end.'

"'We must all hang together or assuredly we shall all hang separately,'
said Franklin with that gentle, fatherly smile of his.

"Again the signers laughed.

"Last night I heard Patrick Henry speak.  He thrilled us with his
eloquence.  He is a spare but rugged man, whose hands have been used to
toil like my own.  They tell me that he was a small merchant, farmer
and bar-keeper down in Virginia before he became a lawyer and that he
educated himself largely by the reading of history.  He has a rapid,
magnificent diction, slightly flavored with the accent of the Scot."



2

In August, Howe had moved a part of his army from Halifax to Staten
Island and offensive operations were daily expected in Washington's
army.  Jack hurried to his regiment, then in camp with others on the
heights back of Brooklyn.  The troops there were not ready for a strong
attack.  General Greene, who was in command of the division, had
suddenly fallen ill.  Jack crossed the river the night of his arrival
with a message to General Washington.  The latter returned with the
young Colonel to survey the situation.  They found Solomon at
headquarters.  He had discovered British scouts in the wooded country
near Gravesend.  He and Jack were detailed to keep watch of that part
of the island and its shores with horses posted at convenient points so
that, if necessary, they could make quick reports.

Next day, far beyond the outposts in the bush, they tied their horses
in the little stable near Remsen's cabin on the south road and went on
afoot through the bush.  Jack used to tell his friends that the
singular alertness and skill of Solomon had never been so apparent as
in the adventures of that day.

"Go careful," Solomon warned as they parted.  "Keep a-goin' south an'
don't worry 'bout me."

"I thought that I knew how to be careful, but Solomon took the conceit
out of me," Jack was wont to say.  "I was walking along in the bush
late that day when I thought I saw a move far ahead.  I stopped and
suddenly discovered that Solomon was standing beside me.

"I was so startled that I almost let a yelp out of me.

"He beckoned to me and I followed him.  He began to walk about as fast
as I had ever seen him go.  He had been looking for me.  Soon he slowed
his gait and said in a low voice:

"'Ain't ye a leetle bit car'less?  An Injun wouldn't have no trouble
smashin' yer head with a tommyhawk.  In this 'ere business ye got to
have a swivel in yer neck an' keep 'er twistin'.  Ye got to know what's
goin' on a-fore an' behind ye an' on both sides.  We must p'int fer
camp.  This mornin' the British begun to land an army at Gravesend.
Out on the road they's waggin loads o' old folks an' women, an' babies
on their way to Brooklyn.  We got to skitter 'long.  Some o' their
skirmishers have been workin' back two ways an' may have us cut off.'"

Suddenly Solomon stopped and lifted his hand and listened.  Then he
dropped and put his ear to the ground.  He beckoned to Jack, who crept
near him.

"Somebody's nigh us afore an' behind," he whispered.  "We better hide
till dark comes.  You crawl into that ol' holler log.  I'll nose myself
under a brush pile."

They were in a burnt slash where the soft timber had been cut some time
before.  The land was covered with a thick, spotty growth of poplar and
wild cherry and brush heaps and logs half-rotted.  The piece of timber
to which Solomon had referred was the base log of a giant hemlock
abandoned, no doubt, because, when cut, it was found to be a shell.  It
was open only at the butt end.  Its opening was covered by an immense
cobweb.  Jack brushed it away and crept backward into the shell.  He
observed that many black hairs were caught upon the rough sides of this
singular chamber.  Through the winter it must have been the den of a
black bear.  As soon as he had settled down, with his face some two
feet from the sunlit air of the outer world.  Jack observed that the
industrious spider had begun again to throw his silvery veil over the
great hole in the log's end.  He watched the process.  First the outer
lines of the structure were woven across the edges of the opening and
made fast at points around its imperfect circle.  Then the weaver
dropped to opposite points, unreeling his slender rope behind him and
making it taut and fast.  He was no slow and clumsy workman.  He knew
his task and rushed about, rapidly strengthening his structure with
parallel lines, having a common center, until his silken floor was in
place again and ready for the death dance of flies and bees and wasps.
Soon a bumble bee was kicking and quivering like a stricken ox on its
surface.  The spider rushed upon him and buried his knives in the back
and sides of his prey.  The young man's observation of this interesting
process was interrupted by the sound of voices and the tread of feet.
They were British voices.

"They came this way.  I saw them when they turned," a voice was saying.
"If I had been a little closer, I could have potted both men with one
bullet."

"Why didn't you take a shot anyhow?" another asked.

"I was creeping up, trying to get closer.  They have had to hide or run
upon the heels of our people."

A number of men were now sitting on the very log in which Jack was
hidden.  The young scout saw the legs of a man standing opposite the
open end of the log.  Then these memorable words were spoken:

"This log is good cover for a man to hide in, but nobody is hid in it.
There's a big spider's web over the opening."

There was more talk, in which it came out that nine thousand men were
crossing to Gravesend.

"Come on, boys, I'm going back," said one of the party.  Whereupon they
went away.

Dusk was falling.  Jack waited for a move from Solomon.  In a few
minutes he heard a stir in the brush.  Then he could dimly see the face
of his friend beyond the spider's web.

"Come on, my son," the latter whispered.  With a feeling of real
regret, Jack rent the veil of the spider and came out of his
hiding-place.  He brushed the silken threads from his hair and brow as
he whispered:

"That old spider saved me--good luck to him!"

"We'll keep clus together," Solomon whispered.  "We got to push right
on an' work 'round 'em.  If any one gits in our way, he'll have to
change worlds sudden, that's all.  We mus' git to them hosses 'fore
midnight."

Darkness had fallen, but the moon was rising when they set out.
Solomon led the way, with that long, loose stride of his.  Their
moccasined feet were about as noiseless as a cat's.  On and on they
went until Solomon stopped suddenly and stood listening and peering
into the dark bush beyond.  Jack could hear and see nothing.  Solomon
turned and took a new direction without a word and moving with the
stealth of a hunted Indian.  Jack followed closely.  Soon they were
sinking to their knees in a mossy tamarack swamp, but a few minutes of
hard travel brought them to the shore of a pond.

"Wait here till I git the canoe," Solomon whispered.

The latter crept into a thicket and soon Jack could hear him cautiously
shoving his canoe into the water.  A little later the young man sat in
the middle of the shell of birch bark while Solomon knelt in its stern
with his paddle.  Silently he pushed through the lilied margin of the
pond into clear water.  The moon was hidden behind the woods.  The
still surface of the pond was now a glossy, dark plane between two
starry deeps--one above, the other beneath.  In the shadow of the
forest, near the far shore, Solomon stopped and lifted his voice in the
long, weird cry of the great bush owl.  This he repeated three times,
when there came an answer out of the woods.

"That's a warnin' fer ol' Joe Thrasher," Solomon whispered.  "He'll go
out an' wake up the folks on his road an' start 'em movin'."

They landed and Solomon hid his canoe in a thicket.

"Now we kin skitter right long, but I tell ye we got purty clus to 'em
back thar."

"How did you know it?"

"Got a whiff o' smoke.  They was strung out from the pond landing over
'crost the trail.  They didn't cover the swamp.  Must 'a' had a fire
for tea early in the evenin'.  Wherever they's an Englishman, thar's
got to be tea."

Before midnight they reached Remsen's barn and about two o'clock
entered the camp on lathering horses.  As they dismounted, looking back
from the heights of Brooklyn toward the southeast, they could see a
great light from many fires, the flames of which were leaping into the
sky.

"Guess the farmers have set their wheat stacks afire," said Solomon.
"They're all scairt an' started fer town."

General Washington was with his forces some miles north of the other
shore of the river.  A messenger was sent for him.  Next day the
Commander-in-Chief found his Long Island brigades in a condition of
disorder and panic.  Squads and companies, eager for a fight, were
prowling through the bush in the south like hunters after game.  A
number of the new Connecticut boys had deserted.  Some of them had been
captured and brought back.  In speaking of the matter, Washington said:

"We must be tolerant.  These lads are timid.  They have been dragged
from the tender scenes of domestic life.  They are unused to the
restraints of war.  We must not be too severe."

Jack heard the Commander-in-Chief when he spoke these words.

"The man has a great heart in him, as every great man must," he wrote
to his father.  "I am beginning to love him.  I can see that these
thousands in the army are going to be bound to him by an affection like
that of a son for a father.  With men like Washington and Franklin to
lead us, how can we fail?"

The next night Sir Henry Clinton got around the Americans and turned
their left flank.  Smallwood's command and that of Colonel Jack Irons
were almost destroyed, twenty-two hundred having been killed or taken.
Jack had his left arm shot through and escaped only by the swift and
effective use of his pistols and hanger, and by good luck, his horse
having been "only slightly cut in the withers."  The American line gave
way.  Its unseasoned troops fled into Brooklyn.  There was the end of
the island.  They could go no farther without swimming.  With a British
fleet in the harbor under Admiral Lord Howe, the situation was
desperate.  Sir Henry had only to follow and pen them in and unlimber
his guns.  The surrender of more than half of Washington's army would
have to follow.  At headquarters, the most discerning minds saw that
only a miracle could prevent it.

The miracle arrived.  Next day a fog thicker than the darkness of a
clouded night enveloped the island and lay upon the face of the waters.
Calmly, quickly Washington got ready to move his troops.  That night,
under the friendly cover of the fog, they were quietly taken across the
East River, with a regiment of Marblehead sea dogs, under Colonel
Glover, manning the boats.  Fortunately, the British army had halted,
waiting for clear weather.



3

For nearly two weeks Jack was nursing his wound in Washington's army
hospital, which consisted of a cabin, a tent, a number of cow stables
and an old shed on the heights of Harlem.  Jack had lain in a stable.

Toward the end of his confinement, John Adams came to see him.

"Were you badly hurt ?" the great man asked.

"Scratched a little, but I'll be back in the service to-morrow," Jack
replied.

"You do not look like yourself quite.  I think that I will ask the
Commander-in-Chief to let you go with me to Philadelphia.  I have some
business there and later Franklin and I are going to Staten Island to
confer with Admiral Lord Howe.  We are a pair of snappish old dogs and
need a young man like you to look after us.  You would only have to
keep out of our quarrels, attend to our luggage and make some notes in
the conference."

So it happened that Jack went to Philadelphia with Mr. Adams, and,
after two days at the house of Doctor Franklin, set out with the two
great men for the conference on Staten Island.  He went in high hope
that he was to witness the last scene of the war.

In Amboy he sent a letter to his father, which said:

"Mr. Adams is a blunt, outspoken man.  If things do not go to his
liking, he is quick to tell you.  Doctor Franklin is humorous and
polite, but firm as a God-placed mountain.  You may put your shoulder
against the mountain and push and think it is moving, but it isn't.  He
is established.  He has found his proper bearings and is done with
moving.  These two great men differ in little matters.  They had a
curious quarrel the other evening.  We had reached New Brunswick on our
way north.  The taverns were crowded.  I ran from one to another trying
to find entertainment for my distinguished friends.  At last I found a
small chamber with one bed in it and a single window.  The bed nearly
filled the room.  No better accommodation was to be had.  I had left
them sitting on a bench in a little grove near the large hotel, with
the luggage near them.  When I returned they were having a hot argument
over the origin of northeast storms, the Doctor asserting that he had
learned by experiment that they began in the southwest and proceeded in
a north-easterly direction.  I had to wait ten minutes for a chance to
speak to them.  Mr. Adams was hot faced, the Doctor calm and smiling.
I imparted the news.

"'God of Israel!' Mr. Adams exclaimed.  'Is it not enough that I have
to agree with you?  Must I also sleep with you?'

"'Sir, I hope that you must not, but if you must, I beg that you will
sleep more gently than you talk,' said Franklin.

"I went with them to their quarters carrying the luggage.  On the way
Mr. Adams complained that he had picked up a flea somewhere.

"'The flea, sir, is a small animal, but a big fact,' said Franklin.
'You alarm me.  Two large men and a flea will be apt to crowd our
quarters.'

"In the room they argued with a depth of feeling which astonished me,
as to whether the one window should be open or closed.  Mr. Adams had
closed it.

"'Please do not close the window,' said Franklin.  'We shall suffocate.'

"'Sir, I am an invalid and afraid of the night air,' said Adams rather
testily.

"'The air of this room will be much worse for you than that
out-of-doors,' Franklin retorted.  He was then between the covers.  'I
beg of you to open the window and get into bed and if I do not prove my
case to your satisfaction, I will consent to its being closed.'

"I lay down on a straw filled mattress outside their door.  I heard Mr.
Adams open the window and get into bed.  Then Doctor Franklin began to
expound his theory of colds.  He declared that cold air never gave any
one a cold; that respiration destroyed a gallon of air a minute and
that all the air in the room would be consumed in an hour.  He went on
and on and long before he had finished his argument, Mr. Adams was
snoring, convinced rather by the length than the cogency of the
reasoning.  Soon the two great men, whose fame may be said to fill the
earth, were asleep in the same bed in that little box of a room and
snoring in a way that suggested loud contention.  I had to laugh as I
listened.  Mr. Adams would seem to have been defeated, for, by and by,
I heard him muttering as he walked the floor."

Howe's barge met the party at Amboy and conveyed them to the landing
near his headquarters.  It was, however, a fruitless journey.  Howe
wished to negotiate on the old ground now abandoned forever.  The
people of America had spoken for independence--a new, irrevocable fact
not to be put aside by ambassadors.  The colonies were lost.  The
concessions which the wise Franklin had so urgently recommended to the
government of England, Howe seemed now inclined to offer, but they
could not be entertained.

"Then my government can only maintain its dignity by fighting," said
Howe.

"That is a mistaken notion," Franklin answered; "It will be much more
dignified for your government to acknowledge its error than to persist
in it."

"We shall fight," Howe declared.

"And you will have more fighting to do than you anticipate," said
Franklin.  "Nature is our friend and ally.  The Lord has prepared our
defenses.  They are the sea, the mountains, the forest and the
character of our people.  Consider what you have accomplished.  At an
expense of eight million pounds, you have killed about eight hundred
Yankees.  They have cost you ten thousand pounds a head.  Meanwhile, at
least a hundred thousand children have been born in America.  There are
the factors in your problem.  How much time and money will be required
for the job of killing all of us?"

The British Admiral ignored the query.

"My powers are limited," said he, "but I am authorized to grant pardons
and in every way to exercise the King's paternal solicitude."

"Such an offer shows that your proud nation has no flattering opinion
of us," Franklin answered.  "We, who are the injured parties, have not
the baseness to entertain it.  You will forgive me for reminding you
that the King's paternal solicitude has been rather trying.  It has
burned our defenseless towns in mid-winter; if has incited the savages
to massacre our farmers' in the back country; it has driven us to a
declaration of independence.  Britain and America are now distinct
states.  Peace can be considered only on that basis.  You wish to
prevent our trade from passing into foreign channels.  Let me remind
you, also, that the profit of no trade can ever be equal to the expense
of holding it with fleets and armies."

"On such a basis I am not empowered to treat with you," Howe answered.
"We shall immediately move against your army."

The conference ended.  The ambassadors and their secretary shook hands
with the British Admiral.

"Mr. Irons, I have heard much of you," said the latter as he held
Jack's hand.  "You are deeply attached to a young lady whom I admire
and whose father is my friend.  I offer you a chance to leave this
troubled land and go to London and marry and lead a peaceable,
Christian life.  You may keep your principles, if you wish, as I have
no use for them.  You will find sympathizers in England."

"Lord Howe, your kindness touches me," the young man answered.  "What
you propose is a great temptation.  It is like Calypso's offer of
immortal happiness to Ulysses.  I love England.  I love peace, and more
than either, I love the young lady, but I couldn't go and keep my
principles."

"Why not, sir?"

"Because we are all of a mind with our Mr. Patrick Henry.  We put
Liberty above happiness and even above life.  So I must stay and help
fight her battles, and when I say it I am grinding my own heart under
my heel.  Don't think harshly of me.  I can not help it.  The feeling
is bred in my bones."

His Lordship smiled politely and bowed as the three men withdrew.

Franklin took the hand of the young man and pressed it silently as they
were leaving the small house in which Howe had established himself.

Jack, who had been taking notes of the fruitless talk of these great
men, was sorely disappointed.  He could see no prospect now of peace.

"My hopes are burned to the ground," he said to Doctor Franklin.

"It is a time of sacrifice," the good man answered.  "You have the
invincible spirit that looks into the future and gives all it has.  You
are America."

"I have been thinking too much of myself," Jack answered.  "Now I am
ready to lay down my life in this great cause of ours."

"Boy, I like you," said Mr. Adams.  "I have arranged to have you safely
conveyed to New York.  There an orderly will meet and conduct you to
our headquarters."

"Thank you, sir," Jack replied.  Turning to Doctor Franklin, he added:

"One remark of yours to Lord Howe impressed me.  You said that Nature
was our friend and ally.  It put me in mind of the fog that helped us
out of Brooklyn and of a little adventure of mine."

Then he told the story of the spider's web.

"I repeat that all Nature is with us," said Franklin.  "It was a sense
of injustice in human nature that sent us across the great barrier of
the sea into conditions where only the strong could survive.  Here we
have raised up a sturdy people with three thousand miles of water
between them and tyranny.  Armies can not cross it and succeed long in
a hostile land.  They are too far from home.  The expense of
transporting and maintaining them will bleed our enemies until they are
spent.  The British King is powerful, but now he has picked a quarrel
with Almighty God, and it will go hard with him."




CHAPTER XVII

WITH THE ARMY AND IN THE BUSH

In January, 1777, Colonel Irons writes to his father from Morristown,
New Jersey, as follows:

"An army is a despotic machine.  For that reason chiefly our men do not
like military service.  It is hard to induce them to enlist for long
terms.  They are released by expiration long before they have been
trained and seasoned for good service.  So Washington has found it
difficult to fill his line with men of respectable fighting quality.

"Our great Commander lost his patience on the eve of our leaving New
York.  Our troops, posted at Kip's Bay on the East River to defend the
landing, fled in a panic without firing a gun at the approach of Howe's
army.  I happened to be in a company of Light Horse with General
Washington, who had gone up to survey the ground.  Before his eyes two
brigades of New England troops ran away, leaving us exposed to capture.

"The great Virginian was hot with indignation.  He threw his hat to the
ground and exclaimed:

"'Are these the kind of men with whom I am to defend America?'

"Next day our troops behaved better and succeeded in repulsing the
enemy.  This put new spirit in them.  Putnam got his forces out of New
York and well up the shore of the North River.  For weeks we lay behind
our trenches on Harlem Heights, building up the fighting spirit of our
men and training them for hard service.  The stables, cabins and sheds
of Harlem were full of our sick.  Smallpox had got among them.  Cold
weather was coming on and few were clothed to stand it.  The
proclamation of Admiral Lord Howe and his brother, the General,
offering pardon and protection to all who remained loyal to the crown,
caused some to desert us, and many timid settlers in the outlying
country, with women and children to care for, were on the fence ready
to jump either way.  Hundreds were driven by fear toward the British.

"In danger of being shut in, we crossed King's Bridge and retreated to
White Plains.  How we toiled with our baggage on that journey, many of
us being yoked like oxen to the wagons!  Every day troops, whose terms
of enlistment had expired, were leaving us.  It seemed as if our whole
flying camp would soon be gone.  But there were many like Solomon and
me who were willing to give up everything for the cause and follow our
beloved Commander into hell, if necessary.  There were some four
thousand of us who streaked up the Hudson with him to King's Ferry, at
the foot of the Highlands, to get out of the way of the British ships.
There we crossed into Jersey and dodged about, capturing a thousand men
at Trenton and three hundred at Princeton, defeating the British
regiments who pursued us and killing many officers and men and cutting
off their army from its supplies.  We have seized a goodly number of
cannon and valuable stores and reclaimed New Jersey and stiffened the
necks of our people.  It has been, I think, a turning point in the war.
Our men have fought like Homeric heroes and endured great hardships in
the bitter cold with worn-out shoes and inadequate clothing.  A number
have been frozen to death.  I loaned my last extra pair of shoes to a
poor fellow whose feet had been badly cut and frozen.  When I tell you
that coming into Morristown I saw many bloody footprints in the snow
behind the army, you will understand.  We are a ragamuffin band, but we
have taught the British to respect us.  Send all the shoes and clothing
you can scare up.

"I have seen incidents which have increased my love of Washington.
When we were marching through a village in good weather there was a
great crowd in the street.  In the midst of it was a little girl crying
out because she could not see Washington.  He stopped and called for
her.  They brought the child and he lifted her to the saddle in front
of him and carried her a little way on his big white horse.

"At the first divine service here in Morristown he observed an elderly
woman, a rough clad farmer's wife, standing back in the edge of the
crowd.  He arose and beckoned to her to come and take his seat.  She
did so, and he stood through the service, save when he was kneeling.
Of course, many offered him their seats, but he refused to take one.

"We have been deeply impressed and inspirited by the address of a young
man of the name of Alexander Hamilton.  He is scarcely twenty years of
age, they tell me, but he has wit and eloquence and a maturity of
understanding which astonished me.  He is slender, a bit under middle
stature and has a handsome face and courtly manners.  He will be one of
the tallest candles of our faith, or I am no prophet.

"Solomon has been a tower of strength in this campaign.  I wish you
could have seen him lead the charge against Mercer's men and bring in
the British general, whom he had wounded.  He and I are scouting around
the camp every day.  Our men are billeted up and down the highways and
living in small huts around headquarters."

Washington had begun to show his great and singular gifts.  One of
them, through which he secured rest and safety for his shattered
forces, shone out there in Morristown.  There were only about three
thousand effective men in his army.  To conceal their number, he had
sent them to many houses on the roads leading into the village.  The
British in New York numbered at least nine thousand well seasoned
troops, and with good reason he feared an attack.  The force at
Morristown was in great danger.  One day a New York merchant was
brought into camp by the famous scout Solomon Binkus.  The merchant had
been mistreated by the British.  He had sold his business and crossed
the river by night and come through the lines on the wagon of a farmer
friend who was bringing supplies to the American army.  He gave much
information as to plans and positions of the British, which was known
to be correct.  He wished to enlist in the American army and do what he
could to help it.  He was put to work in the ranks.  A few days later
the farmer with whom he had arrived came again and, after selling his
wagon load, found the ex-merchant and conferred with him in private.
That evening, when the farmer had got a mile or so from camp, he was
stopped and searched by Colonel Irons.  A letter was found in the
farmer's pocket which clearly indicated that the ex-merchant was a spy
and the farmer a Tory.  Irons went at once to General Washington with
his report, urging that the spy be taken up and put in confinement.

The General sat thoughtfully looking into the fire, but made no answer.

"He is here to count our men and report our weakness," said the Colonel.

"The poor fellow has not found it an easy thing to do," the General
answered.  "I shall see that he gets help."

They went together to the house where the Adjutant General had his home
and office.  To this officer Washington said:

"General, you have seen a report from one Weatherly, a New York
merchant, who came with information from that city.  Will you kindly do
him the honor of asking him to dine with you here alone to-morrow
evening?  Question him as to the situation in New York in a friendly
manner and impart to him such items of misinformation as you may care
to give, but mainly look to this.  Begin immediately to get signed
returns from the brigadiers showing that we have an effective force
here of twelve thousand men.  These reports must be lying on your desk
while you are conferring with Weatherly.  Treat the man with good food
and marked politeness and appreciation of the service he is likely to
render us.  Soon after you have eaten, I shall send an orderly here.
He will deliver a message.  You will ask the man to make himself at
home while you are gone for half an hour or so.  You will see that the
window shades are drawn and the door closed and that no one disturbs
the man while he is copying those returns, which he will be sure to do.
Colonel Irons, I depend upon you to see to it that he has an
opportunity to escape safely with his budget.  I warn you not to let
him fail.  It is most important."

The next morning, Weatherly was ordered to report to Major Binkus for
training in scout duty, and the morning after that he was taken out
through the lines, mounted, with Colonel Irons and carefully lost in
the pine bush.  He was seen no more in the American camp.  The spy
delivered his report to the British and the little remnant of an army
at Morristown was safe for the winter.  Cornwallis and Howe put such
confidence in this report that when Luce, another spy, came into their
camp with a count of Washington's forces, which was substantially
correct, they doubted the good faith of the man and threw him into
prison.

So the great Virginian had turned a British spy into one of his most
effective helpers.

Meanwhile good news had encouraged enlistment for long terms.  Four
regiments of horse were put in training, ten frigates were built and
sent to sea and more were under construction.  The whole fighting force
of America was being reorganized.  Moreover, in this first year the
Yankee privateers had so wounded a leg of the British lion that he was
roaring with rage.  Three hundred and fifty of his ships, well laden
from the West Indies, had been seized.  Their cargoes were valued at a
million pounds.  The fighting spirit of America was encouraged also by
events in France, where Franklin and Silas Deane were now at work.
France had become an ally.  A loan of six hundred thousand dollars had
been secured in the French capital and expert officers from that
country had begun to arrive to join the army of Washington.




CHAPTER XVIII

HOW SOLOMON SHIFTED THE SKEER

In the spring news came of a great force of British which was being
organized in Canada for a descent upon New York through Lake Champlain.
Frontier settlers in Tryon County were being massacred by Indians.

Generals Herkimer and Schuyler had written to Washington, asking for
the services of the famous scout, Solomon Binkus, in that region.

"He knows the Indian as no other man knows him and can speak his
language and he also knows the bush," Schuyler had written.  "If there
is any place on earth where his help is needed just now, it is here."

"Got to leave ye, my son," Solomon said to Jack one evening soon after
that.

"How so?" the young man asked.

"Goin' hum to fight Injuns.  The Great Father has ordered it.  I'll
like it better.  Gittin' lazy here.  Summer's comin' an' I'm a born
bush man.  I'm kind o' oneasy--like a deer in a dooryard.  I ain't had
to run fer my life since we got here.  My hoofs are complainin'.  I
ain't shot a gun in a month."

A look of sorrow spread over the face of Solomon.

"I'm tired of this place," said Jack.  "The British are scared of us
and we're scared of the British.  There's nothing going on.  I'd love
to go back to the big bush with you."

"I'll tell the Great Father that you're a born bush man.  Mebbe he'll
let ye go.  They'll need us both.  Rum, Injuns an' the devil have
j'ined hands.  The Long House will be the center o' hell an' its line
fences 'll take in the hull big bush."

That day Jack's name was included in the order.

"I am sorry that it is not yet possible to pay you or any of the men
who have served me so faithfully," said Washington.  "If you need money
I shall be glad to lend you a sum to help you through this journey."

"I ain't fightin' fer pay," Solomon answered.  "I'll hoe an' dig, an'
cook, an' guide fer money.  But I won't fight no more fer money--partly
'cause I don't need it--partly 'cause I'm fightin' fer myself.  I got a
little left in my britches pocket, but if I hadn't, my ol' Marier
wouldn't let me go hungry."



2

In April the two friends set out afoot for the lower end of the
Highlands.  On the river they hired a Dutch farmer to take them on to
Albany in his sloop.  After two delightful days at home, General
Schuyler suggested that they could do a great service by traversing the
wilderness to the valley of the great river of the north, as far as
possible toward Swegachie, and reporting their observations to Crown
Point or Fort Edward, if there seemed to be occasion for it, and if
not, they were to proceed to General Herkimer's camp at Oriskany and
give him what help they could in protecting the settlers in the west.

"You would need to take all your wit and courage with you," the General
warned them.  "The Indians are in bad temper.  They have taken to
roasting their prisoners at the stake and eating their flesh.  This is
a hazardous undertaking.  Therefore, I give you a suggestion and not an
order."

"I'll go 'lone," said Solomon.  "If I get et up it needn't break
nobody's heart.  Let Jack go to one o' the forts."

"No, I'd rather go into the bush with you," said Jack.  "We're both
needed there.  If necessary we could separate and carry our warning in
two directions.  We'll take a couple of the new double-barreled rifles
and four pistols.  If we had to, I think we could fight a hole through
any trouble we are likely to have."

So it was decided that they should go together on this scouting trip
into the north bush.  Solomon had long before that invented what he
called "a lightnin' thrower" for close fighting with Indians, to be
used if one were hard pressed and outnumbered and likely to have his
scalp taken.  This odd contrivance he had never had occasion to use.
It was a thin, round shell of cast iron with a tube, a flint and
plunger.  The shell was of about the size of a large apple.  It was to
be filled with missiles and gunpowder.  The plunger, with its spring,
was set vertically above the tube.  In throwing this contrivance one
released its spring by the pressure of his thumb.  The hammer fell and
the spark it made ignited a fuse leading down to the powder.  Its owner
had to throw it from behind a tree or have a share in the peril it was
sure to create.

While Jack was at home with his people Solomon spent a week in the
foundry and forge and, before they set out on their journey, had three
of these unique weapons, all loaded and packed in water-proof wrappings.

About the middle of May they proceeded in a light bark canoe to Fort
Edward and carried it across country to Lake George and made their way
with paddles to Ticonderoga.  There they learned that scouts were
operating only on and near Lake Champlain.  The interior of Tryon
County was said to be dangerous ground.  Mohawks, Cagnawagas, Senecas,
Algonquins and Hurons were thick in the bush and all on the warpath.
They were torturing and eating every white man that fell in their
hands, save those with a Tory mark on them.

"We're skeered o' the bush," said an elderly bearded soldier, who was
sitting on a log.  "A man who goes into the wildwood needs to be a good
friend o' God."

"But Schuyler thinks a force of British may land somewhere along the
big river and come down through the bush, building a road as they
advance," said Jack.

"A thousand men could make a tol'able waggin road to Fort Edward in a
month," Solomon declared.  "That's mebbe the reason the Injuns are out
in the bush eatin' Yankees.  They're tryin' fer to skeer us an' keep us
erway.  By the hide an' horns o' the devil!  We got to know what's
a-goin' on out thar.  You fellers are a-settin' eround these 'ere forts
as if ye had nothin' to do but chaw beef steak an' wipe yer rifles an'
pick yer teeth.  Why don't ye go out thar in the bush and do a little
skeerin' yerselves?  Ye're like a lot o' ol' women settin' by the fire
an' tellin' ghos' stories."

"We got 'nuff to do considerin' the pay we git," said a sergeant.

"Hell an' Tophet!  What do ye want o' pay?" Solomon answered.  "Ain't
ye willin' to fight fer yer own liberty without bein' paid fer it?  Ye
been kicked an' robbed an' spit on, an' dragged eround by the heels,
an' ye don't want to fight 'less somebody pays ye.  What a dam' corn
fiddle o' a man ye mus' be!"

Solomon was putting fresh provisions in his pack as he talked.

"All the Injuns o' Kinady an' the great grass lands may be snookin'
down through the bush.  We're bound fer t' know what's a-goin' on out
thar.  We're liable to be skeered, but also an' likewise we'll do some
skeerin' 'fore we give up--you hear to me."

Jack and Solomon set out in the bush that afternoon and before night
fell were up on the mountain slants north of the Glassy Water, as Lake
George was often called those days.  But for Solomon's caution an evil
fate had perhaps come to them before their first sleep on the journey.
The new leaves were just out, but not quite full.  The little maples
and beeches flung their sprays of vivid green foliage above the darker
shades of the witch hopple into the soft-lighted air of the great house
of the wood and filled it with a pleasant odor.  A mile or so back,
Solomon had left the trail and cautioned Jack to keep close and step
softly.  Soon the old scout stopped, and listened and put his ear to
the ground.  He rose and beckoned to Jack and the two turned aside and
made their way stealthily up the slant of a ledge.  In the edge of a
little thicket on a mossy rock shelf they sat down.  Solomon looked
serious.  There were deep furrows in the skin above his brow.

When he was excited in the bush he had the habit of swallowing and the
process made a small, creaky sound in his throat.  This Jack observed
then and at other times.  Solomon was peering down through the bushes
toward the west, now and then moving his head a little.  Jack looked in
the same direction and presently saw a move in the bushes below, but
nothing more.  After a few minutes Solomon turned and whispered:

"Four Injun braves jist went by.  Mebbe they're scoutin' fer a big
band--mebbe not.  If so, the crowd is up the trail.  If they're comin'
by, it'll be 'fore dark.  We'll stop in this 'ere tavern.  They's a
cave on t'other side o' the ledge as big as a small house."

They watched until the sun had set.  Then Solomon led Jack to the cave,
in which their packs were deposited.

From the cave's entrance they looked upon the undulating green roof of
the forest dipping down into a deep valley, cut by the smooth surface
of a broad river with mirrored shores, and lifting to the summit of a
distant mountain range.  Its blue peaks rose into the glow of the
sunset.

"Yonder is the great stairway of Heaven!" Jack exclaimed.

"I've put up in this 'ere ol' tavern many a night," said Solomon.  "Do
ye see its sign?"

He pointed to a great dead pine that stood a little below it, towering
with stark, outreaching limbs more than a hundred and fifty feet into
the air.

"I call it The Dead Pine Tavern," Solomon remarked.

"On the road to Paradise," said Jack as he gazed down the valley, his
hands shading his eyes.

"Wisht we could have a nice hot supper, but 'twon't do to build no
fire.  Nothin' but cold vittles!  I'll go down with the pot to a spring
an' git some water.  You dig fer our supper in that pack o' mine an'
spread it out here.  I'm hungry."

They ate their bread and dried meat moistened with spring water, picked
some balsam boughs and covered a corner of the mossy floor with them.
When the rock chamber was filled with their fragrance, Jack said:

"If my dream comes true and Margaret and I are married, I shall bring
her here.  I want her to see The Dead Pine Tavern and its outlook."

"Ayes, sir, when ye're married safe," Solomon answered.  "We'll come up
here fust summer an' fish, an' hunt, an' I'll run the tavern an' do the
cookin' an' sweep the floor an' make the beds!"

"I'm a little discouraged," said Jack.  "This war may last for years."

"Keep up on high ground er ye'll git mired down," Solomon answered.
"Ain't nuther on ye very old yit, an' fust ye know these troubles 'll
be over an' done."

Jack awoke at daylight and found that he was alone.  Solomon returned
in half an hour or so.

"Been scoutin' up the trail," he said.  "Didn't see a thing but an ol'
gnaw bucket.  We'll jest eat a bite an' p'int off to the nor'west an'
keep watch o' this 'ere trail.  They's Injuns over thar on the slants.
We got to know how they look an' 'bout how many head they is."

They went on, keeping well away from the trail.

"We'll have to watch it with our ears," said Solomon in a whisper.

His ear was often on the ground that morning and twice he left Jack "to
snook" out to the trail and look for tracks.  Solomon could imitate the
call of the swamp robin, and when they were separated in the bush, he
gave it so that his friend could locate him.  At midday they sat down
in deep shade by the side of a brook and ate their luncheon.

"This 'ere is Peppermint Brook," said Solomon.  "It's 'nother one o' my
taverns."

"Our food isn't going to last long at the rate we are eating it," Jack
remarked.  "If we can't shoot a gun what are we going to do when it's
all gone?"

"Don't worry," Solomon answered.  "Ye're in my kentry now an' there's a
better tavern up in the high trail."

They fared along, favored by good weather, and spent that night on the
shore of a little pond not more than fifty paces off the old blazed
thoroughfare.  Next day, about "half-way from dawn to dark," as Solomon
was wont, now and then, to speak of the noon hour, they came suddenly
upon fresh "sign."  It was where the big north trail from the upper
waters of the Mohawk joined the one near which they had been traveling.
When they were approaching the point Solomon had left Jack in a thicket
and cautiously crept out to the "juncshin."  There was half an hour of
silence before the old scout came back in sight and beckoned to Jack.
His face had never looked more serious.  The young man approached him.
Solomon swallowed--a part of the effort to restrain his emotions.

"Want to show ye suthin'," he whispered.

The two went cautiously toward the trail.  When they reached it the old
scout led the way to soft ground near a brook.  Then he pointed down at
the mud.  There were many footprints, newly made, and among them the
print of that wooden peg with an iron ring around its bottom, which
they had seen twice before, and which was associated with the blackest
memories they knew.  For some time Solomon studied the surface of the
trail in silence.

"More'n twenty Injuns, two captives, a pair o' hosses, a cow an' the
devil," he whispered to Jack.  "Been a raid down to the Mohawk Valley.
The cow an' the hosses are loaded with plunder.  I've noticed that when
the Injuns go out to rob an' kill folks ye find, 'mong their tracks,
the print o' that 'ere iron ring.  I seen it twice in the Ohio kentry.
Here is the heart o' the devil an' his fire-water.  Red Snout has got
to be started on a new trail.  His ol' peg leg is goin' down to the
gate o' hell to-night."

Solomon's face had darkened with anger.  There were deep furrows across
his brow.

Standing before Jack about three feet away, he drew out his ram rod and
tossed it to the young man, who caught it a little above the middle.
Jack knew the meaning of this.  They were to put their hands upon the
ram rod, one above the other.  The last hand it would hold was to do
the killing.  It was Solomon's.

"Thank God!" he whispered, as his face brightened.

He seemed to be taking careful aim with his right eye.

"It's my job," said he.  "I wouldn't 'a' let ye do it if ye'd drawed
the chanst.  It's my job--proper.  They ain't an hour ahead.
Mebbe--it's jest possible--he may go to sleep to-night 'fore I do, an'
I wouldn't be supprised.  They'll build their fire at the Caverns on
Rock Crick an' roast a captive.  We'll cross the bush an' come up on t'
other side an' see what's goin' on."

They crossed a high ridge, with Solomon tossing his feet in that long,
loose stride of his, and went down the slope into a broad valley.  The
sun sank low and the immeasurable green roofed house of the wild was
dim and dusk when the old scout halted.  Ahead in the distance they had
heard voices and the neighing of a horse.

"My son," said Solomon as he pointed with his finger, "do you see the
brow o' the hill yonder whar the black thickets be?"

Jack nodded.

"If ye hear to me yell stay this side.  This 'ere business is kind o'
neevarious.  I'm a-goin' clus up.  If I come back ye'll hear the call
o' the bush owl.  If I don't come 'fore mornin' you p'int fer hum an'
the good God go with ye."

"I shall go as far as you go," Jack answered.

Solomon spoke sternly.  The genial tone of good comradeship, had left
him.

"Ye kin go, but ye ain't obleeged," said he.  "Bear in mind, boy.
To-night I'm the Cap'n.  Do as I tell ye--_exact_."

He took the lightning hurlers out of the packs and unwrapped them and
tried the springs above the hammers.  Earlier in the day he had looked
to the priming.  Solomon gave one to Jack and put the other two in his
pockets.  Each examined his pistols and adjusted them in his belt.
They started for the low lying ridge above the little valley of Rock
Creek.  It was now quite dark and looking down through the thickets of
hemlock they could see the firelight of the Indians and hear the wash
of the creek water.  Suddenly a wild whooping among the red men, savage
as the howl of wolves on the trail of a wounded bison, ran beyond them,
far out into the forest, and sent its echoes traveling from hilltop to
mountain side.  Then came a sound which no man may hear without
getting, as Solomon was wont to say, "a scar on his soul which he will
carry beyond the last cape."  It was the death cry of a captive.
Solomon had heard it before.  He knew what it meant.  The fire was
taking hold and the smoke had begun to smother him.  Those cries were
like the stabbing of a knife and the recollection of them like
blood-stains.

They hurried down the slant, brushing through the thicket, the sound of
their approach being covered by the appalling cries of the victim and
the demon-like tumult of the drunken braves.  The two scouts were
racked with soul pain as they went on so that they could scarcely hold
their peace and keep their feet from running.  A new sense of the
capacity for evil in the heart of man entered the mind of Jack.  They
had come close to the frightful scene, when suddenly a deep silence
fell upon it.  Thank God, the victim had gone beyond the reach of pain.
Something had happened in his passing--perhaps the savages had thought
it a sign from Heaven.  For a moment their clamor had ceased.  The two
scouts could plainly see the poor man behind a red veil of flame.
Suddenly the white leader of the raiders approached the pyre, limping
on his wooden stump, with a stick in his hand, and prodded the face of
the victim.  It was his last act.  Solomon was taking aim.  His rifle
spoke.  Red Snout tumbled forward into the fire.  Then what a scurry
among the Indians!  They vanished and so suddenly that Jack wondered
where they had gone.  Solomon stood reloading the rifle barrel he had
just emptied.  Then he said:

"Come on an' do as I do."

Solomon ran until they had come near.  Then he jumped from tree to
tree, stopping at each long enough to survey the ground beyond it.
This was what he called "swapping cover."  From behind a tree near the
fire he shouted in the Indian tongue:

"Red men, you have made the Great Spirit angry.  He has sent the Son of
the Thunder to slay you with his lightning."

No truer words had ever left the lips of man.  His hand rose and swung
back of his shoulder and shot forward.  The round missile sailed
through the firelight and beyond it and sank into black shadows in the
great cavern at Rocky Creek--a famous camping-place in the old time.
Then a flash of white light and a roar that shook the hills!  A blast
of gravel and dust and debris shot upward and pelted down upon the
earth.  Bits of rock and wood and an Indian's arm and foot fell in the
firelight.  A number of dusky figures scurried out of the mouth of the
cavern and ran for their lives shouting prayers to Manitou as they
disappeared in the darkness.  Solomon pulled the embers from around the
feet of the victim.

"Now, by the good God A'mighty, 'pears to me we got the skeer shifted
so the red man'll be the rabbit fer a while an' I wouldn't wonder,"
said Solomon, as he stood looking down at the scene.  "He ain't a-goin'
to like the look o' a pale face--not overly much.  Them Injuns that got
erway 'll never stop runnin' till they've reached the middle o' next
week."

He seized the foot of Red Snout and pulled his head out of the fire.

"You ol' hellion!" Solomon exclaimed.  "You dog o' the devil!  Tumbled
into hell whar ye b'long at last, didn't ye?  Jack, you take that
luther bucket an' bring some water out o' the creek an' put out this
fire.  The ring on this 'ere ol' wooden leg is wuth a hundred pounds."

Solomon took the hatchet from his belt and hacked off the end of Red
Snout's wooden leg and put it in his coat pocket, saying:

"'From now on a white man can walk in the bush without gittin' his
bones picked.  Injuns is goin' to be skeered o' us--a few an' I
wouldn't be supprised."

When Jack came back with the water, Solomon poured it on the embers,
and looked at the swollen form which still seemed to be straining at
the green withes of moose wood.

"Nothin' kin be done fer him," said the old scout.  "He's gone erway.
I tell ye, Jack, it g'in my soul a sweat to hear him dyin'."

A moment of silence full of the sorrow of the two men followed.
Solomon broke it by saying:

"That 'ere black pill o' mine went right down into the stummick o' the
hill an' give it quite a puke--you hear to me."

They went to the cavern's mouth and looked in.

"They's an awful mess in thar.  I don't keer to see it," said Solomon.

Near them they discovered a warrior who had crawled out of that death
chamber in the rocks.  He had been stunned and wounded about the
shoulders.  They helped him to his feet and led him away.  He was
trembling with fear.  Solomon found a pine torch, still burning, near
where the fire had been.  By its light they dressed his wounds--the old
scout having with him always a small surgeon's outfit.

"Whar is t' other captive?" he asked in the Indian tongue.

"About a mile down the trail.  It's a woman and a boy," said the
warrior.

"Take us whar they be," Solomon commanded.

The three started slowly down the trail, the warrior leading them.

"Son of the Thunder, throw no more lightning and I will kiss your
mighty hand and do as you tell me," said the Indian, as they set out.

It was now dark.  Jack saw, through the opening in the forest roof
above the trail, Orion and the Pleiades looking down at them, as
beautiful as ever, and now he could hear the brook singing merrily.

"I could have chided the stars and the brook while the Indian and I
were waiting for Solomon to bring the packs," he wrote in his diary.




CHAPTER XIX

THE VOICE OF A WOMAN SOBBING

Over the ridge and more than a mile away was a wet, wild meadow.  They
found the cow and horses feeding on its edge near the trail.  The moon,
clouded since dark, had come out in the clear mid-heavens and thrown
its light into the high windows of the forest above the ancient
thoroughfare of the Indian.  The red guide of the two scouts gave a
call which was quickly answered.  A few rods farther on, they saw a
pair of old Indians sitting in blankets near a thicket of black timber.
They could hear the voice of a woman sobbing near where they stood.

"Womern, don't be skeered o' us--we're friends--we're goin' to take ye
hum," said Solomon.

The woman came out of the thicket with a little lad of four asleep in
her arms.

"Where do ye live?" Solomon asked.

"Far south on the shore o' the Mohawk," she answered in a voice
trembling with emotion.

"What's yer name?"

"I'm Bill Scott's wife," she answered.

"Cat's blood and gunpowder!" Solomon exclaimed.  "I'm Sol Binkus."

She knelt before the old scout and kissed his knees and could not speak
for the fulness of her heart.  Solomon bent over and took the sleeping
lad from her arms and held him against his breast.

"Don't feel bad.  We're a-goin' to take keer o' you," said Solomon.
"Ayes, sir, we be!  They ain't nobody goin' to harm ye--nobody at all."

There was a note of tenderness in the voice of the man as he felt the
chin of the little lad with his big thumb and finger.

"Do ye know what they done with Bill?" the woman asked soon in a
pleading voice.

The scout swallowed as his brain began to work on the problem in hand.

"Bill broke loose an' got erway.  He's gone," Solomon answered in a sad
voice.

"Did they torture him?"

"What they done I couldn't jes' tell ye.  But they kin't do no more to
him.  He's gone."

She seemed to sense his meaning and lay crouched upon the ground with
her sorrow until Solomon lifted her to her feet and said:

"Look here, little womern, this don't do no good.  I'm goin' to spread
my blanket under the pines an' I want ye to lay down with yer boy an'
git some sleep.  We got a long trip to-morrer.

"'Tain't so bad as it might be--ye're kind o' lucky a'ter all is said
an' done," he remarked as he covered the woman and the child.

The wounded warrior and the old men were not to be found.  They had
sneaked away into the bush.  Jack and Solomon looked about and the
latter called but got no answer.

"They're skeered cl'ar down to the toe nails," said Solomon.  "They
couldn't stan' it here.  A lightnin' thrower is a few too many.  They'd
ruther be nigh a rattlesnake."

The scouts had no sleep that night.  They sat down by the trail side
leaning against a log and lighted their pipes.

"You 'member Bill Scott?" Solomon whispered.

"Yes.  We spent a night in his house."

"He were a mean cuss.  Sold rum to the Injuns.  I allus tol' him it
were wrong but--my God A'mighty!--I never 'spected that the fire in the
water were a goin' to burn him up sometime.  No, sir--I never dreamed
he were a-goin' to be punished so--never."

They lay back against the log with their one blanket spread and spent
the night in a kind of half sleep.  Every little sound was "like a kick
in the ribs," as Solomon put it, and drove them "into the look and
listen business."  The woman was often crying out or the cow and horses
getting up to feed.

"My son, go to sleep," said Solomon.  "I tell ye there ain't no danger
now--not a bit.  I don't know much but I know Injuns---plenty."

In spite of his knowledge even Solomon himself could not sleep.  A
little before daylight they arose and began to stir about.

"I was badly burnt by that fire," Jack whispered.

"Inside!" Solomon answered.  "So was I.  My soul were a-sweatin' all
night."

The morning was chilly.  They gathered birch bark and dry pine and soon
had a fire going.  Solomon stole over to the thicket where the woman
and child were lying and returned in a moment.

"They're sound asleep," he said in a low tone.  "We'll let 'em alone."

He began to make tea and got out the last of their bread and dried meat
and bacon.  He was frying the latter when he said:

"That 'ere is a mighty likely womern."

He turned the bacon with his fork and added:

"Turrible purty when she were young.  Allus hated the rum business."

Jack went out on the wild meadow and brought in the cow and milked her,
filling a basin and a quart bottle.

Solomon went to the thicket and called:

"Mis' Scott!"

The woman answered.

"Here's a tow'l an' a leetle jug o' soap, Mis' Scott.  Ye kin take the
boy to the crick an' git washed an' then come to the fire an' eat yer
breakfust."

The boy was a handsome, blond lad with blue eyes and a serious manner.
His confidence in the protection of his mother was sublime.

"What's yer name?" Solomon asked, looking up at the lad whom he had
lifted high in the air.

"Whig Scott," the boy answered timidly with tears in his eyes.

"What!  Be ye skeered o' me?"

These words came from the little lad as he began to cry.  "No, sir.  I
ain't skeered.  I'm a brave man."

"Courage is the first virtue in which the young are schooled on the
frontier," Jack wrote in a letter to his friends at home in which he
told of the history of that day.  "The words and manner of the boy
reminded me of my own childhood.

"Solomon held Whig in his lap and fed him and soon won his confidence.
The backs of the horses and the cow were so badly galled they could not
be ridden, but we were able to lash the packs over a blanket on one of
the horses.  We drove the beasts ahead of us.  The Indians had timbered
the swales here and there so that we were able to pass them with little
trouble.  Over the worst places I had the boy on my back while Solomon
carried 'Mis' Scott' in his arms as if she were a baby.  He was very
gentle with her.  To him, as you know, a woman has been a sacred
creature since his wife died.  He seemed to regard the boy as a
wonderful kind of plaything.  At the camping-places he spent every
moment of his leisure tossing him in the air or rolling on the ground
with him."

[Illustration: Solomon Binkus with Whig Scott on his shoulder.]

"One day when the woman sat by the fire crying, the little lad touched
her brow with his hand and said:

"'Don't be skeered, mother.  I'm brave.  I'll take care o' you.'

"Solomon came to where I was breaking some dry sticks for the fire and
said laughingly, as he wiped a tear from his cheek with the back of his
great right hand:

"'Did ye ever see sech a gol' durn cunnin' leetle cricket in yer born
days--ever?'

"Always thereafter he referred to the boy as the Little Cricket.

"That would have been a sad journey but for my interest in these
reactions on this great son of Pan, with whom I traveled.  I think that
he has found a thing he has long needed, and I wonder what will come of
it.

"When he had discovered, by tracks in the trail, that the Indians who
had run away from us were gone South, he had no further fear of being
molested.

"'They've gone on to tell what happened on the first o' the high slants
an' to warn their folks that the Son o' the Thunder is comin' with
lightnin' in his hands.  Injuns is like rabbits when the Great Spirit
begins to rip 'em up.  They kin't stan' it."

That afternoon Solomon, with a hook and line and grubs, gathered from
rotted stumps, caught many trout in a brook crossing the trail and
fried them with slices of salt pork.  In the evening they had the best
supper of their journey in what he called "The Catamount Tavern."  It
was an old bark lean-to facing an immense boulder on the shore of a
pond.  There, one night some years before, he had killed a catamount.
It was in the foot-hills remote from the trail.  In a side of the rock
was a small bear den or cavern with an overhanging roof which protected
it from the weather.  On a shelf in the cavern was a round block of
pine about two feet in diameter and a foot and a half long.  This block
was his preserve jar.  A number of two-inch augur holes had been bored
in its top and filled with jerked venison and dried berries.  They had
been packed with a cotton wick fastened to a small bar of wood at the
bottom of each hole.  Then hot deer's fat had been poured in with the
meat and berries until the holes were filled within an inch or so of
the top.  When the fat had hardened a thin layer of melted beeswax
sealed up the contents of each hole.  Over all wooden plugs had been
driven fast.

"They's good vittles in that 'ere block," said Solomon.  "'Nough, I
guess, to keep a man a week.  All he has to do is knock out the plug
an' pull the wick an' be happy."

"Going to do any pulling for supper?" Jack queried.

"Nary bit," said Solomon.  "Too much food in the woods now.  We got to
be savin'.  Mebbe you er I er both on us 'll be comin' through here in
the winter time skeered o' Injuns an' short o' fodder.  Then we'll open
the pine jar."

They had fish and tea and milk and that evening as he sat on his
blanket before the fire with the little lad in his lap he sang an old
rig-a-dig tune and told stories and answered many a query.

Jack wrote in one of his letters that as they fared along, down toward
the sown lands of the upper Mohawk, Solomon began to develop talents of
which none of his friends had entertained the least suspicion.

"He has had a hard life full of fight and peril like most of us who
were born in this New World," the young man wrote.  "He reminds me of
some of the Old Testament heroes, and is not this land we have
traversed like the plains of Mamre?  What a gentle creature he might
have been if he had had a chance!  How long, I wonder, must we be
slayers of men?  As long, I take it, as there are savages against whom
we must defend ourselves."

The next morning they met a company of one of the regiments of General
Herkimer who had gone in pursuit of Red Snout and his followers.
Learning what had happened to that evil band and its leader the
soldiers faced about and escorted Solomon and his party to Oriskany.




CHAPTER XX

THE FIRST FOURTH OF JULY

Mrs. Scott and her child lived in the family of General Herkimer for a
month or so.  Settlers remote from towns and villages had abandoned
their farms.  The Indians had gone into the great north bush perhaps to
meet the British army which was said to be coming down from Canada in
appalling numbers.  Hostilities in the neighborhood of The Long House
had ceased.  The great Indian highway and its villages were deserted
save by young children and a few ancient red men and squaws, too old
for travel.  Late in June, Jack and Solomon were ordered to report to
General Schuyler at Albany.

"We're gettin' shoveled eroun' plenty," Solomon declared.  "We'll take
the womern an' the boy with us an' paddle down the Mohawk to Albany.
They kind o' fell from Heaven into our hands an' we got to look a'ter
'em faithful.  Fust ye know ol' Herk 'll be movin' er swallered hull by
the British an' the Injuns, like Jonah was by the whale, then what 'ud
become o' her an' the Leetle Cricket?  We got to look a'ter 'em."

"I think my mother will be glad to give them a home," said Jack.  "She
really needs some help in the house these days."



2

The Scotts' buildings had been burned by the Indians and their boats
destroyed save one large canoe which had happened to be on the south
shore of the river out of their reach.  In this Jack and Solomon and
"Mis' Scott" and the Little Cricket set out with loaded packs in the
moon of the new leaf, to use a phrase of the Mohawks, for the city of
the Great River.  They had a carry at the Wolf Riff and some shorter
ones but in the main it was a smooth and delightful journey, between
wooded shores, down the long winding lane of the Mohawk.  Without fear
of the Indians they were able to shoot deer and wild fowl and build a
fire on almost any part of the shore.  Mrs. Scott insisted on her right
to do the cooking.  Jack kept a diary of the trip, some pages of which
the historian has read.  From them we learn:

"Mrs. Scott has bravely run the gauntlet of her sorrows.  Now there is
a new look in her face.  She is a black eyed, dark haired, energetic,
comely woman of forty with cheeks as red as a ripe strawberry.  Solomon
calls her 'middle sized' but she seems to be large enough to fill his
eye.  He shows her great deference and chooses his words with
particular care when he speaks to her.  Of late he has taken to
singing.  She and the boy seem to have stirred the depths in him and
curious things are coming up to the surface--songs and stories and
droll remarks and playful tricks and an unusual amount of laughter.  I
suppose that it is the spirit of youth in him, stunned by his great
sorrow.  Now touched by miraculous hands he is coming back to his old
self.  There can be no doubt of this: the man is ten years younger than
when I first knew him even.  The Little Cricket has laid hold of his
heart.  Whig sits between the feet of Solomon in the stern during the
day and insists upon sleeping with him at night.

"One morning my old friend was laughing as we stood on the river bank
washing ourselves.

"'What are you laughing at?' I asked.

"'That got dum leetle skeezucks!' he answered.  'He were kickin' all
night like a mule fightin' a bumble bee.  'Twere a cold night an' I
held him ag'in' me to keep the leetle cuss warm.'

"'Hadn't you better let him sleep with his mother?' I asked.

"'Wall, if it takes two to do his sleepin' mebbe I better be the one
that suffers.  Ain't she a likely womern?'

"Of course I agreed, for it was evident that she was likely, sometime,
to make him an excellent wife and the thought of that made me happy."

They had fared along down by the rude forts and villages traveling
stealthily at night in tree shadows through "the Tory zone," as the
vicinity of Fort Johnson was then called, camping, now and then, in
deserted farm-houses or putting up at village inns.  They arrived at
Albany in the morning of July fourth.  Setting out from their last camp
an hour before daylight they had heard the booming of cannon at
sunrise, Solomon stopped his paddle and listened.

"By the hide an' horns o' the devil!" he exclaimed.  "I wonder if the
British have got down to Albany."

They were alarmed until they hailed a man on the river road and learned
that Albany was having a celebration.

"What be they celebratin'?" Solomon asked.

"The Declaration o' Independence," the citizen answered.

"It's a good idee," said Solomon.  "When we git thar this 'ere ol'
rifle o' mine 'll do some talkin' if it has a chanst."

Church bells were ringing as they neared the city.  Its inhabitants
were assembled on the river-front.  The Declaration was read and then
General Schuyler made a brief address about the peril coming down from
the north.  He said that a large force under General Burgoyne was on
Lake Champlain and that the British were then holding a council with
the Six Nations on the shore of the lake above Crown Point.

"At present we are unprepared to meet this great force but I suppose
that help will come and that we shall not be dismayed.  The modest man
who leads the British army from the north declares in his proclamation
that he is 'John Burgoyne, Esq., Lieutenant General of His Majesty's
forces in America, Colonel of the Queen's Regiment of Light Dragoons,
Governor of Fort William in North Britain, one of the Commons in
Parliament and Commander of an Army and Fleet Employed on an Expedition
from Canada!'  My friends, such is the pride that goeth before a fall.
We are an humble, hard-working people.  No man among us can boast of a
name so lavishly adorned.  Our names need only the simple but glorious
adornments of firmness, courage and devotion.  With those, I verily
believe, we shall have an Ally greater than any this world can offer.
Let us all kneel where we stand while the Reverend Mr. Munro leads us
in prayer to Almighty God for His help and guidance."

It was an impressive hour and that day the same kind of talk was heard
in many places.  The church led the people.  Pulpiteers of inspired
vision of which, those days, there were many, spoke with the tongues of
men and of angels.  A sublime faith in "The Great Ally" began to travel
up and down the land.




CHAPTER XXI

THE AMBUSH

Mrs. Scott and her little son were made welcome in the home of John
Irons.  Jack and Solomon were immediately sent up the river and through
the bush to help the force at Ti.  In the middle and late days of July,
they reported to runners the southward progress of the British.  They
were ahead of Herkimer's regiment of New York militia on August third
when they discovered the ambush--a misfortune for which they were in no
way responsible.  Herkimer and his force had gone on without them to
relieve Fort Schuyler.  The two scouts had ridden post to join him.
They were afoot half a mile or so ahead of the commander when Jack
heard the call of the swamp robin.  He hurried toward his friend.
Solomon was in a thicket of tamaracks.

"We got to git back quick," said the latter.  "I see sign o' an ambush."

They hurried to their command and warned the General.  He halted and
faced his men about and began a retreat.  Jack and Solomon hurried out
ahead of them some twenty rods apart.  In five minutes Jack heard
Solomon's call again.  Thoroughly alarmed, he ran in the direction of
the sound.  In a moment he met Solomon.  The face of the latter had
that stern look which came only in a crisis.  Deep furrows ran across
his brow.  His hands were shut tight.  There was an expression of anger
in his eyes.  He swallowed as Jack came near.

"It's an ambush sure as hell's ahead," he whispered.

As they were hurrying toward the regiment, he added:

"We got to fight an' ag'in' big odds--British an' Injuns.  Don't never
let yerself be took alive, my son, lessen ye want to die as Scott did.
But, mebbe, we kin bu'st the circle."

In half a moment they met Herkimer.

"Git ready to fight," said Solomon.  "We're surrounded."

The men were spread out in a half-circle and some hurried orders given,
but before they could take a step forward the trap was sprung.  "The
Red Devils of Brant" were rushing at them through the timber with yells
that seemed to shake the tree-tops.  The regiment fired and began to
advance.  Some forty Indians had fallen as they fired.  General
Herkimer and others were wounded by a volley from the savages.

"Come on, men.  Foller me an' use yer bayonets," Solomon shouted.
"We'll cut our way out."

The Indians ahead had no time to load.  Scores of them were run
through.  Others fled for their lives.  But a red host was swarming up
from behind and firing into the regiment.  Many fell.  Many made the
mistake of turning to fight back and were overwhelmed and killed or
captured.  A goodly number had cut their way through with Jack and
Solomon and kept going, swapping cover as they went.  Most of them were
wounded in some degree.  Jack's right shoulder had been torn by a
bullet.  Solomon's left hand was broken and bleeding.  The savages were
almost on their heels, not two hundred yards behind.  The old scout
rallied his followers in a thicket at the top of a knoll with an open
grass meadow between them and their enemies.  There they reloaded their
rifles and stood waiting.

"Don't fire--not none o' ye--till I give the word.  Jack, you take my
rifle.  I'm goin' to throw this 'ere bunch o' lightnin'."

Solomon stepped out of the thicket and showed himself when the savages
entered the meadow.  Then he limped up the trail as if he were badly
hurt, in the fashion of a hen partridge when one has come near her
brood.  In a moment he had dodged behind cover and crept back into the
thicket.

There were about two hundred warriors who came running across the flat
toward that point where Solomon had disappeared.  They yelled like
demons and overran the little meadow with astonishing speed.

"Now hold yer fire--hold yer fire till I give ye the word, er we'll all
be et up.  Keep yer fingers off the triggers now."

He sprang into the open.  Astonished, the foremost runners halted while
others crowded upon them.  The "bunch of lightning" began its curved
flight as Solomon leaped behind a tree and shouted, "Fire!"

"'Tain't too much to say that the cover flew off o' hell right thar at
the edge o' the Bloody Medder that minnit--you hear to me," he used to
tell his friends.  "The air were full o' bu'sted Injun an' a barrel o'
blood an' grease went down into the ground.  A dozen er so that wasn't
hurt run back ercrost the medder like the devil were chasin' 'em all
with a red-hot iron.  I reckon it'll allus be called the Bloody Medder."

In this retreat Jack had lost so much blood that he had to be carried
on a litter.  Before night fell they met General Benedict Arnold and a
considerable force.  After a little rest the tireless Solomon went back
into the bush with Arnold and two regiments to find the wounded
Herkimer, if possible, and others who might be in need of relief.  They
met a band of refugees coming in with the body of the General.  They
reported that the far bush was echoing with the shrieks of tortured
captives.

"Beats all what an amount o' sufferin' it takes to start a new nation,"
Solomon used to say.

Next day Arnold fought his way to the fort, and many of St. Leger's
Rangers and their savage allies were slain or captured or broken into
little bands and sent flying for their lives into the northern bush.
So the siege of Fort Schuyler was raised.

"I never see no better fightin' man than Arnold," Solomon used to say.
"I seen him fight in the middle bush an' on the Stillwater.  Under fire
he was a regular wolverine.  Allus up ag'in' the hottest side o' hell
an' sayin':

"'Come on, boys.  We kin't expec' to live forever.'

"But Arnold were a sore head.  Allus kickin' over the traces an'
complainin' that he never got proper credit."




CHAPTER XXII

THE BINKUSSING OF COLONEL BURLEY

Solomon had been hit in the thigh by a rifle bullet on his way to the
fort.  He and Jack and other wounded men were conveyed in boats and
litters to the hospital at Albany where Jack remained until the leaves
were gone.  Solomon recovered more quickly and was with Lincoln's
militia under Colonel Brown when they joined Johnson's Rangers at
Ticonderoga and cut off the supplies of the British army.  Later having
got around the lines of the enemy with this intelligence he had a part
in the fighting on Bemus Heights and the Stillwater and saw the
defeated British army under Burgoyne marching eastward in disgrace to
be conveyed back to England.

Jack had recovered and was at home when Solomon arrived in Albany with
the news.

"Wal, my son, I cocalate they's goin' to be a weddin' in our fam'ly
afore long," said the latter.

"What makes you think so?" Jack inquired.

"'Cause John Burgoyne, High Cockylorum and Cockydoodledo, an' all his
army has been licked an' kicked an' started fer hum an' made to promise
that they won't be sassy no more.  I tell ye the war is goin' to end.
They'll see that it won't pay to keep it up."

"But you do not know that Howe has taken Philadelphia," said Jack.
"His army entered it on the twenty-sixth of September.  Washington is
in a bad fix.  You and I have been ordered to report to him at White
Marsh as soon as possible."

"That ol' King 'ud keep us fightin' fer years if he had his way," said
Solomon.  "He don't have to bleed an' groan an' die in the swamps like
them English boys have been doin'.  It's too bad but we got to keep
killin' 'em, an' when the bad news reaches the good folks over thar
mebbe the King'll git spoke to proper.  We got to keep a-goin'.  Fer
the fust time in my life I'm glad to git erway from the big bush.  The
Injuns have found us a purty tough bit o' fodder but they's no tellin',
out thar in the wilderness, when a man is goin' to be roasted and
chawed up."

Solomon spent a part of the evening at play with the Little Cricket and
the other children and when the young ones had gone to bed, went out
for a walk with "Mis' Scott" on the river-front.

Mrs. Irons had said of the latter that she was a most amiable and
useful person.

"The Little Cricket has won our hearts," she added.  "We love him as we
love our own."

When Jack and Solomon were setting out in a hired sloop for the
Highlands next morning there were tears in the dark eyes of "Mis'
Scott."

"Ain't she a likely womern?" Solomon asked again when with sails spread
they had begun to cut the water.

Near King's Ferry in the Highlands on the Hudson they spent a night in
the camp of the army under Putnam.  There they heard the first note of
discontent with the work of their beloved Washington.  It came from the
lips of one Colonel Burley of a Connecticut regiment.  The
Commander-in-Chief had lost Newport, New York and Philadelphia and been
defeated on Long Island and in two pitched battles on ground of his own
choosing at Brandywine and Germantown.

The two scouts were angry.

It had been a cold, wet afternoon and they, with others, were drying
themselves around a big, open fire of logs in front of the camp
post-office.

Solomon was quick to answer the complaint of Burley.

"He's allus been fightin' a bigger force o' well trained, well paid men
that had plenty to eat an' drink an' wear.  An' he's fit 'em with jest
a shoe string o' an army.  When it come to him, it didn't know nothin'
but how to shoot an' dig a hole in the ground.  The men wouldn't enlist
fer more'n six months an' as soon as they'd learnt suthin', they put
fer hum.  An' with that kind o' an army, he druv the British out o'
Boston.  With a leetle bunch o' five thousand unpaid, barefoot, ragged
backed devils, he druv the British out o' Jersey an' they had twelve
thousan' men in that neighborhood.  He's had to dodge eround an' has
kep' his army from bein' et up, hide, horns an' taller, by the power o'
his brain.  He's managed to take keer o' himself down thar in Jersey
an' Pennsylvaney with the British on all sides o' him, while the best
fighters he had come up here to help Gates.  I don't see how he could
'a' done it--damned if I do--without the help o' God."

"Gates is a real general," Burley answered.  "Washington don't amount
to a hill o' beans."

Solomon turned quickly and advanced upon Burley.  "I didn't 'spect to
find an enemy o' my kentry in this 'ere camp," he said in a quiet tone.
"Ye got to take that back, mister, an' do it prompt, er ye're goin' to
be all mussed up."

"Ye could see the ha'r begin to brustle under his coat," Solomon was
wont to say of Burley, in speaking of that moment.  "He stepped up clus
an' growled an' showed his teeth an' then he begun to git rooined."

Burley had kept a public house for sailors at New Haven and had had the
reputation of being a bad man in a quarrel.  Of just what happened
there is a full account in a little army journal of that time called
_The Camp Gazette_.  Burley aimed a blow at Solomon with his fist.
Then as Solomon used to put it, "the water bu'st through the dam."  It
was his way of describing the swift and decisive action which was
crowded into the next minute.  He seized Burley and hurled him to the
ground.  With one hand on the nape of his neck and the other on the
seat of his trousers, Solomon lifted his enemy above his head and
quoited him over the tent top.

Burley picked himself up and having lost his head drew his hanger, and,
like a mad bull, rushed at Solomon.  Suddenly he found his way barred
by Jack.

"Would you try to run a man through before he can draw?" the latter
asked.

Solomon's old sword flashed out of its scabbard.

"Let him come on," he shouted.  "I'm more to hum with a hanger than I
be with good vittles."

Of all the words on record from the lips of this man, these are the
most immodest, but it should be remembered that when he spoke them his
blood was hot.

Jack gave way and the two came together with a clash of steel.  A crowd
had gathered about them and was increasing rapidly.  They had been
fighting for half a moment around the fire when Solomon broke the blade
of his adversary.  The latter drew his pistol!  Before he could raise
it Solomon had fired his own weapon.  Burley's pistol dropped on the
ground.  Instantly its owner reeled and fell beside it.  The battle
which had lasted no more than a minute had come to its end.  There had
been three kinds of fighting in that lively duel.

Solomon's voice trembled when he cried out:

"Ary man who says a word ag'in' the Great Father is goin' to git mussed
up."

He pushed his way through the crowd which had gathered around the
wounded man.

"Let me bind his arm," he said.

But a surgeon had stood in the crowd.  He was then doing what he could
for the shattered member of the hot-headed Colonel Burley.  Jack was
helping him.  Some men arrived with a litter and the unfortunate
officer was quickly on his way to the hospital.

Jack and Solomon set out for headquarters.  They met Putnam and two
officers hurrying toward the scene of the encounter.  Solomon had
fought in the bush with him.  Twenty years before they had been friends
and comrades.  Solomon saluted and stopped the grizzled hero of many a
great adventure.

"Binkus, what's the trouble here?" the latter asked, as the crowd who
had followed the two scouts gathered about them.

Solomon gave his account of what had happened.  It was quickly verified
by many eye-witnesses.

"Ye done right," said the General.  "Burley has got to take it back an'
apologize.  He ain't fit to be an officer.  He behaved himself like a
bully.  Any man who talks as he done orto be cussed an' Binkussed an'
sent to the guard house."

Within three days Burley had made an ample apology for his conduct and
this bulletin was posted at headquarters:

"Liberty of speech has its limits.  It must be controlled by the law of
decency and the general purposes of our army and government.  The man
who respects no authority above his own intellect is a conceited ass
and would be a tyrant if he had the chance.  No word of disrespect for
a superior officer will be tolerated in this army."

"The Binkussing of Burley"--a phrase which traveled far beyond the
limits of Putnam's camp--and the notice of warning which followed was
not without its effect on the propaganda of Gates and his friends.



2

Next day Jack and Solomon set out with a force of twelve hundred men
for Washington's camp at White Marsh near Philadelphia.  There Jack
found a letter from Margaret.  It had been sent first to Benjamin
Franklin in Paris through the latter's friend Mr. David Hartley, a
distinguished Englishman who was now and then sounding the Doctor on
the subject of peace.

"I am sure that you will be glad to know that my love for you is not
growing feeble on account of its age," she wrote.  "The thought has
come to me that I am England and that you are America.  It will be a
wonderful and beautiful thing if through all this bitterness and
bloodshed we can keep our love for each other.  My dear, I would have
you know that in spite of this alien King and his followers, I hold to
my love for you and am waiting with that patience which God has put in
the soul of your race and mine, for the end of our troubles.  If you
could come to France I would try to meet you in Doctor Franklin's home
at Passy.  So I have the hope in me that you may be sent to France."

This is as much of the letter as can claim admission to our history.
It gave the young man a supply of happiness sufficient to fill the many
days of hardship and peril in the winter at Valley Forge.  It was read
to Solomon.

"Say, this 'ere letter kind o' teches my feelin's--does sart'in," said
Solomon.  "I'm goin' to see what kin be done."

Unknown to Jack, within three days Solomon had a private talk with the
Commander-in-Chief at his headquarters.  The latter had a high regard
for the old scout.  He maintained a dignified silence while Solomon
made his little speech and then arose and offered his hand saying in a
kindly tone:

"Colonel Binkus, I must bid you good night."




CHAPTER XXIII

THE GREATEST TRAIT OF A GREAT COMMANDER

Jack Irons used to say that no man he had known had such an uncommon
amount of common sense as George Washington.  He wrote to his father:

"It would seem that he must be in communication with the all-seeing mind.
If he were to make a serious blunder here our cause would fail.  The
enemy tries in vain to fool him.  Their devices are as an open book to
Washington.  They have fooled me and Solomon and other officers but not
him.  I had got quite a conceit of myself in judging strategy but now it
is all gone.

"One day I was scouting along the lines, a few miles from Philadelphia,
when I came upon a little, ragged, old woman.  She wished to go through
the lines into the country to buy flour.  The moment she spoke I
recognized her.  It was old Lydia Darrah who had done my washing for me
the last year of my stay in Philadelphia.

"'Why, Lydia, how do you do?' I asked.

"'The way I have allus done, laddie buck," she answered in her good Irish
brogue.  'Workin' at the tub an' fightin' the divil--bad 'cess to
him--but I kape me hilth an' lucky I am to do that--thanks to the good
God!  How is me fine lad that I'd niver 'a' knowed but for the voice o'
him?'

"'Not as fine as when I wore the white ruffles but stout as a moose,' I
answered.  'The war is a sad business.'

"'It is that--may the good God defind us!  We cross the sea to be rid o'
the divil an' he follys an' grabs us be the neck.'

"We were on a lonely road.  She looked about and seeing no one, put a
dirty old needle case in my hands.  "'Take that, me smart lad.  It's fer
good luck,' she answered.

"As I left her I was in doubt of the meaning of her generosity.  Soon I
opened the needle book and found in one of its pockets a piece of thin
paper rolled tight.  On it I found the information that Howe would be
leaving the city next morning with five thousand men, and baggage wagons
and thirteen cannon and eleven boats.  The paper contained other details
of the proposed British raid.  I rode post to headquarters and luckily
found the General in his tent.  On the way I arrived at a definite
conviction regarding the plans of Howe.  I was eager to give it air,
having no doubt of its soundness.  The General gave me respectful
attention while I laid the facts before him.  Then I took my courage in
my hands and asked:

"'General, may I venture to express an opinion?'

"'Certainly,' he answered.

"'It is the plan of Howe to cross the Delaware in his boats so as to make
us believe that he is going to New York.  He will recross the river above
Bristol and suddenly descend upon our rear.'

"Washington sat, with his arms folded, looking very grave but made no
answer.

"In other words, again I presented my conviction.

"Still he was silent and I a little embarrassed.  In half a moment I
ventured to ask:

"'General, what is your opinion?'

"He answered in a kindly tone: 'Colonel Irons, the enemy has no business
in our rear.  The boats are only for our scouts and spies to look at.
The British hope to fool us with them.  To-morrow morning about daylight
they will be coming down the Edgely Bye Road on our left.'

"He called an aid and ordered that our front be made ready for an attack
in the early morning.

"I left headquarters with my conceit upon me and half convinced that our
Chief was out in his judgment of that matter.  No like notion will enter
my mind again.  Solomon and I have quarters on the Edgely Bye Road.  A
little after three next morning the British were reported coming down the
road.  A large number of them were killed and captured and the rest
roughly handled.

"A smart Yankee soldier in his trial for playing cards yesterday, set up
a defense which is the talk of the camp.  For a little time it changed
the tilt of the wrinkles on the grim visage of war.  His claim was that
he had no Bible and that the cards aided him in his devotions.

"The ace reminded him of the one God; the deuce of the Father and Son;
the tray of the Trinity; the four spot of the four evangelists--Matthew,
Luke, Mark and John; the five spot of the five wise and the five foolish
virgins; the six spot of the six days of creation; the seven of the
Sabbath; the eight of Noah and his family; the nine of the nine
ungrateful lepers; the ten of the Ten Commandments; the knave of Judas;
the queen was to him the Queen of Sheba and the king was the one great
King of Heaven and the Universe.

"'You will go to the guard house for three days so that, hereafter, a
pack of cards will remind you only of a foolish soldier,' said Colonel
Provost."

Snow and bitter winds descended upon the camp early in December.  It was
a worn, ragged, weary but devoted army of about eleven thousand men that
followed Washington into Valley Forge to make a camp for the winter.  Of
these, two thousand and ninety-eight were unfit for duty.  Most of the
latter had neither boots nor shoes.  They marched over roads frozen hard,
with old rags and pieces of hide wrapped around their feet.  There were
many red tracks in the snow in the Valley of the Schuylkill that day.
Hardly a man was dressed for cold weather.  Hundreds were shivering and
coughing with influenza.

"When I look at these men I can not help thinking how small are my
troubles," Jack wrote to his mother.  "I will complain of them no more.
Solomon and I have given away all the clothes we have except those on our
backs.  A fiercer enemy than the British is besieging us here.  He is
Winter.  It is the duty of the people we are fighting for to defend us
against this enemy.  We should not have to exhaust ourselves in such a
battle.  Do they think that because God has shown His favor at Brooklyn,
Saratoga, and sundry other places, He is in a way committed?  Are they
not disposed to take it easy and over-work the Creator?  I can not resist
the impression that they are praying too much and paying too little.  I
fear they are lying back and expecting God to send ravens to feed us and
angels to make our boots and weave our blankets and clothing.  He will
not go into that kind of business.  The Lord is not a shoemaker or a
weaver or a baker.  He can have no respect for a people who would leave
its army to starve and freeze to death in the back country.  If they are
to do that their faith is rotten with indolence and avarice.

"There are many here who have nothing to wear but blankets with armholes,
belted by a length of rope.  There are hundreds who have no blankets to
cover them at night.  They have to take turns sitting by the fire while
others are asleep.  For them a night's rest is impossible.  Let this
letter be read to the people of Albany and may they not lie down to sleep
until they have stirred themselves in our behalf, and if any man dares to
pray to God to help us until he has given of his abundance to that end
and besought his neighbors to do the same, I could wish that his praying
would choke him.  Are we worthy to be saved--that is the question.  If we
expect God to furnish the flannel and the shoe leather, we are not.  That
is our part of the great task.  Are we going to shirk it and fail?

"We are making a real army.  The men who are able to work are being
carefully trained by the crusty old Baron Steuben and a number of French
officers."

That they did not fail was probably due to the fact that there were men
in the army like this one who seemed to have some little understanding of
the will of God and the duty of man.  This letter and others like it,
traveled far and wide and more than a million hands began to work for the
army.

The Schuylkill was on one side of the camp and wooded ridges, protected
by entrenchments, on the other.  Trees were felled and log huts
constructed, sixteen by fourteen feet in size.  Twelve privates were
quartered in each hut.

The Gates propaganda was again being pushed.  Anonymous letters
complaining that Washington was not protecting the people of Pennsylvania
and New Jersey from depredations were appearing in sundry newspapers.  By
and by a committee of investigation arrived from Congress.  They left
satisfied that Washington had done well to keep his army alive, and that
he must have help or a large part of it would die of cold and hunger.



2

It was on a severe day in March that Washington sent for Jack Irons.  The
scout found the General sitting alone by the fireside in his office which
was part of a small farm-house.  He was eating a cold luncheon of baked
beans and bread without butter.  Jack had just returned from Philadelphia
where he had risked his life as a spy, of which adventure no details are
recorded save the one given in the brief talk which follows.  The scout
smiled as he took the chair offered.

"The British are eating no such frugal fare," he remarked.

"I suppose not," the General answered.

"The night before I left Philadelphia Howe and his staff had a banquet at
The Three Mariners.  There were roasted hams and geese and turkeys and
patties and pies and jellies and many kinds of wine and high merriment.
The British army is well fed and clothed."

"We are not so provided but we must be patient," said Washington.  "Our
people mean well, they are as yet unorganized.  This matter of being
citizens of an independent nation at war is new to them.  The men who are
trying to establish a government while they are defending it against a
powerful enemy have a most complicated problem.  Naturally, there are
disagreements and factions.  Congress may, for a time, be divided but the
army must stand as one man.  This thing we call human liberty has become
for me a sublime personality.  In times when I could see no light, she
has kept my heart from failing."

"She is like the goddess of old who fought in the battles of Agamemnon,"
said Jack.  "Perhaps she is the angel of God who hath been given charge
concerning us.  Perhaps she is traveling up and down the land and
overseas in our behalf."

Washington sat looking thoughtfully into the fire.  In a moment he said:

"She is like a wise and beautiful mother assuring us that our sorrows
will end, by and by, and that we must keep on."

The General arose and went to his desk and returned with sealed letters
in his hand and said:

"Colonel, I have a task for you.  I could give it to no man in whom I had
not the utmost confidence.  You have earned a respite from the hardships
and perils of this army.  Here is a purse and two letters.  With them I
wish you to make your way to France as soon as possible and turn over the
letters to Franklin.  The Doctor is much in need of help.  Put your
services at his disposal.  A ship will be leaving Boston on the
fourteenth.  A good horse has been provided; your route is mapped.  You
will need to start after the noon mess.  For the first time in ten days
there will be fresh beef on the tables.  Two hundred blankets have
arrived and more are coming.  After they have eaten, give the men a
farewell talk and put them in good heart, if you can.  We are going to
celebrate the winter's end which can not be long delayed.  When you have
left the table, Hamilton will talk to the boys in his witty and inspiring
fashion."

Soon after one o'clock on the seventh of March, 1778, Colonel Irons bade
Solomon good-by and set out on his long journey.  That night he slept in
a farmhouse some fifty miles from Valley Forge.

Next morning this brief note was written to his mother:

"I am on my way to France, leaving mother and father and sister and
brother and friend, as the Lord has commanded, to follow Him, I verily
believe.  Yesterday the thought came to me that this thing we call the
love of Liberty which is in the heart of every man and woman of us,
urging that we stop at no sacrifice of blood and treasure, is as truly
the angel of God as he that stood with Peter in the prison house.  Last
night I saw Liberty in my dreams--a beautiful woman she was, of heroic
stature with streaming hair and the glowing eyes of youth and she was
dressed in a long white robe held at the waist by a golden girdle.  And I
thought that she touched my brow and said:

"'My son, I am sent for all the children of men and not for America
alone.  You will find me in France for my task is in many lands.'

"I left the brave old fighter, Solomon, with tears in his eyes.  What a
man is Solomon!  Yet, God knows, he is the rank and file of Washington's
army as it stands to-day--ragged, honest, religious, heroic, half fed,
unappreciated, but true as steel and willing, if required, to give up his
comfort or his life!  How may we account for such a man without the help
of God and His angels?"




BOOK THREE


CHAPTER XXIV

IN FRANCE WITH FRANKLIN

Jack shipped in the packet Mercury, of seventy tons, under Captain
Simeon Sampson, one of America's ablest naval commanders.  She had been
built for rapid sailing and when, the second day out, they saw a
British frigate bearing down upon her they wore ship and easily ran
away from their enemy.  Their first landing was at St. Martin on the
Isle de Rhé.  They crossed the island on mules, being greeted with the
cry:

"_Voilà les braves Bostones_!"

In France the word _Bostone_ meant American revolutionist.  At the
ferry they embarked on a long gabbone for La Rochelle.  There the young
man enjoyed his first repose on a French _lit_ built up of sundry
layers of feather beds.  He declares in his diary that he felt the need
of a ladder to reach its snowy summit of white linen.  He writes a
whole page on the sense of comfort and the dreamless and refreshing
sleep which he had found in that bed.  The like of it he had not known
since he had been a fighting man.

In the morning he set out in a heavy vehicle of two wheels, drawn by
three horses.  Its postillion in frizzed and powdered hair, under a
cocked hat, with a long queue on his back and in great boots, hooped
with iron, rode a lively little _bidet_.  Such was the French
stagecoach of those days, its running gear having been planned with an
eye to economy, since vehicles were taxed according to the number of
their wheels.  The diary informs one that when the traveler stopped for
food at an inn, he was expected to furnish his own knife.  The highways
were patrolled, night and day, by armed horsemen and robberies were
unknown.  The vineyards were not walled or fenced.  All travelers had a
license to help themselves to as much fruit as they might wish to eat
when it was on the vines.

They arrived at Chantenay on a cold rainy evening.  They were settled
in their rooms, happy that they had protection from the weather, when
their landlord went from room to room informing them that they would
have to move on.

"Why?" Jack ventured to inquire.

"Because a _seigneur_ has arrived."

"A _seigneur_!" Jack exclaimed.

"_Oui_, Monsieur.  He is a very great man."

"But suppose we refuse to go," said Jack.

"Then, Monsieur, I shall detain your horses.  It is a law of _le grand
monarque_."

There was no dodging it.  The coach and horses came back to the inn
door.  The passengers went out into the dark, rainy night to plod along
in the mud, another six miles or so, that the seigneur and his suite
could enjoy that comfort the weary travelers had been forced to leave.
Such was the power of privilege with which the great Louis had saddled
his kingdom.

They proceeded to Ancenis, Angers and Breux.  From the latter city the
road to Versailles was paved with flat blocks of stone.  There were
swarms of beggars in every village and city crying out, with hands
extended, as the coach passed them:

"_La charité, au nom de Dieu_!"

"France is in no healthy condition when this is possible," the young
man wrote.

If he met a priest carrying a Bon Dieu in a silver vase every one
called out, "_Aux genoux_!" and then the beholder had to kneel, even if
the mud were ankle deep.  So on a wet day one's knees were apt to be as
muddy as his feet.

The last stage from Versailles to Paris was called the post royale.
There the postillion had to be dressed like a gentleman.  It was a
magnificent avenue, crowded every afternoon by the wealth and beauty of
the kingdom, in gorgeously painted coaches, and lighted at night by
great lamps, with double reflectors, over its center.  They came upon
it in the morning on their way to the capital.  There were few people
traveling at that hour.  Suddenly ahead they saw a cloud of dust.  The
stage stopped.  On came a band of horsemen riding at a wild gallop.
They were the King's couriers.

"Clear the way," they shouted.  "The King's hunt is coming."

All travelers, hearing this command, made quickly for the sidings,
there to draw rein and dismount.  The deer came in sight, running for
its life, the King close behind with all his train, the hounds in full
cry.  Near Jack the deer bounded over a hedge and took a new direction.
His Majesty--a short, stout man with blue eyes and aquiline nose,
wearing a lace cocked hat and brown velvet coatee and high boots with
spurs--dismounted not twenty feet from the stage-coach, saying with
great animation:

"_Vite!  Donnez moi un cheval frais_."

Instantly remounting, he bounded over the hedge, followed by his train.



2

A letter from Jack presents all this color of the journey and avers
that he reached the house of Franklin in Passy about two o'clock in the
afternoon of a pleasant May day.  The savant greeted his young friend
with an affectionate embrace.

"Sturdy son of my beloved country, you bring me joy and a new problem,"
he said.

"What is the problem?" Jack inquired.

"That of moving Margaret across the channel.  I have a double task now.
I must secure the happiness of America and of Jack Irons."

He read the despatches and then the Doctor and the young man set out in
a coach for the palace of Vergennes, the Prime Minister.  Colonel Irons
was filled with astonishment at the tokens of veneration for the
white-haired man which he witnessed in the streets of Paris.

"The person of the King could not have attracted more respectful
attention," he writes.  "A crowd gathered about the coach when we were
leaving it and every man stood with uncovered head as we passed on our
way to the palace door.  In the crowd there was much whispered praise
of '_Le grand savant_.'  I did not understand this until I met, in the
office of the Compte de Vergennes, the eloquent Senator Gabriel Honore
Riquetti de Mirabeau.  What an impressive name!  Yet I think he
deserves it.  He has the eye of Mars and the hair of Samson and the
tongue of an angel, I am told.  In our talk, I assured him that in
Philadelphia Franklin came and went and was less observed than the town
crier.

"'But your people seem to adore him,' I said.

"'As if he were a god,' Mirabeau answered.  'Yes, it is true and it is
right.  Has he not, like Jove, hurled the lightning of heaven in his
right hand?  Is he not an unpunished Prometheus?  Is he not breaking
the scepter of a tyrant?'

"Going back to his home where in the kindness of his heart he had asked
me to live, he endeavored, modestly, to explain the evidences of high
regard which were being showered upon him.

"'It happens that my understanding and small control of a mysterious
and violent force of nature has appealed to the imagination of these
people,' he said, 'I am the only man who has used thunderbolts for his
playthings.  Then, too, I am speaking for a new world to an old one.
Just at present I am the voice of Human Liberty.  I represent the
hunger of the spirit of man.  It is very strong here.  You have not
traveled so far in France without seeing thousands of beggars.  They
are everywhere.  But you do not know that when a child comes in a poor
family, the father and mother go to prison _pour mois de nourrice_.  It
is a pity that the poor can not keep their children at home.  This old
kingdom is a muttering Vesuvius, growing hotter, year by year, with
discontent.  You will presently hear its voices.'"

[Illustration: Ben Franklin]

There was a dinner that evening at Franklin's house, at which the
Marquis de Mirabeau, M. Turgot, the Madame de Brillon, the Abbé Raynal
and the Compte and Comptesse d' Haudetot, Colonel Irons and three other
American gentlemen were present.  The Madame de Brillon was first to
arrive.  She entered with a careless, jaunty air and ran to meet
Franklin and caught his hand and gave him a double kiss on each cheek
and one on his forehead and called him "papa."

"At table she sat between me and Doctor Franklin," Jack writes.  "She
frequently locked her hand in the Doctor's and smiled sweetly as she
looked into his eyes.  I wonder what the poor, simple, hard-working
Deborah Franklin would have thought of these familiarities.  Yet here,
I am told, no one thinks ill of that kind of thing.  The best women of
France seem to treat their favorites with like tokens of regard.  Now
and then she spread her arms across the backs of our chairs, as if she
would have us feel that her affection was wide enough for both.

"She assured me that all the women of France were in love with _le
grand savant_.

"Franklin, hearing the compliment, remarked: 'It is because they pity
my age and infirmities.  First we pity, then embrace, as the great Mr.
Pope has written.'

"'We think it a compliment that the greatest intellect in the world is
willing to allow itself to be, in a way, captured by the charms of
women,' Madame Brillon declared.

"'My beautiful friend!  You are too generous,' the Doctor continued
with a laugh.  'If the greatest man were really to come to Paris and
lose his heart, I should know where to find it.'

"The Doctor speaks an imperfect and rather broken French, but these
people seem to find it all the more interesting on that account.
Probably to them it is like the English which we have heard in America
from the lips of certain Frenchmen.  How fortunate it is that I learned
to speak the language of France in my boyhood!

"From the silver-tongued Mirabeau I got further knowledge of Franklin,
with which I, his friend and fellow countryman, should have been
acquainted, save that the sacrifices of the patriot are as common as
mother's milk and cause little comment among us.  The great orator was
expected to display his talents, if there were any excuse for it,
wherever he might be, so the ladies set up a demand for a toast.  He
spoke of Franklin, 'The Thrifty Prodigal,' saying;

"'He saves only to give.  There never was such a squanderer of his own
immeasurable riches.  For his great inventions and discoveries he has
never received a penny.  Twice he has put his personal fortune at the
disposal of his country.  Once when he paid the farmers for their
horses and wagons to transport supplies for the army of Braddock, and
again when he offered to pay for the tea which was thrown into Boston
Harbor.'

"The great man turned to me and added:

"'I have learned of these things, not from him, but from others who
know the truth, and we love him in France because we are aware that he
is working for Human Liberty and not for himself or for any greedy
despot in the 'west.'

"It is all so true, yet in America nothing has been said of this.

"As the dinner proceeded the Abbé Raynal asked the Doctor if it was
true that there were signs of degeneracy in the average male American.

"'Let the facts before us be my answer," said Franklin.  "There are at
this table four Frenchmen and four Americans.  Let these gentlemen
stand up."

"The Frenchmen were undersized, the Abbé himself being a mere shrimp of
a man.  The Americans, Carmichael, Harmer, Humphries and myself, were
big men, the shortest being six feet tall.  The contrast raised a laugh
among the ladies.  Then said Franklin in his kindest tones:

"'My dear Abbé, I am aware that manhood is not a matter of feet and
inches.  I only assure you that these are average Americans and that
they are pretty well filled with brain and spirit.'

"The Abbé spoke of a certain printed story on which he had based his
judgment.

"Franklin laughed and answered: 'I know that is a fable, because I
wrote it myself one day, long ago, when we were short of news.'"

The guests having departed, Franklin asked the young man to sit down
for a talk by the fireside.  The Doctor spoke of the women of France,
saying:

"'You will not understand them or me unless you remind yourself that we
are in Europe and that it is the eighteenth century.  Here the clocks
are lagging.  Time moves slowly.  With the poor it stands still.  They
know not the thing we call progress.'

"'Those who have money seem to be very busy having fun,' I said.

"'There is no morning to their day,' he went on.  'Their dawn is
noontime.  Our kind of people have had longer days and have used them
wisely.  So we have pushed on ahead of this European caravan.  Our
fathers in New England made a great discovery.'

"'What was it?' I asked.

"'That righteousness was not a joke; that Christianity was not a solemn
plaything for one day in the week, but a real, practical, working
proposition for every day in the year; that the main support of the
structure is industry; that its most vital commandment is this, 'six
days shalt thou labor'; that no amount of wealth can excuse a man from
this duty.  Every one worked.  There was no idleness and therefore
little poverty.  The days were all for labor and the nights for rest.
The wheels of progress were greased and moving.'

"'And our love of learning helped to push them along,' I suggested.

"'True.  Our people have been mostly like you and me,' he went on.  'We
long for knowledge of the truth.  We build schools and libraries and
colleges.  We have pushed on out of the eighteenth century into a new
time.  There you were born.  Now you have stepped a hundred years
backward into Europe.  You are astonished, and this brings me to my
point.  Here I am with a great task on my hands.  It is to enlist the
sympathy and help of France.  I must take things, not as I could wish
them to be, but as I find them.  At this court women are all powerful.
It has long been a maxim here that a diplomatist must stand well with
the ladies.  Even though he is venerable, he must be gallant, and I do
not use the word in a shady sense.  The ladies are not so bad as you
would think them.  They are playthings.  To them, life is not as we
know it, filled with realities.  It is a beautiful drama of rich
costumes and painted scenes and ingenious words, all set in the
atmosphere of romance.  The players only pretend to believe each other.
In the salon I am one of these players.  I have to be.'

"'Mirabeau seemed to mean what he said,' was my answer.

"'Yes.  He is one of those who often speak from the heart.  All these
players love the note of sincerity when they hear it.  In the salon it
is out of key, but away from the ladies the men are often living and
not playing.  Mirabeau, Condorcet, Turgot and others have heard the
call of Human Liberty.  Often they come to this house and speak out
with a strong candor.'

"'I suppose that this great drama of despotism in France will end in a
tragedy whose climax will consume the stage and half the players,' I
ventured to say.

"'That is a theme, Jack, on which you and I must be silent,' Franklin
answered.  'We must hold our mouths as with a bridle.'

"For a moment he sat looking sadly into the glowing coals on the grate.
Franklin loved to talk, but no one could better keep his own counsel.

"'At heart I am no revolutionist,' he said presently.  'I believe in
purifying--not in breaking down.  I would to God that I could have
convinced the British of their error.  Mainly I am with the prophet who
says:

"'"Stand in the old ways.  View the ancient paths.  Consider them well
and be not among those who are given to change."'

"I sat for a moment thinking of the cruelties I had witnessed, and
asking myself if it had been really worth while.  Franklin interrupted
my thoughts.

"'I wish we could discover a plan which would induce and compel nations
to settle their differences without cutting each other's throats.  When
will human wisdom be sufficient to see the advantage of this?'

"He told me the thrilling details of his success in France; how he had
won the kingdom for an ally and secured loans and the help of a fleet
and army then on the sea.

"'And you will not be surprised to learn that the British have been
sounding me to see if we would be base enough to abandon our ally,' he
laughed.

"In a moment he added:

"'Come, it is late and you must write a letter to the heart of England
before you lie down to rest.'

"Often thereafter he spoke of Margaret as 'the heart of England.'"




CHAPTER XXV

THE PAGEANT

Jack began to assist Franklin in his correspondence and in the many
business details connected with his mission.

"I have never seen a man with a like capacity for work," the young
officer writes.  "Every day he is conferring with Vergennes or other
representatives of the King, or with the ministers of Spain, Holland
and Great Britain.  The greatest intellect in the kingdom is naturally
in great request.  To-day, after many hours of negotiation with the
Spanish minister, in came M. Dubourg, the most distinguished physician
in Europe.

"'_Mon chère mâitre_,' he said.  'I have a most difficult case and as
you know more about the human body than any man of my acquaintance I
wish to confer with you.'

"Yesterday, Doctor Ingenhauz, physician to the Emperor of Austria, came
to consult him regarding the vaccination of the royal family of France.

"In the evening, M. Robespierre, a slim, dark-skinned, studious young
attorney from Arras, wearing gold-rimmed spectacles, came for
information regarding lightning rods, he having doubts of their
legality.  While they were talking, M. Joseph Ignace Guillotin, another
physician, arrived.  He was looking for advice regarding a proposed new
method of capital punishment, and wished to know if, in the Doctor's
opinion, a painless death could be produced by quickly severing the
head from the body.  Next morning, M. Jourdan, with hair and beard as
red as the flank of my bay mare and a loud voice, came soon after
breakfast, to sell us mules by the ship load.

"So you see that even I, living in his home and seeing him almost every
hour of the day, have little chance to talk with him.  Last night we
met M. Voltaire--dramatist and historian--now in the evening of his
days.  We were at the Academy, where we had gone to hear an essay by
D'Alembert.  Franklin and Voltaire--a very thin old gentleman of
eighty-four, with piercing black eyes--sat side by side on the
platform.  The audience demanded that the two great men should come
forward and salute each other.  They arose and advanced and shook hands.

"'_A la Française_,' the crowd demanded.

"So the two white-haired men embraced and kissed each other amidst loud
applause.

"We are up at sunrise and at breakfast, for half an hour or so, I have
him to myself.  Then we take a little walk in the palace grounds of M.
le Ray de Chaumont, Chief Forester of the kingdom, which adjoins us.
To the Count's generosity Franklin is indebted for the house we live
in.  The Doctor loves to have me with him in the early morning.  He
says breakfasting alone is the most _triste_ of all occupations.

"'I think that the words of Demosthenes could not have been more sought
than yours,' I said to him at breakfast this morning.

"He laughed as he answered: 'Demosthenes said that the first point in
speaking was action.  Probably he meant the action which preceded the
address--a course of it which had impressed people with the integrity
and understanding of the speaker.  For years I have had what Doctor
Johnson would call 'a wise and noble curiosity' about nature and have
had some success in gratifying it.  Then, too, I have tried to order my
life so that no man could say that Ben Franklin had intentionally done
him a wrong.  So I suppose that my words are entitled to a degree of
respect--a far more limited degree than the French are good enough to
accord them.'

"As we were leaving the table he said: 'Jack, I have an idea worthy of
Demosthenes.  My friend, David Hartley of London, who still has hope of
peace by negotiation, wishes to come over and confer with me.  I shall
tell him that he may come if he will bring with him the Lady Hare and
her daughter.'

"'More thrilling words were never spoken by Demosthenes,' I answered.
'But how about Jones and his _Bonne Homme Richard_?  He is now a terror
to the British coasts.  They would fear destruction.'

"'I shall ask Jones to let them alone,' he said.  'They can come under
a special flag.'

"Commodore Jones did not appear again in Paris until October, when he
came to Passy to report upon a famous battle.

"I was eager to meet this terror of the coasts.  His impudent courage
and sheer audacity had astonished the world.  The wonder was that men
were willing to join him in such dare devil enterprises.

"I had imagined that Jones would be a tall, gaunt, swarthy, raw-boned,
swearing man of the sea.  He was a sleek, silent, modest little man,
with delicate hands and features.  He wished to be alone with the
Doctor, and so I did not hear their talk.  I know that he needed money
and that Franklin, having no funds, provided the sea fighter from his
own purse.

"Commodore Jones had brought with him a cartload of mail from captured
British ships.  In it were letters to me from Margaret.

"'Now you are near me and yet there is an impassable gulf between us,'
she wrote.  'We hear that the seas are overrun with pirates and that no
ship is safe.  Our vessels are being fired upon and sunk.  I would not
mind being captured by a good Yankee captain, if it were carefully
done.  But cannons are so noisy and impolite!  I have a lot of British
pluck in me, but I fear that you would not like to marry a girl who
limped because she had been shot in the war.  And, just think of the
possible effect on my disposition.  So before we start Doctor Franklin
will have to promise not to fire his cannons at us.'

"I showed the letter to Franklin and he laughed and said:

"'They will be treated tenderly.  The Commodore will convoy them across
the channel.  I shall assure Hartley of that in a letter which will go
forward today.'

"Anxious days are upon us.  Our money in America has become almost
worthless and we are in extreme need of funds to pay and equip the
army.  We are daily expecting a loan from the King of three million
livres.  But Vergennes has made it clear to us that the government of
France is itself in rather desperate straits.  The loan has been
approved, but the treasury is waiting upon certain taxes not yet
collected.  The moment the money is available the Prime Minister will
inform us of the fact.

"On a fine autumn day we drove with the Prince of Condé in his great
coach, ornamented with costly paintings, to spend a day at his country
seat in Chantilly.  The palace was surrounded by an artificial canal;
the gardens beautified with ponds and streams and islands and cascades
and grottos and labyrinths, the latter adorned with graceful
sculptures.  His stables were lined with polished woods; their windows
covered with soft silk curtains.  Of such a refinement of luxury I had
never dreamed.  Having seen at least a thousand beggars on the way, I
was saddened by these rich, lavish details of a prince's
self-indulgence.

"On the wish of our host, Franklin had taken with him a part of his
electrical apparatus, with which he amused a large company of the
friends of the great _Seigneur_ in his palace grounds.  Spirits were
fired by a spark sent from one pond to another with no conductor but
the water of a stream.  The fowls for dinner were slain by electrical
shocks and cooked over a fire kindled by a current from an electrical
bottle.  At the table the success of America was toasted in electrified
bumpers with an accompaniment of guns fired by an electrical battery.

"A poet had written a _Chanson à Boire_ to Franklin, which was read and
merrily applauded at the dinner--one stanza of which ran as follows:

  "'Tout, en fondant un empire,
    Vous le voyez boire et rire
    Le verre en main
    Chantons notre Benjamin.'

"To illustrate the honest candor with which often he speaks, even in
the presence of Frenchmen who are near the throne, I quote a few words
from his brief address to the Prince and his friends;

"'A good part of my life I have worked with my hands.  If Your Grace
will allow me to say so, I wish to see in France a deeper regard for
the man who works with his hands--the man who supplies food.  He really
furnishes the standard of all value.  The value of everything depends
on the labor given to the making of it.  If the labor in producing a
bushel of wheat is the same as that consumed in the production of an
ounce of silver, their value is the same.

"'The food maker also supplies a country with its population.  By 1900
he will have given to America a hundred million people and a power and
prosperity beyond our reckoning.  Frugality and Industry are the most
fruitful of parents, especially where they are respected.  When luxury
and the cost of living have increased, people have become more cautious
about marriage and populations have begun to dwindle.'

"The Bourbon Prince, a serious-minded man, felt the truth of all this
and was at pains to come to my venerable friend and heartily express
his appreciation.

"'We know that we are in a bad way, but we know not how to get out of
it,' he said.

"The Princess, who sat near us at table, asked the Doctor for
information about the American woman.

"'"She riseth while it is yet night and giveth meat to her household,
and a portion to her maidens,"' he quoted.  'She is apt to be more
industrious than her husband.  She works all day and often a part of
the night.  She is weaver, knitter, spinner, tailor, cook, washerwoman,
teacher, doctor, nurse.  While she is awake her hands are never idle,
and their most important work is that of slowly building up the manhood
of America.  Ours is to be largely a mother-made land.'

"'_Mon Dieu_!  I should think she would be cross with so much to do,'
said the Princess.

"'Often she is a little cross,' Franklin answered.  'My friend, James
Otis of Massachusetts, complained of the fish one day at dinner when
there was company at the table.  Mrs. Otis frankly expressed her
opinion of his bad manners.  He was temperamental and himself a bit
overworked.  He made no answer, but in the grace which followed the
meal he said:

"'"O Lord, we thank Thee that we have been able to finish this dinner
without getting slapped."

"'But I would ask Your Highness to believe that our men are mostly
easier to get along with.  They do not often complain of the food.
They are more likely to praise it.'

"On our way back to Paris the Doctor said to me:

"'The great error of Europe is entailment--entailed estates, entailed
pride, entailed luxury, entailed conceit.  A boy who inherits honor
will rarely honor himself.  I like the method of China, where honor
ascends, but does not descend.  It goes back to his parents who taught
him his virtues.  It can do no harm to his parents, but it can easily
ruin him and his children.  I regard humility as one of the greatest
virtues.'"



2

"That evening our near neighbors, Le Compte de Chaumont and M.
LeVilleard, came to announce that a dinner and ball in honor of
Franklin would occur at the palace of Compte de Chaumont less than a
week later.

"'My good friends,' said the philosopher, 'I value these honors which
are so graciously offered me, but I am old and have much work to do.  I
need rest more than I need the honors.'

"'It is one of the penalties of being a great savant that people wish
to see and know him,' said the Count.  'The most distinguished people
in France will be among those who do you honor.  I think, if you can
recall a talk we had some weeks ago, you will wish to be present.'

"'Oh, then, you have heard from the Hornet.'

"'I have a letter here which you may read at your convenience.'

"'My dear friend, be pleased to receive my apologies and my hearty
thanks,' said Franklin.  'Not even the gout could keep me away.'

"Next day I received a formal invitation to the dinner and ball.  I
told the Doctor that in view of the work to be done, I would decline
the invitation.  He begged me not to do it and insisted that he was
counting upon me to represent the valor and chivalry of the New World;
that as I had grown into the exact stature of Washington and was so
familiar with his manners and able to imitate them in conversation, he
wished me to assume the costume of our Commander-in-Chief.  He did me
the honor to say:

"'There is no other man whom it would be safe to trust in such an
exalted role.  I wish, as a favor to me, you would see what can be done
at the costumer's and let me have a look at you.'

"I did as he wished.  The result was an astonishing likeness.  I
dressed as I had seen the great man in the field.  I wore a wig
slightly tinged with gray, a blue coat, buff waistcoat and sash and
sword and the top boots and spurs.  When I strode across the room in
the masterly fashion of our great Commander, the Doctor clapped his
hands.

"'You are as like him as one pea is like another!' he exclaimed.
'Nothing would so please our good friends, the French, who have an
immense curiosity regarding _Le Grand Vasanton_, and it will give me an
opportunity to instruct them as to our spirit.'

"He went to his desk and took from a drawer a cross of jeweled gold on
a long necklace of silver--a gift from the King--and put it over my
head so that the cross shone upon my breast.

"'That is for the faith of our people,' he declared.  'The guests will
assemble on the grounds of the Count late in the afternoon.  You will
ride among them on a white horse.  A beautiful maiden in a white robe
held at the waist with a golden girdle will receive you.  She will be
Human Liberty.  You will dismount and kneel and kiss her hand.  Then
the Prime Minister of France will give to each a blessing and to you a
sword and a purse.  You will hold them up and say:

"'"For these things I promise you the friendship of my people and their
prosperity."

"'You will kiss the sword and hang it beside your own and pass the
purse to me and then I shall have something to say.'

"So it was all done, but with thrilling details, of which no suspicion
had come to me.  I had not dreamed, for instance, that the King and
Queen would be present and that the enthusiasm would be so great.  You
will be able to judge of my surprise when, riding my white horse
through the cheering crowd, throwing flowers in my way, I came suddenly
upon Margaret Hare in the white robe of Human Liberty.  Now facing me
after these years of trial, her spirit was equal to her part.  She was
like unto the angel I had seen in my dreams.  The noble look of her
face thrilled me.  It was not so easy to maintain the calm dignity of
Washington in that moment.  I wanted to lift her in my arms and hold
her there, as you may well believe, but, alas, I was Washington!  I
dismounted and fell upon one knee before her and kissed her hand not
too fervently, I would have you know, in spite of my temptation.  She
stood erect, although tears were streaming down her cheeks and her dear
hand trembled when it rested on my brow and she could only whisper the
words:

"'May the God of your fathers aid and keep you.'

"The undercurrent of restrained emotion in this little scene went out
to that crowd, which represented the wealth, beauty and chivalry of
France.  I suppose that some of them thought it a bit of good acting.
These people love the drama as no others love it.  I suspect that many
of the friends of Franklin knew that she who was Liberty was indeed my
long lost love.  A deep silence fell upon them and then arose a wild
shout of approval that seemed to come out of the very heart of France
and to be warm with its noble ardor.  Every one in this beautiful
land--even the King and Queen and their kin--are thinking of Liberty
and have begun to long for her blessing.  That, perhaps, is why the
scene had so impressed them.

"But we were to find in this little drama a climax wholly unexpected by
either of us and of an importance to our country which I try in vain to
estimate.  When the Prime Minister handed the purse to Franklin he bade
him open it.  This the latter did, finding therein letters of credit
for the three million livres granted, of which we were in sore need.
With it was the news that a ship would be leaving Boulogne in the
morning and that relays on the way had been provided for his messenger.
The invention of our beloved diplomat was equal to the demand of the
moment and so he announced:

"'Washington is like his people.  He turns from all the loves of this
world to obey the call of duty.  My young friend who has so well
presented the look and manner of Washington will now show you his
spirit.'

"He looked at his watch and added:

"'Within forty minutes he will be riding post to Boulogne, there to
take ship for America.'

"So here I am on the ship _L'Etoile_ and almost in sight of Boston
harbor, bringing help and comfort to our great Chief.

"I was presented to the King and Queen.  Of him I have written--a
stout, fat-faced man, highly colored, with a sloping forehead and large
gray eyes.  His coat shone with gold embroidery and jeweled stars.  His
close-fitting waistcoat of milk white satin had golden buttons and a
curve which was not the only sign he bore of rich wine and good capon.
The queen was a beautiful, dark-haired lady of some forty years, with a
noble and gracious countenance.  She was clad in no vesture of gold,
but in sober black velvet.  Her curls fell upon the loose ruff of lace
around her neck.  There were no jewels on or about her bare, white
bosom.  Her smile and gentle voice, when she gave me her bon-voyage and
best wishes for the cause so dear to us, are jewels I shall not soon
forget.

"Yes, I had a little talk with Margaret and her mother, who walked with
me to Franklin's house.  There, in his reception room, I took a good
look at the dear girl, now more beautiful than ever, and held her to my
heart a moment.

"'I see you and then I have to go,' I said.

"'It is the fault of my too romantic soul,' she answered mournfully.
'For two days we have been in hiding here.  I wanted to surprise you.'

"And this protest came involuntarily from my lips:

"'Here now is the happiness for which I have longed, and yet forthwith
I must leave it.  What a mystery is the spirit of man!'

"'When it is linked to the spirit of God it ceases to understand
itself,' she answered.  'Oh, that I had the will for sacrifice which is
in you!'

"She lifted the jeweled cross I wore to her lips and kissed it.  I wish
that I could tell you how beautiful she looked then.  She is twenty-six
years old and her womanhood is beginning.

"'Now you may go,' she said.  'My heart goes with you, but I fear that
we shall not meet again.'

"'Why ?' was my question.

"'I am utterly discouraged.'

"'You can not expect her to wait for you any longer.  It is not fair,'
said her mother.

"'Margaret, I do not ask you to wait,' I said.  'I am not quite a human
being.  I seem to have no time for that.  I am of the army of God.  I
shall not expect you to wait.'

"So it befell that the stern, strong hand of a soldier's duty drew me
from her presence almost as soon as we had met I kissed her and left
her weeping, for there was need of haste.  Soon I was galloping out of
Passy on my way to the land I love.  I try not to think of her, but how
can I put out of mind the pathos of that moment?  Whenever I close my
eyes I see her beautiful figure sitting with bowed head in the
twilight."




CHAPTER XXVI

IN WHICH APPEARS THE HORSE OF DESTINY AND THE JUDAS OF WASHINGTON'S ARMY

In Boston harbor, Jack learned of the evacuation of Philadelphia by the
British and was transferred to a Yankee ship putting out to sea on its
way to that city.  There he found the romantic Arnold, crippled by his
wounds, living in the fine mansion erected by William Penn.  He had
married a young daughter of one of the rich Tory families, for his
second wife, and was in command of the city.  Colonel Irons, having
delivered the letters to the Treasurer of the United States, reported
at Arnold's office.  It was near midday and the General had not
arrived.  The young man sat down to wait and soon the great soldier
drove up with his splendid coach and pair.  His young wife sat beside
him.  He had little time for talk.  He was on his way to breakfast.
Jack presented his compliments and the good tidings which he had
brought from the Old Country.  Arnold listened as if he were hearing
the price of codfish and hams.

The young man was shocked by the coolness of the Commandant.  The
former felt as if a pail of icy water had been thrown upon him, when
Arnold answered:

"Now that they have money I hope that they will pay their debt to me."

This kind of talk Jack had not heard before.  He resented it but
answered calmly: "A war and an army is a great extravagance for a young
nation that has not yet learned the imperial art of gathering taxes.
Many of us are going unpaid but if we get liberty it will be worth all
it costs."

"That sounds well but there are some of us who are also in need of
justice," Arnold answered as he turned away.

"General, you who have not been dismayed by force will never, I am
sure, surrender to discouragement," said Jack.

The fiery Arnold turned suddenly and lifting his cane in a threatening
manner said in a loud voice:

"Would you reprimand me--you damned upstart?"

"General, you may strike me, if you will, but I can not help saying
that we young men must look to you older ones for a good example."

Very calmly and politely the young man spoke these words.  He towered
above the man Arnold in spirit and stature.  The latter did not commit
the folly of striking him but with a look of scorn ordered him to leave
the office.

Jack obeyed the order and went at once to call upon his old friend,
Governor Reed.  He told the Governor of his falling out with the
Major-General.

"Arnold is a sordid, selfish man and a source of great danger to our
cause," said the Governor.  "He is vain and loves display and is living
far beyond his means.  To maintain his extravagance he has resorted to
privateering and speculation, and none of it has been successful.  He
is deeply involved in debt.  It is charged that he has used his
military authority for private gain.  He was tried by a court-martial
but escaped with only a reprimand from the Commander-in-Chief.  He is
thick with the Tories.  He is the type of man who would sell his master
for thirty pieces of silver."

"This is alarming," said Jack.

"My boy an ill wind is blowing on us," the Governor went on.  "We have
all too many Arnolds in our midst.  Our currency has depreciated until
forty shillings will not buy what one would have bought before the war.
The profit makers are rolling in luxury and the poor army starves.  The
honest and patriotic are impoverished while those who practise fraud
and Toryism are getting rich."

Depressed by this report of conditions in America Jack set out for
Washington's headquarters on the Hudson.  Never had the posture of
American affairs looked so hopeless.  The Governor had sold him a young
mare with a white star in her forehead and a short, white stocking on
her left fore-leg, known in good time as the horse of destiny.

"She was a well turned, high spirited creature with good plumes, a
noble eye and a beautiful head and neck," Jack wrote long after the day
he parted with her.  "I have never ridden a more distinguished animal.
She was in every way worthy of the task ahead of her."

When he had crossed the King's Ferry the mare went lame.  A little
beyond the crossing he met a man on a big, roan gelding.  Jack stopped
him to get information about the roads in the north.

"That's a good-looking mare," the man remarked.

"And she is better than she looks," Jack answered.  "But she has thrown
a shoe and gone lame."

"I'll trade even and give you a sound horse," the man proposed.

"What is your name and where do you live?" Jack inquired.

"My name is Paulding and I live at Tarrytown in the neutral territory."

"I hope that you like horses."

"You can judge of that by the look of this one.  You will observe that
he is well fed and groomed."

"And your own look is that of a good master," said Jack, as he examined
the teeth and legs of the gelding.  "Pardon me for asking.  I have
grown fond of the mare.  She must have a good master."

"I accepted his offer not knowing that a third party was looking on and
laying a deeper plan than either of us were able to penetrate," Jack
used to say of that deal.

He approached the little house in which the Commander-in-Chief was
quartered with a feeling of dread, fearing the effect of late
developments on his spirit.

The young man wrote to Margaret in care of Franklin this account of the
day which followed his return to camp:

"Thank God!  I saw on the face of our Commander the same old look of
unshaken confidence.  I knew that he could see his way and what a sense
of comfort came of that knowledge!  More than we can tell we are
indebted to the calm and masterful face of Washington.  It holds up the
heart of the army in all discouragements.  His faith is established.
He is not afraid of evil tidings.  This great, god-like personality of
his has put me on my feet again.  I was in need of it, for a different
kind of man, of the name of Arnold, had nearly floored me."

"'Sit down here and tell me all about Franklin,' he said with a smile.

"I told him what was going on in Paris and especially of the work of
our great minister to the court of Louis XVI.

"He heard me with deep interest and when I had finished arose and gave
me his hand saying:

"'Colonel, again you have won my gratitude.  We must keep our courage.'

"I told him of my unhappy meeting with Arnold.

"'The man has his faults--he is very human, but he has been a good
soldier,' Washington answered.

"The thought came to me that the love of liberty had lifted many of us
above the human plane of sordid striving.

"Solomon came into camp that evening.  He was so glad to see me that he
could only wring my hand and utter exclamations.

"'How is the gal?' he asked presently.

"I told him of our meeting in Passy and of my fear that we should not
meet again.

"'It seems as if the Lord were not yet willing to let us marry,' I said.

"'Course not,' he answered.  'When yer boat is in the rapids it's no
time fer to go ashore an' pick apples.  I cocalate the Lord is usin' ye
fer to show the Ol' World what's inside o' us Americans.'

"Margaret, I wonder if the Lord really wished to show you and others
the passion which is in the heart of Washington and his army.  On the
way to my ship I was like one making bloody footprints in the snow.
How many of them I have seen!  And now is the time to tell you that
Doctor Franklin has written a letter informing me how deeply our part
in the little pageant had impressed Mr. Hartley and the court people of
France and that he had secured another loan.

"Solomon is a man of faith.  He never falters.

"He said to me: 'Don't worry.  That gal has got a backbone.  She ain't
no rye straw.  She's a-goin' to think it over.'

"Neither spoke for a time.  We sat by an open fire in front of his tent
as the night fell.  Solomon was filling his pipe.  He swallowed and his
right eye began to take aim.  I knew that some highly important theme
would presently open the door of his intellect and come out.

"'Jack, I been over to Albany,' he said.  'Had a long visit with
Mirandy.  They ain't no likelier womern in Ameriky.  I'll bet a pint o'
powder an' a fish hook on that.  Ye kin look fer 'em till yer eyes run
but ye'll be obleeged to give up.'

"He lighted his pipe and smoked a few whiffs and added: 'Knit seventy
pair o' socks fer my regiment this fall.'

"'Have you asked her to marry you?' I inquired.

"'No.  'Tain't likely she'd have me,' he answered.  'She's had troubles
enough.  I wouldn't ask no womern to marry me till the war is fit out.
I'm liable to git all shot up any day.  I did think I'd ask her but I
didn't.  Got kind o' skeered an' skittish when we sot down together,
an' come to think it all over, 'twouldn't 'a' been right.'

"'You're wrong, Solomon,' I answered.  'You ought to have a home of
your own and a wife to make you fond of it.  How is the Little Cricket?'

"'Cunnin'est little shaver that ever lived,' said he.  'I got him a
teeny waggin an' drawed him down to the big medder an' back.  He had a
string hitched on to my waist an' he pulled an' hauled an' hollered
whoa an' git ap till he were erbout as hoarse as a bull frog.  When we
got back he wanted to go all over me with a curry comb an' braid my
mane.'

"The old scout roared with laughter as he thought of the child's play
in which he had had a part.  He told me of my own people and next to
their good health it pleased me to learn that my father had given all
his horses--save two--to Washington.  That is what all our good men are
doing.  So you will see how it is that we are able to go on with this
war against the great British empire.

"That night the idea came to me that I would seek an opportunity to
return to France in the hope of finding you in Paris.  I applied for a
short furlough to give me a chance to go home and see the family.
There I found a singular and disheartening situation.  My father's
modest fortune is now a part of the ruin of war.  Soon after the
beginning of hostilities he had loaned his money to men who had gone
into the business of furnishing supplies to the army.  He had loaned
them dollars worth a hundred cents.  They are paying their debts to him
in dollars worth less than five cents.  Many, and Washington among
them, have suffered in a like manner.  My father has little left but
his land, two horses, a yoke of oxen and a pair of slaves.  So I am too
poor to give you a home in any degree worthy of you.

"Dear old Solomon has proposed to make me his heir, but now that he has
met the likely womern I must not depend upon him.  So I have tried to
make you know the truth about me as well as I do.  If your heart is
equal to the discouragement I have heaped upon it I offer you this poor
comfort.  When the war is over I can borrow a thousand pounds to keep a
roof over our heads and a fowl in the pot and pudding in the twifflers
while I am clearing the way to success.  The prospect is not inviting,
I fear, but if, happily, it should appeal to you, I suggest that you
join your father in New York at the first opportunity so that we may
begin our life together as soon as the war ends.  And now, whatever
comes, I would wish you to keep these thoughts of me: I have loved you,
but there are things which I have valued above my own happiness.  If I
can not have you I shall have always the memory of the hours we have
spent together and of the great hope that was mine.

"While I was at home the people of our neighborhood set out at daylight
one morning for a pigeon party.  We had our breakfast on an island.
Then the ladies sat down to knit and sew, while the men went fishing.
In the afternoon we gathered berries and returned at dusk with filled
pails and many fish.  So our people go to the great storehouse of
Nature and help themselves."




CHAPTER XXVII

WHICH CONTAINS THE ADVENTURES OF SOLOMON IN THE TIMBER SACK AND ON THE
"HAND-MADE RIVER"

In the spring of 1779, there were scarcely sixteen thousand men in the
American army, of which three thousand were under Gates at Providence;
five thousand in the Highlands under McDougall, who was building new
defenses at West Point, and on the east shore of the Hudson under
Putnam; seven thousand were with Washington at Middlebrook where he had
spent a quiet winter; a few were in the south.  The British,
discouraged in their efforts to conquer the northern and middle
colonies, sent a force of seven thousand men to take Georgia and South
Carolina.  They hoped that Washington, who could not be induced to risk
his army in decisive action against superior numbers, would thus be
compelled to scatter and weaken it.  But the Commander-in-Chief,
knowing how seriously Nature, his great ally, was gnawing at the vitals
of the British, bided his time and kept his tried regiments around him.
Now and then, a staggering blow filled his enemies with a wholesome
fear of him.  His sallies were as swift and unexpected as the rush of a
panther with the way of retreat always open.  Meanwhile a cry of
affliction and alarm had arisen in England.  Its manufacturers were on
the verge of bankruptcy, its people out of patience.

As soon as the ice was out of the lakes and rivers, Jack and Solomon
joined an expedition under Sullivan against the Six Nations, who had
been wreaking bloody vengeance on the frontiers of Pennsylvania and New
York.  The Senecas had been the worst offenders, having spilled the
blood of every white family in their reach.  Sullivan's expedition
ascended the Chemung branch of the Susquehanna and routed a great force
of Indians under Brant and Johnson at Newtown and crossed to the Valley
of the Genessee, destroying orchards, crops and villages.  The red men
were slain and scattered.  The fertile valley was turned into a
flaming, smoking hell.  Simultaneously a force went up the Alleghany
and swept its shores with the besom of destruction.

Remembrance of the bold and growing iniquities of the savage was like a
fire in the heart of the white man.  His blood boiled with anger.  He
was without mercy.  Like every reaping of the whirlwind this one had
been far more plentiful than the seed from which it sprang.  Those
April days the power of the Indian was forever broken and his cup
filled with bitterness.  Solomon had spoken the truth when he left the
Council Fire in the land of Kiodote:

"Hereafter the Injun will be a brother to the snake."

Jack and Solomon put their lives in danger by entering the last village
ahead of the army and warning its people to flee.  The killing had made
them heart-sick, although they had ample reason for hating the red men.

In the absence of these able helpers Washington had moved to the
Highlands.  This led the British General, Sir Henry Clinton, to decide
to block his return.  So he sent a large force up the river and
captured the fort at Stony Point and King's Ferry connecting the great
road from the east with the middle states.  The fort and ferry had to
be retaken, and, early in July, Jack and Solomon were sent to look the
ground over.

In the second day of their reconnoitering above Stony Point they came
suddenly upon a British outpost.  They were discovered and pursued but
succeeded in eluding the enemy.  Soon a large party began beating the
bush with hounds.  Jack escaped by hiding behind a waterfall.  Solomon
had a most remarkable adventure in making his way northward.  Hearing
the dogs behind him he ran to the shore of a bay, where a big drive of
logs had been boomed in, and ran over them a good distance and dropped
out of sight.  He lay between two big sections of a great pine with his
nose above water for an hour or so.  A band of British came down to the
shore and tried to run the logs but, being unaccustomed to that kind of
work, were soon rolled under and floundering to their necks.

"I hadn't na skeer o' their findin' me," Solomon said to Jack.  "'Cause
they was a hundred acres o' floatin' timber in that 'ere bay.  I heard
'em slippin' an' sloshin' eround nigh shore a few minutes an' then they
give up an' went back in the bush.  They were a strip o' open water
'twixt the logs an' the shore an' I clumb on to the timber twenty rod
er more from whar I waded in so's to fool the dogs."

"What did you do with your rifle an' powder?" Jack inquired.

"Wal, ye see, they wuz some leetle logs beyond me that made a kind o' a
holler an' I jest put ol' Marier 'crost 'em an' wound the string o' my
powder-horn on her bar'l.  I lay thar a while an' purty soon I heard a
feller comin' on the timber.  He were clus up to me when he hit a log
wrong an' it rolled him under.  I dim' up an' grabbed my rifle an' thar
were 'nother cuss out on the logs not more'n ten rod erway.  He took a
shot at me, but the bullet didn't come nigh 'nough so's I could hear it
whisper he were bobbin' eround so.  I lifted my gun an' says I:

"'Boy, you come here to me.'

"But he thought he'd ruther go somewhar else an' he did--poor, ignorant
devil!  I went to t' other feller that was rasslin' with a log tryin'
to git it under him.  He'd flop the log an' then it would flop him.
He'd throwed his rifle 'crost the timber.  I goes over an' picks it up
an' says I:

"'Take it easy, my son.  I'll help ye in a minute.'

"His answer wa'n't none too p'lite.  He were a leetle runt of a
sergeant.  I jest laughed at him an' went to t' other feller an' took
the papers out o' his pockets.  I see then a number o' British boys was
makin' fer me on the wobbly top o' the river.  They'd see me goin' as
easy as a hoss on a turnpike an' they was tryin' fer to git the knack
o' it.  In a minute they begun poppin' at me.  But shootin' on logs is
like tryin' to walk a line on a wet deck in a hurricane.  Ye got to
know how to offset the wobble.  They didn't skeer me.  I went an'
hauled that runt out o' the water an' with him under my right arm an'
the two rifles under the left un I started treadin' logs headin' fer
the north shore.  They quit shootin' but come on a'ter me pell-mell.
They got to comin' too fast an' I heard 'em goin' down through the roof
o' the bay behind me an' rasslin' with the logs.  That put meat on my
bones!  I could 'a' gone back an' made a mess o' the hull party with
the toe o' my boot but I ain't overly fond o' killin'.  Never have
been.  I took my time an' slopped erlong toward shore with the runt
under my arm cussin' like a wildcat.  We got ashore an' I made the
leetle sergeant empty his pockets an' give me all the papers he had.  I
took the strip o' rawhide from round my belt an' put a noose above his
knees an' 'nother on my wrist an' sot down to wait fer dark which the
sun were then below the tree-tops.  I looked with my spy-glass 'crost
the bay an' could see the heads bobbin' up an' down an' a dozen men
comin' out with poles to help the log rasslers.  Fer some time they had
'nough to do an' I wouldn't be supprised.  If we had the hull British
army on floatin' timber the logs would lick 'em in a few minutes."

Solomon came in with his prisoner and accurate information as to the
force of British in the Highlands.

On the night of the fifteenth of July, a detachment of Washington's
troops under Wayne, preceded by the two scouts, descended upon Stony
Point and King's Ferry and routed the enemy, capturing five hundred and
fifty men and killing sixty.  Within a few days the British came up the
river in great force and Washington, unwilling to risk a battle,
quietly withdrew and let them have the fort and ferry and their labor
for their pains.  It was a bitter disappointment to Sir Henry Clinton.
The whole British empire clamored for decisive action and their great
Commander was unable to bring it about and meanwhile the French were
preparing to send a heavy force against them.



2

Solomon, being the ablest bush scout in the American army, was needed
for every great enterprise in the wilderness.  So when a small force
was sent up the Penobscot River to dislodge a regiment of British from
Nova Scotia, in the late summer of 1779, he went with it.  The fleet
which conveyed the Americans was in command of a rugged old sea captain
from Connecticut of the name of Saltonstall who had little knowledge of
the arts of war.  He neglected the precautions which a careful
commander would have taken.

A force larger than his own should have guarded the mouth of the river.
Of this Solomon gave him warning, but Captain Saltonstall did not share
the apprehension of the great scout.  In consequence they were pursued
and overhauled far up the river by a British fleet.  Saltonstall in a
panic ran his boats ashore and blew them up with powder.  Again a force
of Americans was compelled to suffer the bitter penalty of ignorance.
The soldiers and crews ran wild in the bush a hundred miles from any
settlement.  It was not possible to organize them.  They fled in all
directions.  Solomon had taken with him a bark canoe.  This he carried,
heading eastward and followed by a large company, poorly provisioned.
A number of the ships' boats which had been lowered--and moved, before
the destruction began, were carried on the advice of Solomon.
Fortunately this party was not pursued.  Nearly every man in it had his
gun and ammunition.  The scout had picked up a goodly outfit of axes
and shovels and put them in the boats.  He organized his retreat with
sentries, rear guard, signals and a plan of defense.  The carriers were
shifted every hour.  After two days of hard travel through the deep
woods they came to a lake more than two miles long and about half as
wide.  Their provisions were gone save a few biscuit and a sack of
salt.  There were sixty-four men in the party.

Solomon organized a drive.  A great loop of weary men was flung around
the end of the lake more than a mile from its shore.  Then they began
approaching the camp, barking like dogs as they advanced.  In this
manner three deer and a moose were driven to the water and slain.
These relieved the pangs of hunger and insured the party, for some
little time, against starvation.  They were, however, a long way from
help in an unknown wilderness with a prospect of deadly hardships.
Solomon knew that the streams in this territory ran toward the sea and
for that reason he had burdened the party with boats and tools.

The able scout explored a long stretch of the lake's outlet which
flowed toward the south.  It had a considerable channel but not enough
water for boats or canoes even.  That night he began cutting timber for
a dam at the end of the lake above its outlet.  Near sundown, next day,
the dam was finished and the water began rising.  A rain hurried the
process.  Two days later the big water plane had begun to spill into
its outlet and flood the near meadow flats.  The party got the boats in
place some twenty rods below and ready to be launched.  Solomon drove
the plug out of his dam and the pent-up water began to pour through.
The stream was soon flooded and the boats floating.  Thus with a
spirited water horse to carry them they began their journey to the sea.
Men stood in the bow and stern of each boat with poles to push it along
and keep it off the banks.  Some ten miles below they swung into a
large river and went on, more swiftly, with the aid of oars and paddles.

Thus Solomon became the hero of this ill-fated expedition.  After that
he was often referred to in the army as the River Maker, although the
ingenious man was better known as the Lightning Hurler, that phrase
having been coined in Jack's account of his adventures with Solomon in
the great north bush.  In the ranks he had been regarded with a kind of
awe as a most redoubtable man of mysterious and uncanny gifts since he
and Jack had arrived in the Highlands fresh from their adventure of
"shifting the skeer"--as Solomon was wont to put it--whereupon, with no
great delay, the rash Colonel Burley had his Binkussing.  The scout was
often urged to make a display of his terrible weapon but he held his
tongue about it, nor would he play with the lightning or be induced to
hurl it upon white men.

"That's only fer to save a man from bein' burnt alive an' et up," he
used to say.

At the White Pine Mills near the sea they were taken aboard a lumber
ship bound for Boston.  Solomon returned with a great and growing
influence among the common soldiers.  He had spent a week in Newport
and many of his comrades had reached the camp of Washington in advance
of the scout's arrival.

When Solomon--a worn and ragged veteran--gained the foot of the
Highlands, late in October, he learned to his joy that Stony Point and
King's Ferry had been abandoned by the British.  He found Jack at Stony
Point and told him the story of his wasted months.  Then Jack gave his
friend the news of the war.

D'Estaing with a French fleet had arrived early in the month.  This had
led to the evacuation of Newport and Stony Point to strengthen the
British position in New York.  But South Carolina had been conquered by
the British.  It took seven hundred dollars to buy a pair of shoes with
the money of that state, so that great difficulties had fallen in the
way of arming and equipping a capable fighting force.

"I do not talk of it to others, but the troubles of our beloved
Washington are appalling," Jack went on.  "The devil loves to work with
the righteous, waiting his time.  He had his envoy even among the
disciples of Jesus.  He is among us in the person of Benedict
Arnold--lover of gold.  The new recruits are mostly of his stripe.  He
is their Captain.  They demand big bounties.  The faithful old guard,
who have fought for the love of liberty and are still waiting for their
pay, see their new comrades taking high rewards.  It isn't fair.
Naturally the old boys hate the newcomers.  They feel like putting a
coat of tar and feathers on every one of them.  You and I have got to
go to work and put the gold seekers out of the temple.  They need to
hear some of your plain talk.  Our greatest peril is Arnoldism."

"You jest wait an' hear to me," said Solomon.  "I got suthin' to say
that'll make their ears bleed passin' through 'em."

The evening of his arrival in camp Solomon talked at the general
assembly of the troops.  He was introduced with most felicitous good
humor by Washington's able secretary, Mr. Alexander Hamilton.  The
ingenious and rare accomplishments of the scout and his heroic loyalty
were rubbed with the rhetoric of an able talker until they shone.

"Boys, ye kint make no hero out o' an old scrag o' a man like me,"
Solomon began.  "You may b'lieve what Mr. Hamilton says but I know
better.  I been chased by Death an' grabbed by the coat-tails frequent,
but I been lucky enough to pull away.  That's all.  You new recruits
'a' been told how great ye be.  I'm a-goin' fer to tell ye the truth.
I don't like the way ye look at this job.  It ain't no job o' workin'
out.  We're all workin' fer ourselves.  It's my fight an' it's yer
fight.  I won't let no king put a halter on my head an', with the stale
in one hand an' a whip in t' other, lead me up to the tax collector to
pay fer his fun.  I'd ruther fight him.  Some o' you has fam'lies.
Don't worry 'bout 'em.  They'll be took care of.  I got some confidence
in the Lord myself.  Couldn't 'a' lived without it.  Look a' me.  I'm
so ragged that I got patches o' sunburn on my back an' belly.  I'm what
ye might call a speckled man.  My feet 'a' been bled.  My body looks
like an ol' tree that has been clawed by a bear an' bit by woodpeckers.
I've stuck my poker into the fire o' hell.  I've been singed an' frost
bit an' half starved an' ripped by bullets, an' all the pay I want is
liberty an' it ain't due yit.  I've done so little I'm 'shamed o'
myself.  Money!  Lord God o' Israel!  If any man has come here fer to
make money let him stan' up while we all pray fer his soul.  These 'ere
United States is your hum an' my hum an' erway down the trail afore us
they's millions 'pon millions o' folks comin' an' we want 'em to be
free.  We're a-fightin' fer 'em an' fer ourselves.  If ye don't fight
ye'll git nothin' but taxes to pay the cost o' lickin' ye.  It'll cost
a hundred times more to be licked than it'll cost to win.  Ye won't
find any o' the ol' boys o' Washington squealin' erbout pay.  We're
lookin' fer brothers an' not pigs.  Git down on yer knees with me,
every one o' ye, while the Chaplain asks God A'mighty to take us all
into His army."

The words of Solomon put the new men in better spirit and there was
little complaining after that.  They called that speech "The Binkussing
of the Recruits."  Solomon was the soul of the old guard.




CHAPTER XXVIII

IN WHICH ARNOLD AND HENRY THORNHILL ARRIVE IN THE HIGHLANDS

Margaret and her mother returned to England with David Hartley soon
after Colonel Irons had left France.  The British Commissioner had not
been able to move the philosopher.  Later, from London, he had sent a
letter to Franklin seeking to induce America to desert her new ally.
Franklin had answered:

"I would think the destruction of our whole country and the extirpation
of our people preferable to the infamy of abandoning our allies.  We
may lose all but we shall act in good faith."

Here again was a new note in the history of diplomatic intercourse.

Colonel Irons' letter to Margaret Hare, with the greater part of which
the reader is familiar, was forwarded by Franklin to his friend
Jonathan Shipley, Bishop of St. Asaph, and by him delivered.  Another
letter, no less vital to the full completion of the task of these pages
was found in the faded packet.  It is from General Sir Benjamin Hare to
his wife in London and is dated at New York, January 10, 1780.  This is
a part of the letter:

"I have a small house near the barracks with our friend Colonel Ware
and the best of negro slaves and every comfort.  It is now a loyal
city, secure from attack, and, but for the soldiers, one might think it
a provincial English town.  This war may last for years and as the sea
is, for a time, quite safe, I have resolved to ask you and Margaret to
take passage on one of the first troop ships sailing for New York,
after this reaches you.  Our friend Sir Roger and his regiments will be
sailing in March as I am apprised by a recent letter.  I am, by this
post, requesting him to offer you suitable accommodations and to give
you all possible assistance.  The war would be over now if Washington
would only fight.  His caution is maddening.  His army is in a
desperate plight, but he will not come out and meet us in the open.  He
continues to lean upon the strength of the hills.  But there are
indications that he will be abandoned by his own army."

Those "indications" were the letters of one John Anderson, who
described himself as a prominent officer in the American army.  The
letters were written to Sir Henry Clinton.  They asked for a command in
the British army and hinted at the advantage to be derived from facts,
of prime importance, in the writer's possession.

Margaret and her mother sailed with Sir Roger Waite and his regiments
on the tenth of March and arrived in New York on the twenty-sixth of
April.  _Rivington's Gazette_ of the twenty-eighth of that month
describes an elaborate dinner given by Major John André,
Adjutant-General of the British Army, at the City Hotel to General Sir
Benjamin Hare and Lady Hare and their daughter Margaret.  Indeed the
conditions in New York differed from those in the camp of Washington as
the day differs from the night.

A Committee of Congress had just finished a visit to Washington's
Highland camp.  They reported that the army had received no pay in five
months; that it often went "sundry successive days without meat"; that
it had scarcely six days' provisions ahead; that no forage was
available; that the medical department had neither sugar, tea,
chocolate, wine nor spirits.

The month of May, 1780, gave Washington about the worst pinch in his
career.  It was the pinch of hunger.  Supplies had not arrived.  Famine
had entered the camp and begun to threaten its life.  Soldiers can get
along without pay but they must have food.  Mutiny broke out among the
recruits.

In the midst of this trouble, Lafayette, the handsome French Marquis,
then twenty-three years old, arrived on his white horse, after a winter
in Paris, bringing word that a fleet and army from France were heading
across the sea.  This news revived the drooping spirit of the army.
Soon boats began to arrive from down the river with food from the east.
The crisis passed.  In the north a quiet summer followed.  The French
fleet with six thousand men under Rochambeau arrived at Newport, July
tenth, and were immediately blockaded by the British as was a like
expedition fitting out at Brest.  So Washington could only hold to his
plan of prudent waiting.



2

On a clear, warm day, late in July, 1780, a handsome coach drawn by
four horses crossed King's Ferry and toiled up the Highland road.  It
carried Benedict Arnold and his wife and their baggage.  Jack and
Solomon passed and recognized them.

"What does that mean, I wonder?" Jack queried.

"Dun know," Solomon answered.

"I'm scared about it," said the younger scout.  "I am afraid that this
money seeker has the confidence of Washington.  He has been a good
fighting man.  That goes a long way with the Chief."

Colonel Irons stopped his horse.  "I am of half a mind to go back," he
declared.

"Why?"

"I didn't tell the General half that Reed said to me.  It was so bitter
and yet I believe it was true.  I ought to have told him.  Perhaps I
ought now to go and tell him."

"There's time 'nough," said Solomon.  "Wait till we git back.
Sometimes I've thought the Chief needed advice but it's allus turned
out that I was the one that needed it."

The two horsemen rode on in silence.  It was the middle of the
afternoon of that memorable July day.  They were bound for the neutral
territory between the American and British lines, infested by "cow
boys" from the south and "skinners" from the north who were raiding the
farms of the settlers and driving away their cattle to be sold to the
opposing armies.  The two scouts were sent to learn the facts and
report upon them.  They parted at a cross-road.  It was near sundown
when at a beautiful brook, bordered with spearmint and wild iris, Jack
watered and fed his horse and sat down to eat his luncheon.  He was
thinking of Arnold and the new danger when he discovered that a man
stood near him.  The young scout had failed to hear his approach--a
circumstance in no way remarkable since the road was little traveled
and covered with moss and creeping herbage.  He thought not of this,
however, but only of the face and form and manner of the stranger.  The
face was that of a man of middle age.  The young man wrote in a letter:

"It was a singularly handsome face, smooth shaven and well shaped with
large, dark eyes and a skin very clean and perfect--I had almost said
it was transparent.  Add to all this a look of friendliness and
masterful dignity and you will understand why I rose to my feet and
took off my hat.  His stature was above my own, his form erect.  I
remember nothing about his clothes save that they were dark in color
and seemed to be new and admirably fitted.

"'You are John Irons, Jr., and I am Henry Thornhill,' said he.  'I saw
you at Kinderhook where I used to live.  I liked you then and, since
the war began, I have known of your adventures.'

"'I did not flatter myself that any one could know of them except my
family, and my fellow scout and General Washington,' I answered.

"'Well, I happen to have had the chance to know of them,' he went on.
'You are a true friend of the great cause.  I saw you passing a little
way back and I followed for I have something to say to you.'

"'I shall be glad to hear of it,' was my answer.

"'Washington can not be overcome by his enemies unless he is betrayed
by his friends.  Arnold has been put in command at West Point.  He has
planned the betrayal of the army.'

"'Do you know that?' I asked.

"'As well as I know light and darkness.'

"'Have you told Washington?'

"'No.  As yet I have had no opportunity.  I am telling him, now,
through you.  In his friendships he is a singularly stubborn man.  The
wiles of an enemy are as an open book to him but those of a friend he
is not able to comprehend.  He will discredit or only half believe any
warning that you or I may give him.  But it is for you and Solomon to
warn him and be not deceived.'

"'I shall turn about and ride back to camp,' I said.

"'There is no need of haste,' he answered.  'Arnold does not assume
command until the third of August.'

"He shaded his eyes and looked toward the west where the sun was
setting and the low lying clouds were like rose colored islands in a
golden sea, and added as he hurried away down the road to the south:

"'It is a beautiful world.'

"'Too good for fighting men,' I answered as I sat down to finish my
luncheon for I was still hungry.

"While I ate, the tormenting thought came to me that I had neglected to
ask for the source of his information or for his address.  It was a
curious oversight due to his masterly manner and that sense of the
guarded tongue which an ordinary mortal is apt to feel in the presence
of a great personality.  I had been, in a way, self-bridled and
cautious in my speech, as I have been wont to be in the presence of
Washington himself.  I looked down the road ahead.  The stranger had
rounded a bend and was now hidden by the bush.  I hurried through my
repast, bridled my horse and set off at a gallop expecting to overtake
him, but to my astonishment he had left the road.  I did not see him
again, but his words were ever with me in the weeks that followed.

"I reached the Corlies farm, far down in the neutral territory, at ten
o'clock and a little before dawn was with Corlies and his neighbors in
a rough fight with a band of cattle thieves, in the course of which
three men and a boy were seriously disabled by my pistols.  We had
salted a herd and concealed ourselves in the midst of it and so were
able to shoot from good cover when the thieves arrived.  Solomon and I
spent four days in the neutral territory.  When we left it a dozen
cattle thieves were in need of repair and three had moved to parts
unknown.  Save in the southern limit, their courage had been broken.

"I had often thought of Nancy, the blaze-faced mare, that I had got
from Governor Reed and traded to Mr. Paulding.  I was again reminded of
her by meeting a man who had just come from Tarrytown.  Being near that
place I rode on to Paulding's farm and spent a night in his house.  I
found Nancy in good flesh and spirits.  She seemed to know and like the
touch of my hand and, standing by her side, the notion came to me that
I ought to own her.  Paulding was reduced in circumstances.  Having
been a patriot and a money-lender, the war had impoverished him.  My
own horse was worn by overwork and so I proposed a trade and offered a
sum to boot which he promptly accepted.  I came back up the north road
with the handsome, high-headed mare under my saddle.  The next night I
stopped with one Reuben Smith near the northern limit of the neutral
territory below Stony Point.  Smith had prospered by selling supplies
to the patriot army.  I had heard that he was a Tory and so I wished to
know him.  I found him a rugged, jovial, long-haired man of middle age,
with a ready ringing laugh.  His jokes were spoken in a low tone and
followed by quick, stertorous breathing and roars and gestures of
appreciation.  His cheerful spirit had no doubt been a help to him in
our camp.

"'I've got the habit o' laughin' at my own jokes,' said he.  'Ye see
it's a lonely country here an' if I didn't give 'em a little
encouragement they wouldn't come eround,' the man explained.

"He lifted a foot and swung it in the air while he bent the knee of the
leg on which he was standing and opened his mouth widely and blew the
air out of his lungs and clapped his hands together.

"'It also gives you exercise,' I remarked.

"'A joke is like a hoss; it has to be fed or it won't work,' he
remarked, as he continued his cheerful gymnastics.  I have never known
a man to whom a joke was so much of an undertaking.  He sobered down
and added:

"'This mare is no stranger to oats an' the curry comb."

"He looked her over carefully before he led her to the stable.

"Next morning as he stood by her noble head, Smith said to me:

"'She's a knowin' beast.  She'd be smart enough to laugh at my jokes
an' I wouldn't wonder.'

"He was immensely pleased with this idea of his.  Then, turning
serious, he asked if I would sell her.

"'You couldn't afford to own that mare,' I said.

"I had touched his vanity.  In fact I did not realize how much he had
made by his overcharging.  He was better able to own her than I and
that he proposed to show me.

"He offered for her another horse and a sum which caused me to take
account of my situation.  The money would be a help to me.  However, I
shook my head.  He increased his offer.

"'What do you want of her?" I asked.

"'I've always wanted to own a hoss like that,' he answered.

"'I intended to keep the mare,' said I.  'But if you will treat her
well and give her a good home I shall let you have her.'

"'A man who likes a good joke will never drive a spavined hoss,' he
answered merrily.

"So it happened that the mare Nancy fell into the hands of Reuben
Smith."




CHAPTER XXIX

LOVE AND TREASON

When Jack and Solomon returned to headquarters, Arnold and his wife
were settled in a comfortable house overlooking the river.  Colonel
Irons made his report.  The Commander-in-Chief complimented him and
invited the young man to make a tour of the camp in his company.  They
mounted their horses and rode away together.

"I learn that General Arnold is to be in command here," Jack remarked
soon after the ride began.

"I have not yet announced my intention," said Washington.  "Who told
you?"

"A man of the name of Henry Thornhill."

"I do not know him but he is curiously well informed.  Arnold is an
able officer.  We have not many like him.  He is needed here for I have
to go on a long trip to eastern Connecticut to confer with Rochambeau.
In the event of some unforeseen crisis Arnold would know what to do."

Then Jack spoke out: "General, I ought to have reported to you the
exact words of Governor Reed.  They were severe, perhaps, even, unjust.
I have not repeated them to any one.  But now I think you should know
their full content and Judge of them in your own way.  The Governor
insists that Arnold is bad at heart--that he would sell his master for
thirty pieces of silver."

Washington made no reply, for a moment, and then his words seemed to
have no necessary relation to those of Jack Irons.

"General Arnold has been badly cut up in many battles," said he.  "I
wish him to be relieved of all trying details.  You are an able and
prudent man.  I shall make you his chief aide with the rank of
Brigadier-General.  He needs rest and will concern himself little with
the daily routine.  In my absence, you will be the superintendent of
the camp, and subject to orders I shall leave with you.  Colonel Binkus
will be your helper.  I hope that you may be able to keep yourself on
friendly terms with the General."

Jack reported to the Commander-in-Chief the warning of Thornhill, but
the former made light of it.

"The air is full of evil gossip," he said.  "You may hear it of me."

When they rode up to headquarters Arnold was there.  To Jack's surprise
the Major-General greeted him with friendly words, saying:

"I hope to know you better for I have heard much of your courage and
fighting quality."

"There are good soldiers here," said Jack.  "If I am one of them it is
partly because I have seen you fight.  You have given all of us the
inspiration of a great example."

It was a sincere and deserved tribute.

On the third of August--the precise date named by Henry
Thornhill--Arnold took command of the camp and Irons assumed his new
duties.  The Major-General rode with Washington every day until, on the
fourteenth of September, the latter set out with three aides and
Colonel Binkus on his trip to Connecticut.  Solomon rode with the party
for two days and then returned.  Thereafter Arnold left the work of his
office to Jack and gave his time to the enjoyment of the company of his
wife and a leisure that suffered little interruption.  For him, grim
visaged war had smoothed his wrinkled front.  Like Richard he had hung
up his bruised arms.  The day of Washington's departure, Mrs. Arnold
invited Jack to dinner.  The young man felt bound to accept this
opportunity for more friendly relations.

Mrs. Arnold was a handsome, vivacious, blonde young woman of thirty.
The officer speaks in a letter of her lively talk and winning smiles
and splendid figure, well fitted with a costume that reminded him of
the court ladies in France.

"What a contrast to the worn, patched uniforms to be seen in that
camp!" he added.

Soon after the dinner began, Mrs. Arnold said to the young man, "We
have heard of your romance.  Colonel and Mrs. Hare and their young
daughter spent a week in our home in Philadelphia on their first trip
to the colonies.  Later Mrs. Hare wrote to my mother of their terrible
adventure in the great north bush and spoke of Margaret's attachment
for the handsome boy who had helped to rescue them, so I have some
right to my interest in you."

"And therefor I thank you and congratulate myself," said the young man.
"It is a little world after all."

"And your story has been big enough to fill it," she went on.  "The
ladies in Philadelphia seem to know all its details.  We knew only how
it began.  They have told us of the thrilling duel and how the young
lovers were separated by the war and how you were sent out of England."

"You astonish me," said the officer.  "I did not imagine that my humble
affairs would interest any one but myself and my family.  I suppose
that Doctor Franklin must have been talking about them.  The dear old
soul is the only outsider who knows the facts."

"And if he had kept them to himself he would have been the most inhuman
wretch in the world," said Mrs. Arnold.  "Women have their rights.
They need something better to talk about than Acts of Parliament and
taxes and war campaigns.  I thank God that no man can keep such a story
to himself.  He has to have some one to help him enjoy it.  A good
love-story is like murder.  It will out."

"It has caused me a lot of misery and a lot of happiness," said the
young man.

"I long to see the end of it," the woman went on.  "I happen to know a
detail in your story which may be new to you.  Miss Hare is now in New
York."

"In New York!"

"Oddso!  In New York!  We heard in Philadelphia that she and her mother
had sailed with Sir Roger Waite in March.  How jolly it would be if the
General and I could bring you together and have a wedding at
headquarters!"

"I could think of no greater happiness save that of seeing the end of
the war," Jack answered.

"The war!  That is a little matter.  I want to see a proper end to this
love-story."

She laughed and ran to the spinnet and sang _Shepherds, I Have Lost My
Love_.

The General would seem to have been in bad spirits.  He had spoken not
half a dozen words.  To him the talk of the others had been as spilled
water.  Jack has described him as a man of "unstable temperament."

The young man's visit was interrupted by Solomon who came to tell him
that he was needed in the matter of a quarrel between some of the new
recruits.

Jack and Solomon exercised unusual care in guarding the camp and
organizing for defense in case of attack.  It was soon after
Washington's departure that Arnold went away on the road to the south.
Solomon followed keeping out of his field of vision.  The General
returned two days later.  Solomon came into Jack's hut about midnight
of the day of Arnold's return with important news.

Jack was at his desk studying a map of the Highlands.  The camp was at
rest.  The candle in Jack's hut was the only sign of life around
headquarters when Solomon, having put out his horse, came to talk with
his young friend.  He stepped close to the desk, swallowed nervously
and began his whispered report.

"Suthin' neevarious be goin' on," he began.  "A British ship were lyin'
nigh the mouth o' the Croton River.  Arnold went aboard.  An' officer
got into his boat with him an' they pulled over to the west shore and
went into the bush.  Stayed thar till mos' night.  If 'twere honest
business, why did they go off in the bush alone fer a talk?"

Jack shook his head.

"Soon as I seen that I went to one o' our batteries an' tol' the Cap'n
what were on my mind.

"'Damn the ol' British tub.  We'll make 'er back up a little,' sez he.
'She's too clus anyhow.'

"Then he let go a shot that ripped the water front o' her bow.  Say,
Jack, they were some hoppin' eround on the deck o' the big British war
sloop.  They h'isted her sails an' she fell away down the river a mile
'er so.  The sun were set when Arnold an' the officer come out o' the
bush.  I were in a boat with a fish rod an' could jes' see 'em with my
spy-glass, the light were so dim.  They stood thar lookin' fer the
ship.  They couldn't see her.  They went back into the bush.  It come
to me what they was goin' to do.  Arnold were a-goin' to take the
Britisher over to the house o' that ol' Tory, Reub Smith.  I got thar
fust an' hid in the bushes front o' the house.  Sure 'nough!--that's
what were done.  Arnold an' t' other feller come erlong an' went into
the house.  'Twere so dark I couldn't see 'em but I knowed 'twere them."

"How?" the young man asked.

"'Cause they didn't light no candle.  They sot in the dark an' they
didn't talk out loud like honest men would.  I come erway.  I couldn't
do no more."

"I think you've done well," said Jack.  "Now go and get some rest.
To-morrow may be a hard day."



2

Jack spent a bad night in the effort to be as great as his problem.  In
the morning he sent Solomon and three other able scouts to look the
ground over east, west and south of the army.  One of them was to take
the road to Hartford and deliver a message to Washington.

After the noon mess, Arnold mounted his horse and rode away alone.  The
young Brigadier sent for his trusted friend, Captain Merriwether.

"Captain, the General has set out on the east road alone," said Jack.
"He is not well.  There's something wrong with his heart.  I am a
little worried about him.  He ought not to be traveling alone.  My
horse is in front of the door.  Jump on his back and keep in sight of
the General, but don't let him know what you are doing."

A little later Mrs. Arnold entered the office of the new Brigadier in a
most cheerful mood.

"I have good news for you," she announced.

"What is it?"

"Soon I hope to make a happy ending of your love-story."

"God prosper you," said the young man.

She went on with great animation: "A British officer has come in a ship
under a flag of truce to confer with General Arnold.  I sent a letter
to Margaret Hare on my own responsibility with the General's official
communication.  I invited her to come with the party and promised her
safe conduct to our house.  I expect her.  For the rest we look to you."

The young man wrote: "This announcement almost took my breath.  My joy
was extinguished by apprehension before it could show itself.  I did
not speak, being for a moment confused and blinded by lightning flashes
of emotion."

"It is your chance to bring the story to a pretty end," she went on.
"Let us have a wedding at headquarters.  On the night of the
twenty-eighth, General Washington will have returned.  He has agreed to
dine with us that evening."

"I think that she must have observed the shadow on my face for, while
she spoke, a great fear had come upon me," he testified in the Court of
Inquiry.  "It seemed clear to me that, if there was a plot, the capture
of Washington himself was to be a part of it and my sweetheart a
helpful accessory."

"'Are you not pleased?' Mrs. Arnold asked.

"I shook off my fear and answered: 'Forgive me.  It is all so
unexpected and so astonishing and so very good of you!  It has put my
head in a whirl.'

"Gentlemen, I could see no sinister motive in this romantic enterprise
of Mrs. Arnold," the testimony proceeds.  "I have understood that her
sympathies were British but, if so, she had been discreet enough in
camp to keep them to herself.  Whatever they may have been, I felt as
sure then, as I do now, that she was a good woman.  Her kindly interest
in my little romance was just a bit of honest, human nature.  It
pleased me and when I think of her look of innocent, unguarded, womanly
frankness, I can not believe that she had had the least part in the
dark intrigue of her husband.

"I arose and kissed her hand and I remember well the words I spoke:
'Madame,' I said, 'let me not try now to express my thanks.  I shall
need time for friendly action and well chosen words.  Do you think that
Margaret will fall in with your plans?'

"She answered:

"'How can she help it?  She is a woman.  Have you not both been waiting
these many years for the chance to marry?  I think that I know a
woman's heart.'

"'You know much that I am eager to know,' I said.  'The General has not
told me that he is to meet the British.  May I know all the good news?'

"'Of course he will tell you about that,' she assured me.  'He has told
me only a little.  It is some negotiation regarding an exchange of
prisoners.  I am much more interested in Margaret and the wedding.  I
wish you would tell me about her.  I have heard that she has become
very beautiful.'

"I showed Mrs. Arnold the miniature portrait which Margaret had given
me the day of our little ride and talk in London and then an orderly
came with a message and that gave me an excuse to put an end to this
untimely babbling for which I had no heart.  The message was from
Solomon.  He had got word that the British war-ship had come back up
the river and was two miles above Stony Point with a white flag at her
masthead.

"My nerves were as taut as a fiddle string.  A cloud of mystery
enveloped the camp and I was unable to see my way.  Was the whole great
issue for which so many of us had perished and fought and endured all
manner of hardships, being bartered away in the absence of our beloved
Commander?  I have suffered much but never was my spirit so dragged and
torn as when I had my trial in the thorny way of distrust.  I have had
my days of conceit when I felt equal to the work of Washington, but
there was no conceit in me then.  Face to face with the looming peril,
of which warning had come to me, I felt my own weakness and the need of
his masterful strength.

"I went out-of-doors.  Soon I met Merriwether coming into camp.  Arnold
had returned.  He had ridden at a walk toward the headquarters of the
Second Brigade and turned about and come back without speaking to any
one.  Arnold was looking down as if absorbed in his own thoughts when
Merriwether passed him in the road.  He did not return the latter's
salute.  It was evident that the General had ridden away for the sole
purpose of being alone.

"I went back to my hut and sat down to try to find my way when suddenly
the General appeared at my door on his bay mare and asked me to take a
little ride with him.  I mounted my horse and we rode out on the east
road together for half a mile or so.

"'I believe that my wife had some talk with you this morning,' he began.

"'Yes,' I answered.

"'A British officer has come up the river in a ship under a white flag
with a proposal regarding an exchange of prisoners.  In my answer to
their request for a conference, some time ago, I enclosed a letter from
Mrs. Arnold to Miss Margaret Hare inviting her to come to our home
where she would find a hearty welcome and her lover--now an able and
most valued officer of the staff.  A note received yesterday says that
Miss Hare is one of the party.  We are glad to be able to do you this
little favor.'

"I thanked him.

"'I wish that you could go with me down the river to meet her in the
morning,' he said.  'But in my absence it will, of course, be necessary
for you to be on duty.  Mrs. Arnold will go with me and we shall, I
hope, bring the young lady safely to head-quarters.'

"He was preoccupied.  His face wore a serious look.  There was a
melancholy note in his tone--I had observed that in other talks with
him--but it was a friendly tone.  It tended to put my fears at rest.

"I asked the General what he thought of the prospects of our cause.

"'They are not promising,' he answered.  'The defeat of Gates in the
south and the scattering of his army in utter rout is not an
encouraging event.'

"'I think that we shall get along better now that the Gates bubble has
burst,' I answered."

This ends the testimony of "the able and most valued officer," Jack
Irons, Jr.




CHAPTER XXX

"WHO IS SHE THAT LOOKETH FORTH AS THE MORNING, FAIR AS THE MOON, CLEAR
AS THE SUN, AND TERRIBLE AS AN ARMY WITH BANNERS?"

The American army had been sold by Arnold.  The noble ideal it had
cherished, the blood it had given, the bitter hardships it had
suffered--torture in the wilderness, famine in the Highlands, long
marches of half naked men in mid-winter, massacres at Wyoming and
Cherry Valley--all this had been bartered away, like a shipload of
turnips, to satisfy the greed of one man.  Again thirty pieces of
silver!  Was a nation to walk the bitter way to its Calvary?  Major
André, the Adjutant-General of Sir Henry Clinton's large force in New
York, was with the traitor when he rowed from the ship to the west
shore of the Hudson and went into the bush under the observation of
Solomon with his spy-glass.  Arnold was to receive a command and large
pay in the British army.  The consideration had been the delivery of
maps showing the positions of Washington's men and the plans of his
forts and other defenses, especially those of Forts Putnam and Clinton
and Battery Knox.  Much other information was put in the hands of the
British officer, including the prospective movements of the
Commander-in-Chief.  He was to be taken in the house of the man he had
befriended.  André had only to reach New York with his treasure and
Arnold to hold the confidence of his chief for a few days and, before
the leaves had fallen, the war would end.  The American army and its
master mind would be at the mercy of Sir Henry Clinton.

Those September days the greatest love-story this world had known was
feeling its way in a cloud of mystery.  The thrilling tale of Man and
Liberty, which had filled the dreams of sage and poet, had been nearing
its golden hours.  Of a surety, at last, it would seem the lovers were
to be wed.  What time, in the flying ages, they had greeted each other
with hearts full of the hope of peace and happiness, some tyrant king
and his armies had come between them.  Then what a carnival of lust,
rapine and bloody murder!  Man was broken on the wheel of power and
thwarted Hope sat brooding in his little house.  History had been a
long siege, like that of Troy, to deliver a fairer Helen from the
established power of Kings.  Now, beyond three thousand miles of sea,
supported by the strength of the hills and hearts informed and sworn to
bitter duty, Man, at last, had found his chance.  Again Liberty, in
robes white as snow and sweet as the morning, beckoned to her lover.
Another king was come with his armies to keep them apart.  The armies
being baffled, Satan had come also and spread his hidden snares.  Could
Satan prevail?  Was the story nearing another failure--a tragedy dismal
and complete as that of Thermopylae?

This day we shall know.  This day holds the moment which is to round
out the fulness of time.  It is the twenty-third of September, 1780,
and the sky is clear.  Now as the clock ticks its hours away, we may
watch the phrases of the capable Author of the great story as they come
from His pen.  His most useful characters are remote and unavailable.
It would seem that the villain was likely to have his way.  The Author
must defeat him, if possible, with some stroke of ingenuity.  For this
He was not unprepared.

Before the day begins it will be well to review, briefly, the hours
that preceded it.

André would have reached New York that night if _The Vulture_ had not
changed her position on account of a shot from the battery below Stony
Point.  For that, credit must be given to the good scout Solomon
Binkus.  The ship was not in sight when the two men came out in their
boat from the west shore of the river while the night was falling.
Arnold had heard the shot and now that the ship had left her anchorage
a fear must have come to him that his treachery was suspected.

"I may want to get away in that boat myself," he suggested to André.

"She will not return until she gets orders from you or me," the
Britisher assured him.

"I wonder what has become of her," said Arnold.

"She has probably dropped down the river for some reason," André
answered.  "What am I to do?"

"I'll take you to the house of a man I know who lives near the river
and send you to New York by horse with passports in the morning.  You
can reach the British lines to-morrow."

"I would like that," André exclaimed.  "It would afford me a welcome
survey of the terrain."

"Smith will give you a suit of clothes that will fit you well enough,"
said the traitor.  "You and he are about of a size.  It will be better
for you to be in citizen's dress."

So it happened that in the darkness of the September evening Smith and
André, the latter riding the blazed-face mare, set out for King's
Ferry, where they were taken across the river.  They rode a few miles
south of the landing to the shore of Crom Pond and spent the night with
a friend of Smith.  In the morning the latter went on with André until
they had passed Pine's Bridge on the Croton River.  Then he turned back.


Now André fared along down the road alone on the back of the mare
Nancy.  He came to an outpost of the Highland army and presented his
pass.  It was examined and endorsed and he went on his way.  He met
transport wagons, a squad of cavalry and, later, a regiment of militia
coming up from western Connecticut, but no one stopped him.  In the
faded hat and coat and trousers of Reuben Smith, this man, who called
himself John Anderson, was not much unlike the farmer folk who were
riding hither and thither in the neutral territory, on their petit
errands.  His face was different.  It was the well kept face of an
English aristocrat with handsome dark eyes and hair beginning to turn
gray.  Still, shadowed by the brim of the old hat, his face was not
likely to attract much attention from the casual observer.  The
handsome mare he rode was a help in this matter.  She took and held the
eyes of those who passed him.  He went on unchallenged.  A little past
the hour of the high sun he stopped to drink at a wayside spring and to
give his horse some oats out of one of the saddle-bags.  It was then
that a patriot soldier came along riding northward.  He was one of
Solomon's scouts.  The latter stopped to let his horse drink.  As his
keen eyes surveyed the south-bound traveler, John Anderson felt his
danger.  At that moment the scout was within reach of immortal fame had
he only known it.  He was not so well informed as Solomon.  He asked a
few questions and called for the pass of the stranger.  That was
unquestionable.  The scout resumed his journey.

André resolved not to stop again.  He put the bit in the mare's mouth,
mounted her and rode on with his treasure.  The most difficult part of
his journey was behind him.  Within twelve hours he should be at
Clinton's headquarters.

Suddenly he came to a fork in the road and held up his horse, uncertain
which way to go.  Now the great moment was come.  Shall he turn to the
right or the left?  On his decision rests the fate of the New World and
one of the most vital issues in all history, it would seem.  The
left-hand road would have taken him safely to New York, it is fair to
assume.  He hesitates.  The day is waning.  It is a lonely piece of
road.  There is no one to tell him.  The mare shows a preference for
the turn to the right.  Why?  Because it leads to Tarrytown, her former
home, and a good master.  André lets her have her way.  She hurries on,
for she knows where there is food and drink and gentle hands.  So a leg
of the mighty hazard has been safely won by the mare Nancy.  The
officer rode on, and what now was in his way?  A wonder and a mystery
greater even than that of Nancy and the fork in the road.  A little out
of Tarrytown on the highway the horseman traveled, a group of three men
were hidden in the bush--ragged, profane, abominable cattle thieves
waiting for cows to come down out of the wild land to be milked.  They
were "skinners" in the patriot militia, some have said; some that they
were farmers' sons not in the army.  However that may have been, they
were undoubtedly rough, hard-fisted fellows full of the lawless spirit
bred by five years of desperate warfare.  They were looking for Tories
as well as for cattle.  Tories were their richest prey, for the latter
would give high rewards to be excused from the oath of allegiance.

They came out upon André and challenged him.  The latter knew that he
had passed the American outposts and thought that he was near the
British lines.  He was not familiar with the geography of the upper
east shore.  He knew that the so-called neutral territory was overrun
by two parties--the British being called the "Lower" and the Yankees
the "Upper."

"What party do you belong to?" André demanded.

"The Lower," said one of the Yankees.

It was, no doubt, a deliberate lie calculated to inspire frankness in a
possible Tory.  That was the moment for André to have produced his
passports, which would have opened the road for him.  Instead he
committed a fatal error, the like of which it would be hard to find in
all the records of human action.

"I am a British officer," he declared.  "Please take me to your post."

They were keen-minded men who quickly surrounded him.  A British
officer!  Why was he in the dress of a Yankee farmer?  The pass could
not save him now from these rough, strong handed fellows.  The die was
cast.  They demanded the right of search.  He saw his error and changed
his plea.

"I am only a citizen of New York returning from family business in the
country," he said.

He drew his gold watch from his pocket--that unfailing sign of the
gentleman of fortune--and looked at its dial.

"You can see I am no common fellow," he added.  "Let me go on about my
business."

They firmly insisted on their right to search him.  He began to be
frightened.  He offered them his watch and a purse full of gold and any
amount of British goods to be allowed to go on his way.

Now here is the wonder and the mystery in this remarkable proceeding.
These men were seeking plunder and here was a handsome prospect.  Why
did they not make the most of it and be content?  The "skinners" were
plunderers, but first of all and above all they were patriots.  The
spirit brooding over the Highlands of the Hudson and the hills of New
England had entered their hearts.  The man who called himself John
Anderson was compelled to dismount and empty his pockets and take off
his boots, in one of which was the damning evidence of Arnold's
perfidy.  A fortune was then within the reach of these three
hard-working men of the hills, but straightway they took their prisoner
and the papers, found in his boot, to the outpost commanded by Colonel
Jameson.

This negotiation for the sale of the United States had met with
unexpected difficulties.  The "skinners" had been as hard to buy as the
learned diplomat.




CHAPTER XXXI

THE LOVERS AND SOLOMON'S LAST FIGHT

Meanwhile, Margaret and her mother had come up the river in a barge
with General and Mrs. Arnold to the house of the latter.  Jack had gone
out on a tour of inspection.  He had left headquarters after the noon
meal with a curious message in his pocket and a feeling of great
relief.  The message had been delivered to him by the mother of a
captain in one of the regiments.  She said that it had been given to
her by a man whom she did not know.  Jack had been busy when it came
and did not open it until she had gone away.  It was an astonishing and
most welcome message in the flowing script of a rapid penman, but
clearly legible.  It was without date and very brief.  These were the
cheering words in it:


"MY DEAR FRIEND:  I have good news from down the river.  The danger is
passed.

            "HENRY THORNHILL."


"Well, Henry Thornhill is a man who knows whereof he speaks," the young
officer said to himself, as he rode away.  "I should like to meet him
again."

That day the phrase "Good news from down the river" came repeatedly
back to him.  He wondered what it meant.

Jack being out of camp, Margaret had found Solomon.  Toward the day's
end he had gone out on the south road with the young lady and her
mother and Mrs. Arnold.

Jack was riding into camp from an outpost of the army.  The day was in
its twilight.  He had been riding fast.  He pulled up his horse as he
approached a sentry post.  Three figures were standing in the dusky
road.

"Halt!  Who comes there?" one of them sang out.

It was the voice of Margaret.  Its challenge was more like a phrase of
music than a demand.  He dismounted.

"I am one of the great army of lovers," said he.

"Advance and give the countersign," she commanded.

A moment he held her in his embrace and then he whispered: "I love you."

"The countersign is correct, but before I let you pass, give me one
more look into your heart."

"As many as you like--but--why?"

"So I may be sure that you do not blame England for the folly of her
King."

"I swear it."

"Then I shall enlist with you against the tyrant.  He has never been my
King."

Lady Hare stood with Mrs. Arnold near the lovers.

"I too demand the countersign," said the latter.

"And much goes with it," said the young man as he kissed her, and then
he embraced the mother of his sweetheart and added:

"I hope that you are also to enlist with us."

"No, I am to leave my little rebel with you and return to New York."

Solomon, who had stood back in the edge of the bush, approached them
and said to Lady Hare:

"I guess if the truth was known, they's more rebels in England than
thar be in Ameriky."

He turned to Jack and added:

"My son, you're a reg'lar Tory privateer--grabbin' for gold.  Give 'em
one a piece fer me."

Margaret ran upon the old scout and kissed his bearded cheek.

"Reg'lar lightnin' hurler!" said he.  "Soon as this 'ere war is over
I'll take a bee line fer hum--you hear to me.  This makes me sick o'
fightin'."

"Will you give me a ride?" Margaret asked her lover.  "I'll get on
behind you."

Solomon took off the saddle and tightened the blanket girth.

"Thar, 'tain't over clean, but now ye kin both ride," said he.

Soon the two were riding, she in front, as they had ridden long before
through the shady, mallowed bush in Tryon County.

"Oh, that we could hear the thrush's song again!"

"I can hear it sounding through the years," he answered.  "As life goes
on with me I hear many an echo from the days of my youth."

They rode a while in silence as the night fell.

"Again the night is beautiful!" she exclaimed.

"But now it is the beauty of the night and the stars," he answered.

"How they glow!"

"I think it is because the light of the future is shining on them."

"It is the light of peace and happiness.  I am glad to be free."

"Soon your people shall be free," he answered her.

"My people?"

"Yes."

"Is the American army strong enough to do it?"

"No."

"The French?"

"No."

"Who then is to free us?"

"God and His ocean and His hills and forests and rivers and these
children of His in America, who have been schooled to know their
rights.  After this King is broken there will be no other like him in
England."

They dismounted at Arnold's door.

"For a time I shall have much to do, but soon I hope for great
promotion and more leisure," he said.

"Tell me the good news," she urged.

"I expect to be the happiest man in the army, and the master of this
house and your husband."

"And you and I shall be as one," she answered.  "God speed the day when
that may be true also of your people and my people."



2

He kissed her and bade her good night and returned to his many tasks.
He had visited the forts and batteries.  He had communicated with every
outpost.  His plan was complete.  About midnight, when he and Solomon
were lying down to rest, two horsemen came up the road at a gallop and
stopped at his door.  They were aides of Washington.  They reported
that the General was spending the night at the house of Henry Jasper,
near the ferry, and would reach camp about noon next day.

"Thank God for that news," said the young man.  "Solomon, I think that
we can sleep better to-night."

"If you're awake two minutes from now you'll hear some snorin',"
Solomon answered as he drew his boots.  "I ain't had a good bar'foot
sleep in a week.  I don't like to have socks er luther on when I wade
out into that pond.  To-night, I guess, we'll smell the water lilies."

Jack was awake for an hour thinking of the great happiness which had
fallen in the midst of his troubles and of Thornhill and his message.
He heard the two aides going to their quarters.  Then a deep silence
fell upon the camp, broken only by the rumble of distant thunder in the
mountains and the feet of some one pacing up and down between his hut
and the house of the General.  He put on his long coat and slippers and
went out-of-doors.

"Who's there?" he demanded.

"Arnold," was the answer.  "Taking a little walk before I turn in."

There was a weary, pathetic note of trouble in that voice, long
remembered by the young man, who immediately returned to his bed.  He
knew not that those restless feet of Arnold were walking in the flames
of hell.  Had some premonition of what had been going on down the river
come up to him?  Could he hear the feet of that horse, now galloping
northward through the valleys and over the hills toward him with evil
tidings?  No more for this man was the comfort of restful sleep or the
joys of home and friendship and affection.  Now the touch of his wife's
hand, the sympathetic look in her eyes and all her babble about the
coming marriage were torture to him.  He could not endure it.  Worst of
all, he was in a way where there is no turning.  He must go on.  He had
begun to know that he was suspected.  The conduct of the scout, Solomon
Binkus, had suggested that he knew what was passing.  Arnold had seen
the aides of Washington as they came in.  The chief could not be far
behind them.  He dreaded to stand before him.  Compared to the torture
now beginning for this man, the fate of Bill Scott on Rock Creek in the
wilderness, had been a mercy.

Soon after sunrise came a solitary horseman, wearied by long travel,
with a message from Colonel Jameson to Arnold.  A man had been captured
near Tarrytown with important documents on his person.  He had
confessed that he was Adjutant-General André of Sir Henry Clinton's
army.  The worst had come to pass.  Now treason! disgrace! the gibbet!

Arnold was sitting at breakfast.  He arose, put the message in his
pocket and went out of the room.  _The Vulture_ lay down the river
awaiting orders.  The traitor walked hurriedly to the boat-landing.
Solomon was there.  It had been his custom when in camp to go down to
the landing every morning with his spy-glass and survey the river.
Only one boatman was at the dock.

"Colonel Binkus, will you help this man to take me down to the British
ship?" Arnold asked.  "I have an engagement with its commander and am
half an hour late."

Solomon had had much curiosity about that ship.  He wished to see the
man who had gone into the bush and then to Smith's with Arnold.

"Sart'n," Solomon answered.

They got into a small barge with the General in the cushioned rear
seat, his flag in hand.

"Make what speed you can," said the General.

The oarsmen bent to their task and the barge swept on by the forts.  A
Yankee sloop overhauled and surveyed them.  If its skipper had
entertained suspicions they were dissipated by the presence of Solomon
Binkus in the barge.

They came up to _The Vulture_ and made fast at its landing stage where
an officer waited to receive the General.  The latter ascended to the
deck.  In a moment a voice called from above:

"General Arnold's boatmen may come aboard."

A British war-ship was a thing of great interest to Solomon.  Once
aboard he began to look about him at the shining guns and their gear
and the tackle and the men.  He looked for Arnold, but he was not in
sight.

Among the crew then busy on the deck, Solomon saw the Tory desperado
"Slops," one time of the Ohio River country, with his black pipe in his
mouth.  Slops paused in his hauling and reeving to shake a fist at
Solomon.  They were heaving the anchor.  The sails were running up.
The ship had begun to move.  What was the meaning of this?  Solomon
stepped to the ship's side.  The stair had been hove up and made fast.
The barge was not to be seen.

"They will put you all ashore below," an officer said to him.

Solomon knew too much about Arnold to like the look of this.  The
officer went forward.  Solomon stepped to the opening in the deck rail,
not yet closed, through which he had come aboard.  While he was looking
down at the water, some ten feet below, a group of sailors came to fill
in.  His arm was roughly seized.  Solomon stepped back.  Before him
stood the man Slops.  An insulting word from the latter, a quick blow
from Solomon, and Slops went through the gate out into the air and
downward.  The scout knew it was no time to tarry.

"A night hawk couldn't dive no quicker ner what I done," were his words
to the men who picked him up.  He was speaking of that half second of
the twenty-fourth of September, 1780.   His brief account of it was
carefully put down by an officer: "I struck not twenty feet from Slops,
which I seen him jes' comin' up when I took water.  This 'ere ol' sloop
that had overhauled us goin' down were nigh.  Hadn't no more'n come up
than I felt Slops' knife rip into my leg.  I never had no practise in
that 'ere knife work.  'Tain't fer decent folks, but my ol' Dan Skinner
is allus on my belt.  He'd chose the weapons an' so I fetched 'er out.
Had to er die.  We fit a minnit thar in the water.  All the while he
had that damn black pipe in his mouth.  I were hacked up a leetle, but
he got a big leak in _him_ an' all of a sudden he wasn't thar.  He'd
gone.  I struck out with ol' Dan Skinner 'twixt my teeth.  Then I see
your line and grabbed it.  Whar's the British ship now?"

"'Way below Stony P'int an' a fair wind in her sails,' the skipper
answered.

"Bound fer New York," said Solomon sorrowfully.  "They'd 'a' took me
with 'em if I hadn't 'a' jumped.  Put me over to Jasper's dock.  I got
to see Washington quick."

"Washington has gone up the river."

"Then take me to quarters soon as ye kin.  I'll give ye ten pounds,
good English gold.  My God, boys!  My ol' hide is leakin' bad."

He turned to the man who had been washing and binding his wounds.

"Sodder me up best ye kin.  I got to last till I see the Father."

Solomon and other men in the old army had often used the word "Father"
in speaking of the Commander-in-Chief.  It served, as no other could,
to express their affection for him.

The wind was unfavorable and the sloop found it difficult to reach the
landing near headquarters.  After some delay Solomon jumped overboard
and swam ashore.

What follows he could not have told.  Washington was standing with his
orderly in the little dooryard at headquarters as Solomon came
staggering up the slope at a run and threw his body, bleeding from a
dozen wounds, at the feet of his beloved Chief.

"Oh, my Father!" he cried in a broken voice and with tears streaming
down his cheeks.  "Arnold has sold Ameriky an' all its folks an' gone
down the river."

Washington knelt beside him and felt his bloody garments.

"The Colonel is wounded," he said to his orderly.  "Go for help."

The scout, weak from the loss of blood, tried to regain his feet but
failed.  He lay back and whispered:

"I guess the sap has all oozed out o' me but I had enough."

Washington was one of those who put him on a stretcher and carried him
to the hospital.

When he was lying on his bed and his clothes were being removed, the
Commander-in-Chief paid him this well deserved compliment as he held
his hand:

"Colonel, when the war is won it will be only because I have had men
like you to help me."

Soon Jack came to his side and then Margaret.  General Washington asked
the latter about Mrs. Arnold.

"My mother is doing what she can to comfort her," Margaret answered.

Solomon revived under stimulants and was able to tell them briefly of
the dire struggle he had had.

"It were Slops that saved me," he whispered.

He fell into a deep and troubled sleep and when he awoke in the middle
of the night he was not strong enough to lift his head.  Then these
faithful friends of his began to know that this big, brawny,
redoubtable soldier was having his last fight.  He seemed to be aware
of it himself for he whispered to Jack:

"Take keer o' Mirandy an' the Little Cricket."

Late the next day he called for his Great Father.  Feebly and brokenly
he had managed to say:

"Jes' want--to--feel--his hand."

Margaret had sat beside him all day helping the nurse.

A dozen times Jack had left his work and run over for a look at
Solomon.  On one of these hurried visits the young man had learned of
the wish of his friend.  He went immediately to General Washington, who
had just returned from a tour of the forts.  The latter saw the look of
sorrow and anxiety in the face of his officer.

"How is the Colonel?" he asked.

"I think that he is near his end," Jack answered.  "He has expressed a
wish to feel your hand again."

"Let us go to him at once," said the other.  "There has been no greater
man in the army."

Together they went to the bedside of the faithful scout.  The General
took his hand.  Margaret put her lips close to Solomon's ear and said:

"General Washington has come to see you."

Solomon opened his eyes and smiled.  Then there was a beauty not of
this world in his homely face.  And that moment, holding the hand he
had loved and served and trusted, the heroic soul of Solomon Binkus
went out upon "the lonesome trail."

Jack, who had been kneeling at his side, kissed his white cheek.

"Oh, General, I knew and loved this man!" said the young officer as he
arose.

"It will be well for our people to know what men like him have endured
for them," said Washington.

"I shall have to learn how to live without him," said Jack.  "It will
be hard."

Margaret took his arm and they went out of the door and stood a moment
looking off at the glowing sky above the western hills.

"Now you have me," she whispered.

He bent and kissed her.

"No man could have a better friend and fighting mate than you," he
answered.



3

"'We spend our years as a tale that is told,'" Jack wrote from
Philadelphia to his wife in Albany on the thirtieth of June, 1787:
"Dear Margaret, we thought that the story was ended when Washington
won.  Five years have passed, as a watch in the night, and the most
impressive details are just now falling out.  You recall our curiosity
about Henry Thornhill?  When stopping at Kinderhook I learned that the
only man of that name who had lived there had been lying in his grave
these twenty years.  He was one of the first dreamers about Liberty.
What think you of that?  I, for one, can not believe that the man I saw
was an impostor.  Was he an angel like those who visited the prophets?
Who shall say?  Naturally, I think often of the look of him and of his
sudden disappearance in that Highland road.  And, looking back at
Thornhill, this thought comes to me: Who can tell how many angels he
has met in the way of life all unaware of the high commission of his
visitor?

"On my westward trip I found that the Indians who once dwelt in The
Long House were scattered.  Only a tattered remnant remains.  Near old
Fort Johnson I saw a squaw sitting in her blanket.  Her face was
wrinkled with age and hardship.  Her eyes were nearly blind.  She held
in her withered hands the ragged, moth eaten tail of a gray wolf.  I
asked her why she kept the shabby thing.

"'Because of the hand that gave it,' she answered in English.  'I shall
take it with me to The Happy Hunting-Grounds.  When he sees it he will
know me.'

"So quickly the beautiful Little White Birch had faded.

"At Mount Vernon, Washington was as dignified as ever but not so grave.
He almost joked when he spoke of the sculptors and portrait painters
who have been a great bother to him since the war ended.

"'Now no dray horse moves more readily to the thill than I to the
painter's chair," he said.

"When I arrived the family was going in to dinner and they waited until
I could make myself ready to join them.  The jocular Light Horse Harry
Lee was there.  His anecdotes delighted the great man.  I had never
seen G. W. in better humor.  A singularly pleasant smile lighted his
whole countenance.  I can never forget the gentle note in his voice and
his dignified bearing.  It was the same whether he were addressing his
guests or his family.  The servants watched him closely.  A look seemed
to be enough to indicate his wishes.  The faithful Billy was always at
his side.  I have never seen a sweeter atmosphere in any home.  We sat
an hour at the table after the family had retired from it.  In speaking
of his daily life he said:

"'I ride around my farms until it is time to dress for dinner, when I
rarely miss seeing strange faces, come, as they say, out of respect for
me.  Perhaps the word curiosity would better describe the cause of it.
The usual time of sitting at table brings me to candle-light when I try
to answer my letters.'

"He had much to say on his favorite theme, viz.: the settling of the
immense interior and bringing its trade to the Atlantic cities.

"I was coughing with a severe cold.  He urged me to take some remedies
which he had in the house, but I refused them.

"He went to his office while Lee and I sat down together.  The latter
told me of a movement in the army led by Colonel Nichola to make
Washington king of America.  He had seen Washington's answer to the
letter of the Colonel.  It was as follows:

"'Be assured, sir, no occurrence in the course of the war has given me
sensations more painful than your information of there being such ideas
in the army as those you have imparted to me and I must view them with
abhorrence and reprehend them with severity.  I am much at a loss to
conceive what part of my conduct could have given encouragement to an
address which to me seems big with the greatest mischiefs which could
befall my country.'

"Is it not a sublime and wonderful thing, dear Margaret, that all our
leaders, save one, have been men as incorruptible as Stephen and Peter
and Paul?

"When I went to bed my cough became more troublesome.  After it had
gone on for half an hour or so my door was gently opened and I observed
the glow of a candle.  On drawing my bed curtains I saw, to my utter
astonishment, Washington standing at my side with a bowl of hot tea in
his hand.  It embarrassed me to be thus waited on by a man of his
greatness.

"We set out next morning for Philadelphia to attend the Convention,
Washington riding in his coach drawn by six horses, I riding the
blaze-faced mare of destiny, still as sweet and strong as ever.  A slow
journey it was over the old road by Calvert's to Annapolis,
Chestertown, and so on to the north.

"I found Franklin sitting under a tree in his dooryard, surrounded by
his grandchildren.  He looks very white and venerable now.  His hair is
a crown of glory."

[Illustration: Ben Franklin, surrounded by his grandchildren.]

"'Well, Jack, it has been no small part of my life-work to get you
happily married,' he began in his playful way.  'A celibate is like the
odd half of a pair of scissors, fit only to scrape a trencher.  How
many babies have you?'

"'Three,' I answered.

"'It is not half enough,' said he.  'A patriotic American should have
at least ten children.  I must not forget to say to you what I say to
every young man.  Always treat your wife with respect.  It will procure
respect for you not only from her, but from all who observe it.  Never
use a slighting word.'

"My beloved, how little I need this advice you know, but I think that
the old philosopher never made a wiser observation.  I am convinced
that civilization itself depends largely on the respect that men feel
and show for women.

"I asked about his health.

"'I am weary and the night is falling and I shall soon lie down to
sleep, but I know that I shall awake refreshed in the morning,' he said.

"He told me how, distressed by his infirmity, he came out of France in
the Queen's litter, carried by her magnificent mules.  Of England he
had only this to say:

"'She is doing wrong in discouraging emigration to America.  Emigration
multiplies a nation.  She should be represented in the growth of the
New World by men who have a voice in its government.  By this fair
means she could repossess it instead of leaving it to foreigners, of
all nations, who may drown and stifle sympathy for the mother land.  It
is now a fact that Irish emigrants and their children are in possession
of the government of Pennsylvania.'

"I must not fail to set down here in the hope that my sons may some
time read it, what he said to me of the treason of Arnold.

"'Here is the vindication of Poor Richard.  Extravagance is not the way
to self-satisfaction.  The man who does not keep his feet in the old,
honest way of thrift will some time sell himself, and then he will be
ready to sell his friends or his country.  By and by nothing is so dear
to him as thirty pieces of silver.'

"I shall conclude my letter with a beautiful confession of faith by
this master mind of the century.  It was made on the motion for daily
prayers in the Convention now drafting a constitution for the States.
I shall never forget the look of him as, standing on the lonely summit
of his eighty years, he said to us:

"'In the beginning of our contest with Britain when we were sensible of
danger, we had daily prayers in this room for Divine protection.  Our
prayers, sirs, were heard and they were graciously answered.  All of us
who were engaged in the struggle must have observed frequent instances
of a directing Providence in our affairs.  And have we forgotten that
powerful friend?  Or do we imagine that we no longer need His
assistance?  I have lived, sirs, a long time and the longer I live the
more convincing proof I see of this truth that God governs in the
affairs of men.  And if a sparrow can not fall to the ground without
His notice is it probable that an empire can rise without His aid?  We
have been assured, sirs, that except the Lord build the house they
labor in vain who build it.  I firmly believe this and I also believe
that without His concurring aid we shall succeed in this political
structure no better than the builders of Babel; we shall be divided and
confounded and we ourselves become a reproach and a byword down to
future ages.  And, what is worse, mankind may hereafter despair of
establishing government by human wisdom and leave it to chance, war and
conquest.'

"Dear Margaret, you and I who have been a part of the great story know
full well that in these words of our noble friend is the conclusion of
the whole matter."